Resumption of the session
I declare resumed the session of the European Parliament adjourned on Thursday 9 October 2008 .
Approval of Minutes of previous sitting : see Minutes
Composition of Parliament : see Minutes
Composition of committees and delegations
I have received a motion from the Independence and Democracy Group to appoint Mr Farage to replace Mr Colman as a member of the Committee on International Trade .
Are there any objections to this ?
( DE ) Mr President , is there a minimum period for serving on a committee , or is this just intended for today ?
You would need to put that question to the Independence and Democracy Group , of course , but I can assure you that the President of Parliament will support absolute transparency in this matter .
Mr President , just to reassure my Austrian colleague , I was in fact a member of the Committee on International Trade for the first two and a half years of this parliamentary term .
I then gave way to a colleague who retired from Parliament completely two weeks ago .
So , contrary to what you may fear , this is not just a last-minute put-up job .
You have not answered the question as to how long you intend to serve on this committee , but I would infer from your remarks that you will continue to do so until the end of this parliamentary term .
Signature of acts adopted under codecision : see Minutes
Corrigendum to a text adopted ( Rule 204a ) : see Minutes
Documents received : see Minutes
Oral questions and written statements ( submission ) : see Minutes
Lapsed written statements : see Minutes
Petitions : see Minutes
Order of business
The final version of the draft agenda for this part-session as drawn up by the Conference of Presidents at its meeting of Thursday 16 October 2008 pursuant to Rules 130 and 131 of the Rules of Procedure has been distributed .
Monday , Tuesday and Thursday :
No amendments .
Wednesday :
The Committee on Regional Development has requested that the question for oral answer by the Commission on the European Union Solidarity Fund be postponed until the next part-session .
Mr President , I just wanted to raise with you the fact that on the eighth floor of the Tower Building , in the period since we were last in Strasbourg , at least two Members ' offices have been opened and goods taken .
I would like to know whether this is just an off-chance event or whether there is other evidence of Members ' offices being entered and , shall we say , ' relieved ' of goods during the period when we were not in Strasbourg .
I find this very disconcerting .
If we cannot ensure that our offices are secure while we are not here , then this is a very poor deal .
Many thanks , Mr Bradbourn .
The matter will be looked into ; the Secretary-General will take care of it .
One-minute speeches on matters of political importance
The next item is the one-minute speeches on matters of political importance .
- ( BG ) Mr President , fellow Members , one of the greatest challenges facing Bulgaria is the transparent use of resources from the European funds .
Our country has shown serious failings in working with the pre-accession programmes , resulting in hundreds of millions of euros being blocked under the PHARE , ISPA and SAPARD programmes .
These blocked funds are a serious signal from the European Commission , which the Bulgarian Government must understand correctly and it must put in place the urgent measures it has promised .
Like our European partners , all Bulgarian citizens must show greater resolve and decisiveness in fighting corruption and organised crime , and in securing reliable , effective controls over how European funds are used .
We cannot afford to have any false starts when operating with financial resources from Community structural funds , as this will be fatal to the development of Bulgaria 's economy , its agriculture , infrastructure , medium and small business sector , and ultimately for the vitally important rise in Bulgarians ' living standards .
Unfortunately , it is ordinary citizens , and not those running the country , who are the main victims of the errors and deficiencies in our country 's use of European funds .
Joining the European Community gave us the opportunity to operate with European money , but we have to do this by European rules .
This is also in the national interest .
Therefore , we should not delude ourselves into thinking that we can correct our mistakes without reforming the system .
( BG ) Ladies and gentlemen , the world is facing a financial crisis whose scale and consequences nobody as yet can accurately predict .
It is even being compared with the Great Depression of the 1920s in the US .
At the present moment , it is essential that we act together to overcome the crisis .
One year prior to elections , in a crisis situation , we are facing a major test .
People will either become convinced of the point and role of the European project , or we will have the opposite effect and reinforce their scepticism .
At this point we need a signed Treaty of Lisbon more than anything else .
Our common efforts so far are already yielding the first positive results .
We should continue these efforts in at least three directions , because although stabilising the banking sector is the prime necessity , it is not enough in itself .
At the moment we are just treating the symptoms without addressing the causes .
Future European legislation has to strengthen the mechanisms which control and regulate the financial markets .
We need a large-scale package of concrete measures which will mitigate the impact of the crisis on the economy , on manufacturing , and in particular on the social sphere .
And last but not least , we need a separate , specific programme of measures for the new Member States , which have yet to reach the level of development of Europe 's financial markets , but are threatened by the indirect consequences of the crisis : falling investments , the rising cost of credit and declining exports .
( DE ) Mr President , both before and after the European elections , we shall be hearing the usual regrettable assessment that Europe is too far removed from its citizens .
I ask myself what the European Parliament is doing about this .
Some time ago , a colleague and I launched an online petition , which is being dealt with in committee just like other petitions .
Approximately one-and-a-half million people have signed this online petition ; a figure roughly equivalent to the population of Estonia .
Under pressure from the Chairman of the Committee on Petitions , Mr Libicki , this matter was taken to the Conference of Presidents with the request that a debate be permitted in Parliament on how online petitions are to be dealt with in principle .
The fact that the petition concerned is about the seat of Parliament should be irrelevant , as we often discuss controversial issues - and I am also aware that not everyone shares my opinion .
Yet the failure to permit such a debate and the complaints about how far removed Europe is from its citizens are mutually incompatible .
I should like the Conference of Presidents to do something about this and perhaps bear it in mind when Europe 's distance from its citizens is lamented again .
( PL ) Mr President , the economic crisis affecting the European and global economies may serve to bring certain over-enthusiastic individuals to their senses .
The crisis provides one more reason not to build the Northern gas pipeline .
I trust that the economic data will finally convince those who refuse to be swayed by geopolitical arguments , namely that it is unwise to become dependent on a single supplier of energy resources , by the need for internal solidarity between Member States of the Union or by the real threat to the Baltic Sea ecosystem .
It is widely known that the construction and use of a pipeline along the sea bed is significantly more expensive than the proposed land-based alternative .
Gazprom has not given any consideration to an alternative route running through politically and economically stable countries that all belong to NATO or to the Union .
This suggests that the investors have what can at best be described as dubious intentions .
The Moscow stock exchange has been affected particularly badly during the collapse of the world 's stock exchanges .
Its difficulties may yet achieve more than all the common sense arguments put forward , including the European Parliament 's opinion calling for serious consideration of the land-based route for this venture .
There is a Polish saying along the lines of ' every cloud has a silver lining ' but this cloud is actually very black indeed .
Mr President , last week Amnesty International reported on a possible attempt on the life of the Russian lawyer and human rights defender Karina Moskalenko .
Small balls of mercury were found in her car .
Mrs Moskalenko has won about 30 cases for Russian citizens against the Russian State in the Court of Human Rights in Strasbourg , and it was here in Strasbourg that an attempt to poison her took place .
The next day she was to represent the family of the murdered Anna Politkovskaya at a court hearing in Moscow .
It now seems that , after the sequence of murders of independent journalists in Russia , it is the turn of independent lawyers .
So it is urgent for us to show solidarity in the strongest possible way , in order to defend those people who help those who cannot help themselves .
Mr President , the real test for any institutional structure , including the EU , is in time of crisis , and we are in a time of crisis .
The integration of the so-called new Members is not complete , the Treaty of Lisbon is not yet ratified by all Member States and our dependence on imported energy is increasing .
Unfortunately , although indispensable , common action often comes slowly and with difficulty , because members prefer the individual approach .
If we let the latter prevail over the former , our Union is in great danger - irrespective of the moral aspect that those who have benefited most from it have more obligation to see that it gets stronger and not weaker .
And the same goes for NATO too .
Now , more than ever , we need common analyses , common perceptions , common positions and common action with regard to the increasing challenges we are confronted with .
Let us do this so we will not be accused of wasting the most remarkable example of successful cooperation on a continent ravaged by wars for too long .
Mr President , given that improving energy efficiency is the most effective way of cutting CO2 emissions , and given that the public sector , according to the 2006 directive , is supposed to play an exemplary role in this matter , I am disappointed that there have been no energy-efficiency improvements in connection with the major repairs carried out on the Strasbourg Parliament building .
I would like to know where the building 's energy performance certificate is displayed .
Furthermore , it is entirely inconsistent for the authorities to have allowed MEPs , in the corridors of Parliament , to sign a life-size model of a bull in support of the written declaration against bullfighting , but not allowed them to sign a banner in support of the written declaration calling for a single seat for the European Parliament .
A single seat is how we could best cut our energy use and save EUR 200 million a year .
( GA ) Mr President , the European Commission should now review the operation of the Habitats Directive in the European Union .
This directive , in my opinion , is being applied too strictly and greater flexibility is now required .
The implementation of the directive is hampering major infrastructural developments in the west of Ireland , and the Galway City outer bypass has borne the consequences of this .
This is a road that is urgently needed and the city and population of Galway will suffer if this development cannot go ahead .
It was never intended for this directive to impede major public works .
Commissioner Dimas must now act and review this directive in order to ensure that it does not disrupt important developments that could enhance the region 's economy .
( FR ) Mr President , for several weeks the world has been undergoing a serious financial crisis .
It has often been said that it stems from the excesses of unchecked capitalism , the search for profit that is not based on anything concrete , and the failure to regulate our financial system .
And , of course , this analysis is quite right !
However , less emphasis has been placed on the whirlwind in which our currency would have found itself without the European Union 's economic and monetary policy .
The euro - as has been pointed out - has withstood the crisis much better than the mark , franc or lira could have withstood it .
It is quite clear , too , that the decisions taken eight days ago by Eurogroup , on the initiative of the President-in-Office of the Council of the European Union , have had an immediate effect on the financial markets .
Obviously , measures will need to be taken to prevent a further financial crisis from arising in the future .
However , if they are to be effective , they will need to be taken at European level .
This crisis shows us that the European Union is strong when it speaks with one voice .
It demonstrates to us , if demonstration were needed , that the institutional improvements provided for by the Treaty of Lisbon are more necessary than ever .
It is therefore more Europe and a better Europe that we need .
( ES ) Atlético Madrid , its fans and even the Spanish police are being mistreated by the Union of European Football Associations .
However , the problem is wider than this as these federative bodies tend to increase sanctions when people resort to the ordinary courts .
This mediaeval concept of one law for me and another for you is contrary to our law and the European institutions .
We must therefore react .
In fact , we will end up having to react as these arbitrary mediaeval tyrants must abide by the law and the ordinary procedural guarantees of our Europe .
( RO ) The legislative proposal put forward by the European Commission last week concerning illegal logging should have marked a great victory for all those who have actively campaigned over the years against illegal land clearing .
However , the Commission has chosen to adopt a minimalist , even idealistic , solution to tackling a very real problem .
There is no standard for certifying the legality of timber .
Suppliers are not required to prove the legality of their products .
Even the possession and sale of this timber are not recognised directly as criminal offences .
If anyone can create standards at will and there is no independent public mechanism for monitoring this activity , all the European Union is doing is encouraging the current illegal practices .
It is a disgrace for us to give ourselves a pat on the back and say that we have done a good job when , in actual fact , controls on the legality of timber from the European Union market remain extremely lax .
The European Parliament must adopt a more robust position in its battle to halt uncontrolled land clearing .
On this note , I am calling on colleagues from every political group to work together to significantly improve the Commission 's proposal .
It is only through adopting a clear , effective law that we will be able to issue a strong message to suppliers indicating that we will not tolerate the illegal timber trade in the EU .

( EL ) Mr President , the Prime Minister of the FYROM , Mr Gruevski , tried to stir up a big fuss last week , which he even brought to Brussels .
The facts are simple : four journalists from the FYROM , who were trying to record the reactions of a small group to the military exercises being held in the area , were escorted to the police station to have their identities confirmed , because they were not carrying their identity cards .
They were kept at the police station for just 20 minutes .
I consider Mr Gruevski 's action to be totally unacceptable .
I would also like to condemn Mr Gruevski 's action because he prevented Greek army units which were part of the NATO military force on its way to Kosovo from passing through Skopje a few days ago .
And at the same time , he wants to join NATO .
Mr President , last week I visited Azerbaijan with the EP delegation to observe the presidential elections , which were held mostly in line with democratic standards .
We had a number of meetings with MPs and high-level officials , including the Minister of Foreign Affairs .
As a result , I have to say that my initial fears that practically nothing has been done for the Nabucco project deepened .
Azerbaijan is not even aware of the framework of this project .
The European Commission has so far done nothing apart from signing a general agreement of cooperation in the energy field .
I think it is ridiculous to hear Commissioners speaking all the time in lofty words about how important this project is for the whole of Europe and at the same time leaving it to single EU countries to negotiate conditions .
In my country , Bulgaria , we often say that there is no smoke without fire .
Well , in this particular case there is too much smoke and no fire , and we all know we face very strong competition .
If the Commission does not get active quickly enough , the whole project will end up in smoke .
Mr President , I think all of us will welcome the fact that some kind of normalisation is beginning to return to financial markets .
However , this is not a one-strand crisis , unfortunately , and there are other areas that need to be looked at .
One of those is the whole area of credit cards .
Current credit behaviour has proven to be unsustainable , both on an individual and on a broader level .
TV programmes , newspapers and magazines over the last years have highlighted the perils of multiple credit card ownership by people who have trouble paying off even one of these cards .
Obviously it is up to the individual to act responsibly in this regard , but it is also up to financial institutions , and increasingly retailers , to act responsibly in offering advertising and granting these cards .
It is up to us as public representatives to ensure our citizens are adequately informed .
We can stabilise our markets , try to inject liquidity into markets , but if we do not address the issue of responsible credit activity , not just at national and international level , but at all the levels of the economic system , eventual recovery is likely to be limited and unsustainable .
To put this into context , the securitised market for credit cards is about as large as the sub-prime mortgage market .
Mr President , every year thousands of grandmothers , mothers and daughters fall victim to breast cancer .
Europeans in particular are affected by the disease , as the most common cancer of European women is breast cancer , with an estimated 430 000 new cases diagnosed every year .
The first step to combat this terrible disease is awareness .
This month , Europeans must focus on early detection as the primary means of prevention .
Detection is a very strong , key issue in this , because in America , for example , 41 % of American cases are diagnosed at a very early stage , compared to 29-30 % in Europe .
However , 1 in 10 women in the EU will develop breast cancer before she reaches 80 years of age ; in addition , every two and a half minutes another woman is diagnosed with breast cancer .
The harsh reality of breast cancer is that every seven and a half minutes a woman dies of this disease .
In Europe , 132 000 women died of breast cancer in 2006 .
This October the measures to increase breast cancer awareness , early detection and prevention must come from all levels of decision-making .

Mr President , especially at a time of economic crisis , public opinion in many of our Member States cannot understand how we spend nearly EUR 200 million a year coming here to Strasbourg , especially after we have just had a quarter of a year of not doing so , very successfully having our sessions in Brussels .
Furthermore , it is Parliament that gets the blame very often , although it is of course the Member States , the national governments , who have the power to rectify this situation .
Since the French presidency is here , may I invite the governments to reconsider this issue , and since we all know we will have to have a solution acceptable to France and to Strasbourg , may I suggest that in exchange for the Parliament sessions going to Brussels , maybe the European Council could meet in Strasbourg ?
That would have a certain institutional logic .
The Commission , the Parliament and the ordinary Council of Ministers , which interact daily , should be in the same town , Brussels .
The European Council , which is a strategic body , should have a certain distance from the day-to-day activities .
That could meet in Strasbourg , which could confer upon Strasbourg just as much prestige as the sessions of the European Parliament .
Mr President , over the years it has become increasingly apparent that EU taxpayers are sick and tired of paying out EUR 200 million every year so that we can work four days a month in Strasbourg .
But the environmental impact in particular of these trips in a year equate to , I am told , 13 000 transatlantic jumbo jet journeys - and this at a time when Parliament itself is trying to impose draconian environmental regulation on European business .
Surely it is a case of ' do as I say , not as I do ' .
The events of August and September have proved that there is no need to travel here and that the Parliament building in Brussels is more than capable of coping with our official sittings , and that EU citizens would be far happier if we discontinued this monthly commute .
I find it rather nonsensical that Parliament has so long been incapable of addressing this issue and putting pressure on the Council to put an end to this flying circus .
Thank you - there are always new arguments .
Mr President , you will be pleased to know that I am not going to talk about Strasbourg , or even the fact that your eyesight is getting worse as about half the Members you have called appeared not to be in the room .
What I want to talk about is the Penhallow fire - which I have mentioned before in this House - a fire disaster which took place on 17 and 18 August last year in my constituency .
A newsletter has recently been produced which suggests that the fire doors were not adequate , that sprinklers would have actually saved the hotel from being burnt down and that , in fact , the fire was arson .
These are speculations made by an , admittedly inexperienced , fire officer , but the problem is that neither the fire service nor the police have published the official report .
As Commissioner Kuneva is at the moment in the process of looking at proposals for improving hotel fire safety across Europe , can I ask her to urge the authorities in the United Kingdom to actually publish a report so that we can get to the bottom of this matter ?
- ( SK ) We often hear it said these days that nobody can make a tree grow to the sky .
The banks persuaded the weak and needy that with loans at 1 % they could live the good life , while failing to point out that this 1 % was for a limited period only and would soon shoot up .
The pursuit of profit at any price has brought the financial system crashing down .
I will leave it to the financial experts to investigate the matter more closely .
All I would like to do is to warn against untrammelled freedom in an area which affects me and with which I have been entrusted in this House .
Today , in societies where men and women are counted in their billions , girls are being murdered by the million .
Freedom of choice for women , allied with antenatal diagnostics , has become a tool for eliminating womankind .
We are all too aware now that profits cannot continue to rise indefinitely , and the same thing can surely be said in the field of morality .
Untrammelled freedom turns against us .
We should learn to recognise when a tree has reached its natural height and to respect it for what it is .
( HU ) Mr President , two of Hungary 's neighbours , Austria and Slovenia , have held elections and in both countries the Social Democrats have emerged victorious .
You mentioned that Mr Borut Pahor , our colleague , has resigned his mandate and will probably be Slovenia 's next prime minister .
At the same time , and this is why I asked to have the floor , what has happened in Austria is extremely worrisome , namely , the far right has won nearly 30 % of the votes in these latest elections .
This outcome fills every European citizen with concern .
Apart from overcoming the financial crisis , the most important task in Europe is to counter instances of extremism throughout Europe .
I welcome that the leader of the Social Democrats and future chancellor , Mr Fayman , firmly insisted that there can be no cooperation with the far right in Austria .
In the face of the ' brown ' menace , all democratic forces on the right and left must join together in Europe . Thank you for your attention .
( HU ) Multilingualism and intercultural dialogue does not preclude the possibility for those who belong to the same culture and speak the same language to meet and create international organisations and consultative bodies .
The international organisation representing French speakers across five continents and in 55 Member States supports the political , cultural and economic cooperation of nearly 200 million French speakers .
The World Jewish Congress has been coordinating the defence of its members ' interests since 1936 through 100 countries .
There is also an International Council of Jewish Parliamentarians .
Romania has a department within its Ministry of Foreign Affairs that looks after the interests of Romanians living abroad .
It was for a similar purpose that the Forum of Hungarian MPs from the Carpathian Basin was established .
The political representatives of Hungarians scattered across eight countries meet once a year to discuss the concerns and the future of their communities and countries .
It is incompatible with European norms for any community - be it French , Jewish , Romanian or Hungarian - to be attacked for its peaceful efforts to defend its interests , as is happening these days in Slovakia . Thank you .
( RO ) The TEN-T network ( Trans-European Transport Network ) is currently facing a number of major challenges .
On the one hand , delays have been noted in the implementation of some of the 30 priority projects due to a lack of finances from the Member States involved , while on the other hand , there has been the desire , ever since 2005 , to expand the TEN-T network to integrate Europe 's transport system with that of the Union 's neighbouring states .
The seminar recently organised by the Commission kicked off a practical series of debates and consultations concerning the review in 2010 of the list of priority TEN-T projects .
In my view , we need to have high-speed trains connecting Bucharest , Constanţa and Sofia with the other European capitals .
In addition , the development of ports and airports in Romania and the implementation of cross-border transport projects at the border between Romania , Moldova and Ukraine need to feature again among the priority TEN-T projects .
Furthermore , the TRAN Commission delegation , which visited Romania in early October , supports the need to give the Danube a higher priority in the development of European transport policy .
Mr President , three weeks ago , the global financial crisis that had threatened America 's banking system with meltdown began to take its toll on this side of the Atlantic .
For many of my constituents , economic disaster had been theoretical , but since then it has become a hard reality rather than a distant threat , as jobs are lost , house prices plunge and social services are being cut .
I welcome the swift action by the Commission and the Member States in securing deposits and in shoring up the capital of banks , because it does not take long for a global crisis to become a domestic one .
- ( SK ) The communist regimes in Central Europe regarded the church as an internal enemy and began to fear it particularly on 16 October 1978 , when Karol Wojtyla of Poland was elected Pope .
I would like to take this opportunity to thank my Polish colleagues for inviting me to join the group organising the event commemorating in the European Parliament the 30th anniversary of the start of John Paul II 's papacy and the 20 years since he spoke on the floor of the European Parliament in Strasbourg .
His words : ' Be not afraid ! ' played a key role in inspiring the courage , particularly among Christians , that led to the spiritual revolutions which brought about the collapse of totalitarian communism in Central Europe .
Today , humanity finds itself once again at a crossroads .
We shall either transform our world into a blossoming garden or bring about its ruin .
I firmly believe that today more than ever we must pay greater heed to the message of John Paul II .

( FR ) Mr President , I should like to respond to the speeches made by Mr Corbett and others concerning our return to Strasbourg and the running costs involved .
It is true that Europe is not just about what is reasonable .
Although it tries to be rational , it operates on the basis of symbols , too .
It is not a unitary state , and we do not operate with only one capital in which all our institutions are based .
Some are here in Strasbourg ; the Central Bank is in Frankfurt ; I believe that the Medicines Agency is in the United Kingdom .
All this comes at a price .
However , we also know the price to be paid for not having a Europe ; we have paid it enough throughout our history .
Thus EUR 200 million - if that is one of the elements that enable institutions to function properly , and , for example , enable Europe to get a better grasp of the problems of the financial markets and , perhaps , in the future , to save over EUR 1 000 billion on rescue plans for financial institutions - then I believe that that is a price worth paying to have a properly functioning democracy .
( RO ) I have asked to be given the floor so that I can draw Parliament 's attention to a serious problem with the process for taking up European funds for rural development in Romania .
I am sorry to say that the Romanian authorities are systematically violating the principle of providing the potential beneficiaries of these funds with correct , transparent information .
Recently , the applicant 's guides for two important measures from Romania 's National Programme for Rural Development were published , without even a minimum promotion and information campaign , just a single day before the start date for submitting applications for financing .
The red tape involved with granting funds for rural development is completely awful for any citizen .
At least a month is needed for some of the documents requested , while the appropriate session for submitting projects is due to finish at the end of that month .
I believe that Community legislation should set out clearer and stricter regulations in order to avoid situations of this kind .
Otherwise , the European funds will not be able to achieve the relevant objectives .
( DA ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to draw Parliament 's attention to the fact that the Danish Government has not implemented Directive 2002 / 73 / EC on equal treatment .
On 21 March 2007 , the Commission sent a letter of formal notice to the Danish Government in which it pointed out , among other things , that Denmark is not complying with the provisions of the directive regarding the appointing of a body for the promotion , analysis , monitoring and support of the equal treatment of women and men .
Denmark did have such a body under the previous government , but the present government abolished it the same year as the directive was introduced .
The Commission is now having to act and order the Danish Government to establish a body that will ensure that Danish women do not fall further behind with regard to equal treatment and equal pay .
Mr President , the Commission proposal on patients ' rights to cross-border health care seeks to broaden the rights of patients to obtain treatment abroad if they experience undue delay in receiving treatment at home .
A chronic example of undue delay has been brought to my attention recently in my own constituency .
Children in the HSE Southern Region are being forced to wait up to 48 months for orthodontic treatment .
Moreover , waiting times have become even longer over the past three years .
It is my sincerest hope that with the cross-border proposal we can work towards shortening such undue delay by making it easier for patients to travel to receive quality treatment on time .
Ultimately it should be the right of all patients to receive high-quality treatment close to home , but in the case of blatant gaps in provision we should have the right to travel freely to receive this necessary treatment abroad .
( EL ) Mr President , the recent crisis has taught us that we need to rely on solidarity , not individualism , and that we need to change our way of life and , as the European Union , to attach particular significance to how each Member State can deal effectively with its own problems .
This should , however , relate to every form of expression of life and not just to economic problems .
It should also relate to respect for national ways of life , and I refer here to Sunday as a day of rest .
Sunday was adopted as a day of rest in the fourth century A.D. and we should not fall into a European model that does away with it .
I trust that something of this sort will never happen in Europe .
( HU ) Thank you , Mr President .
It was exactly three years ago that Croatia began accession negotiations with the European Union .
At the eighth meeting of the Joint Parliamentary Committee , held a few days ago , we noted that since that time Croatia has achieved considerable progress in all areas .
Negotiations have now been opened on 21 of the 35 chapters .
Moreover , the country is making enormous efforts to carry out the necessary reforms and fulfil the criteria for membership .
I am confident that the European Commission will present , along with the progress report on Croatia due on 5 November , a timetable that gives the Croatian Government a clear roadmap indicating how the accession talks can be concluded by the end of 2009 , that is , by the end of the Barroso Commission 's term of office .
This timetable will be feasible , however , only if we succeed in speeding up the negotiations and if the Council is willing to open up additional chapters by the end of the year .
I am convinced that Croatia 's accession will serve as an example to its neighbouring countries and will at the same time serve as an important stabilising factor in the region . Thank you .
Mr President , as one of the three Northern Ireland MEPs involved in securing the original PEACE funding in 1994 , which I believe has made an immense contribution to Northern Ireland 's social and economic well-being , I would personally like to thank and pay tribute to the hard work of those who , over the years since then , have given freely of their time and put considerable effort into the work of the local strategy partnerships .
They have shouldered the burden for the implementation , which I know was a very onerous task .
This December they will be stood down , and they have been given little thanks for what they have achieved .
Many have criticised the PEACE programme , accusing it of having non-measurable outcomes .
However , I say to the critics that they are wrong : what the programme facilitated was cooperation and partnership at local level , and that would not have happened without PEACE funding .
People were brought together to work in partnership who would never have had that opportunity if it had not been for the PEACE programme .
Could I ask you , Mr President , to write to the overall strategy partnerships board expressing the thanks of this Parliament - because we are central to what has been achieved - to those people who have unceremoniously been stood down after all these years of working and giving their contributions freely to the people they hope to help ?
( EL ) Mr President , on 16 October we celebrated World Food Day .
When this day was established in 1980 , the objective was to reduce hunger .
Today , however , we are in the paradoxical position of having to deal with two scourges : hunger and obesity , with hunger hitting the developing world and obesity the developed world .
Today , hunger threatens approximately 850 million people on this planet and approximately 40 million die from hunger every year .
It is estimated that 2 billion people are suffering from hunger and that 55 % of child deaths in the developing world are due to their poor diet .
On the other hand , the model in the West has given rise to diseases such as obesity , various types of cancer and diabetes : diseases which we estimate will be responsible for 72 % of deaths by 2020 .
I suggest that the European Parliament start a campaign to adopt the Mediterranean diet .
Mr President , it is imperative that , if approved this week , Commissioner designate Baroness Ashton achieves the right balance between EU food security and food independence on the one hand and helping developing markets in promoting free trade on the other , notwithstanding our existing relationship with ACP nations , which has been extremely important to them and us .
The multilateral trade system has been an important contributor to global prosperity by opening up such markets , and the World Trade Organisation ( WTO ) has been most effective in providing a more level playing field for poorer nations .
However , any future WTO agreement must not unnecessarily expose vital sectors of our EU economy .
On currently available proposals , future EU agricultural production would be threatened .
It is predicted that in Ireland alone the value of output from the beef sector could decline by EUR 120 million per year and , overall , the drop in agricultural output value across Ireland could amount to up to EUR 450 million per annum .

We must never agree to threaten the EU 's strategic food security , and the Commissioner in her challenging new job would be wise to listen closely to the concerns of this Parliament and observe the mandate she is given by EU governments .
That concludes this item .
I would recommend that Members ask for the floor only if they plan to be present .
Temporary workers ( debate )
The next item is the recommendation for second reading , on behalf of the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs , on the Council common position ( 10599 / 2 / 2008 - C6-0327 / 2008 - for adopting a directive of the European Parliament and of the Council on temporary agency work ( Rapporteur : Mr Désir ) .
rapporteur . - ( FR ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen - I hope that the Council Presidency is going to join us - it has now been more than six years since the adoption of the Directive on temporary work was postponed , not because of Parliament , which gave its opinion as soon as the Commission 's proposal was referred to it in 2002 , but precisely because of the deadlock of certain Member States within the Council .
We have the opportunity today , after the adoption of a common position between the Member States , to arrive at this important piece of social legislation at a time when expectations of a social Europe are high , and it is this opportunity that we must seize .
Temporary work accounts for more than three million jobs in the Union .
Temporary workers are employed by around 20 000 companies , which represent a turnover of EUR 75 billion .
This is a sector that is obviously very liable to fluctuations in growth , and temporary workers are today the first to be affected by the economic slowdown and the rise in unemployment .
However , like other types of insecure and atypical employment , temporary work has seen structural growth over the last few years , and this development was estimated at almost 60 % over the last five years .
It is a development that has continued with particular intensity within the new Member States .
Temporary work concerns a very large number of sectors that vary according to the Member State : industry , in some countries , services , in others , and construction , agriculture and transport , in others still .
Its proportion also varies a great deal from one country to another .
It may be as much as 5 % of all workers in countries such as the United Kingdom .
The duration of assignments also varies .
In some countries it is short , with assignments lasting around 10 days , in France , for example ; less than a week , in Spain ; or around 20 days in Finland .
However , in other countries , such as Ireland , Belgium and the Netherlands , it may be several months , indeed even a year or more in Austria .
Temporary workers , as we know , are more exposed to physical risks , intensity of work and accidents at work .
Their training is often less extensive .
Stress linked to the insecurity of their jobs is also extremely common .
The fact is , the laws and the types of legal framework relating to their situation differ greatly within the Member States - so much so that temporary workers are , for example , truly protected by equal treatment , in particular in terms of pay , in just 10 of the 27 countries of the European Union .
Their access to training , social protection , maternity leave - these subjects all vary and are absolutely not guaranteed in the same way in all the Member States .
That is why the European Commission , at the request of the social partners , and with the support of the European Parliament , wanted a piece of legislation that could guarantee such equal treatment .
Having received an initial draft , in November 2002 the European Parliament , following on from the report by my fellow Member , Mrs van den Burg , who is still here in this House and to whom I should like to pay tribute , strengthened this draft legislation by making it possible to guarantee equal treatment from day one , in particular regarding pay .
When its common position was adopted last June , the Council eventually came round to the European Parliament 's position .
It therefore believed that equal treatment from day one should be the general rule and that any derogation from this principle needed to be agreed on by the social partners by means of collective negotiations or through agreements concluded with the social partners at national level .
The European Parliament 's amendments on the definition of the basic working and employment conditions , in particular with the inclusion of pay in Article 3 , have also been incorporated in the common position .
Lastly , the Council 's common position has retained the amendments on access to employment , collective facilities and vocational training , and on the right of temporary workers to be represented under the same conditions as those of permanent workers employed by the user enterprise .
A debate has taken place within the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs concerning Parliament 's initial proposal to amend the Commission 's proposal to add elements relating to health , safety and hygiene at work , which have not been adopted by the Council .
However , these guarantees exist under the terms of another directive , the Council Directive of 25 June 1991 , which supplements the measures to encourage improvements in the health and safety at work of workers with a fixed-duration employment relationship or a temporary employment relationship .
As you know , ladies and gentlemen - I am going to end this first speech on this point - the European Trade Union Confederation , on the one hand , and the professional bodies representing temporary employment agencies , on the other , want us to adopt this legislation .
Adopting this legislation today means ensuring that the European Parliament 's positions at first reading henceforth become the law ; that this framework for protecting temporary workers can be transposed within the next three years ; and that the Pandora 's box of uncertain negotiations within the Council cannot be reopened .
That is why the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs decided on 7 October to recommend the adoption of the common position , without amendment , in order to protect this , the most insecure employment sector in Europe .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , first of all I would like to thank the rapporteur , Mr Harlem Désir , for the piece of work he has delivered .
I feel I have nothing to add to the general points that have been put forward , but would like just to focus on the results of the political agreement of the 10 June and to point out the successes which have been achieved across a range of key points in the interests of the European Parliament .
We now have the direct application of the principle of equal treatment for temporary workers from day one of their assignments , without any exceptions whatsoever for short-term assignments , ' deferral periods ' , clarification of definitions , consultations with the social partners or involving them in proposing exceptions which would allow certain specific departures from the principle of equal treatment .
The Commission is pleased with the consensus on the common position taken by the Council in the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs and I must repeat my congratulations to the rapporteur and the political groups for confirming their willingness to adopt a common position without further amendments .
Ladies and gentlemen , respect for the social partners is a key element in the political idea of the European Union , and I therefore note with great satisfaction the positions taken both by the unions and by the employers .
Ladies and gentlemen , I believe that we have the conditions for passing the proposal on first reading .

President-in-Office of the Council . - ( FR ) Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , although I could not physically hear you , Mr Désir , your remarks have , I believe , been faithfully reported to me , as have yours , Commissioner .
On 9 June , in Luxembourg , the Council reached an agreement on two texts that the Member States of the European Union had been debating for several years .
The first , as you know , is a proposal for revision of the Working Time Directive , which has been the subject of negotiations since 2004 .
This is not the subject of this evening 's debate .
The second is a draft directive on the working conditions of temporary workers that has been debated since 2002 .
The aim of this draft is to enhance the protection received by temporary workers and to improve the quality of temporary work .
It is for the purpose of its definitive adoption that we are meeting today .
I should like first of all to say to you that , in my view , the adoption of this text on temporary workers will send out a very strong signal to all Europeans : that 2008 can be the year of the revival of social Europe .
For years we waited for substantial legislative progress to be made in the social sphere .
With the definitive adoption of the Directive on Temporary Work , we are beginning to move on from those years of deadlock .
The people of Europe were waiting for this signal , that of a more protective Europe .
Their expectations , as we know , are even greater in the current context , with the financial crisis and its consequences for the economy .
Now more than ever , it is time to give them tangible signs of our ability to reconcile the objective of economic prosperity with that of social cohesion and of our will to defend and promote the European social model .
The draft directive that we are debating this evening is a vitally important text , for a start because of the number of Europeans it will affect .
In 2006 , there were 3.4 million temporary workers in Europe .
However , if we count the number of people who , at one time or another , find themselves on the list of temporary employment agencies , we arrive at 6 million people who are affected .
I would add that , for 20 years , temporary work has been the type of atypical work that has increased the most .
Furthermore , according to the Dublin-based European Foundation , it has at least doubled in almost all the Member States , and increased fivefold in Denmark , Italy , Spain and Sweden - there being an increasing number of European businesses that have recourse to it in order to find workers meeting their specific requirements .
Thus , we are talking today about a key sector of the European economy , and for this key sector , you have submitted a key text , Mr Désir , that will offer real additional guarantees to European workers .
The first of these guarantees is the principle of equal treatment from day one between permanent workers and temporary workers .
This innovation is a major advance for temporary workers in Europe , those for whom the laws did not previously lay down such protective provisions .
Throughout their assignments , these workers will henceforth be covered by the same working conditions as those who are recruited directly by the company to the same post .
This will apply with regard to working time , overtime , break times , rest periods , night work , paid leave , the protection of workers ' health , the right to non-discrimination and the protection of pregnant women .
This is essential , because we also know , regarding all these subjects , that temporary workers are at present exposed to physical risks at least as significant as those to which permanent workers are exposed , and to a pace of work that is at times faster .
The principle of equal treatment from day one will also apply regarding pay .
From the start of their assignments , temporary workers will receive the same pay as people recruited directly by the user enterprise to do the same job .
Derogations from this principle , and in particular the introduction of qualification periods , will be possible only if there is agreement between the social partners , that is to say , compensation for workers .
Lastly , the directive will provide new guarantees in terms of temporary workers ' access to permanent jobs , access to collective facilities , catering services , childcare facilities and transport services , and in terms of access to vocational training or representation .
I should like to say to you , as President-in-Office of the Council , that I am delighted to observe that the conditions are in place today for the adoption of this text .
It is true , too , that this text incorporates a large number of the amendments adopted by Parliament at first reading in November 2002 .
This also without doubt explains why the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs - virtually all of its members - decided not to amend it , and I should like once again to thank for their constructive approach the rapporteur of the text and all the Members who worked actively on it .
This virtually unanimous support is also a clear sign of the usefulness and quality of this text , and I should also like to pay tribute in this House to Mr Špidla , who has always supported this initiative and who agreed not to withdraw this text even though the debates seemed to be at a standstill in December 2007 , in Brussels for example .
As you know , it was during the Slovenian Presidency that we were able to reach a positive outcome .
I should also like to highlight the efforts made in this matter by the United Kingdom , by paying tribute to the agreement reached between the United Kingdom 's social partners on 19 May 2008 .
This was an important element .
Lastly , I should like to refer to the support given by the European social partners to the common position adopted on 9 June concerning the strand on temporary work .
We can thus say today that there is agreement between all the players in this matter .
This also demonstrates that , with perseverance , creativity and dialogue , we can emerge from situations that are seemingly at a standstill , even on social matters , even in Europe , even in order to adopt directives .


on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - ( FR ) Madam President , Mr Bertrand , Mr Špidla , firstly , we have here the conclusion of an extremely constructive piece of work between the European institutions , on the one hand , and the Member States , on the other , but also between the political groups and the social partners .
The text we have arrived at is based on a consensus with the social partners .
This draft directive now lays down a general framework for temporary workers in the 27 Member States , and it is an extremely important advance , founded on the principle of non-discrimination between permanent workers and temporary workers .
In it we have included a commitment to transparency - transparency regarding the conditions provided to workers - but also a commitment to confidence between workers and employers .
Safety of workers and the flexibility required by businesses are extremely important ; that is why , today , the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats - which is based on these foundations of equal treatment , on access to vocational training , and on the procedures for representing temporary workers in accordance with collective agreements - has sought to make progress with this work , too , and reach a consensus .
Europe , today , is protecting these workers .
This framework directive on the protection of temporary workers lays down new working conditions .
We firmly believe that we are making progress together on social Europe .
That is why we will of course agree to vote in favour of this directive without any amendment , as it has been submitted today .
on behalf of the PSE Group . - Madam President , some things that you have worked hard on never happen , and some things happen only very late .
That was the case with this directive .
You would not expect any more for it to happen .
In 2002 , six years ago , I was working very hard as your rapporteur in first reading on this Commission proposal after the social dialogue negotiations of the social partners ' fields .
We managed to convince the Commission and the vast majority of the Council to adopt 95 % of our amendments and improvements of the text , only a blocking minority of , at the time , 4 of the 15 Member States did not want to go along with that majority .
Several presidencies tried very hard to break the stalemate but , after some years , the proposal was - well , maybe not really dead , but at least in a coma .
That was a shame , since the problems that the directive tackles had not disappeared by far - on the contrary , in the period of enlargement of the EU .
Also , with the directive , those problems of exploitation of migrant workers are not fully solved , so we have to continue to work on this , but a temporary agency directive is a first step .
It creates clarity about the status and rights of employment of temporary agency workers by reinforcing the principle of equal treatment as the basic principle of labour law but at the same time - and no less importantly - by emphasising the role of collective bargaining and decent industrial relations in a growing and maturing temporary agency sector .
I emphasise this , and this is linked to the negative connotations of exploitation by gang masters from the organised professional temporary agency sector .
In the present directive this sector can really prove to be mature and to have a good social dialogue with trade unions , and then help reach very advanced arrangements for flexibility and security in the labour market .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - Madam President , I am speaking today on behalf of my colleague , Liz Lynne , who is the shadow rapporteur for the ALDE Group on this directive , since she cannot be with us today due to problems with flights to Strasbourg .
I share her general concerns about this document and , in particular , her belief that this directive is far from ideal , but could be worse .
Many temporary agency businesses in the UK do now want to see the adoption of this directive , but only because it is the ' least worst ' option .
We have always argued that this should not have been done at European level , given the stark differences and the different traditions that exist in each Member State .
However , we understand the purpose of temporary work agencies , which is to establish more working places for people and to make the labour market more flexible .
This directive was , of course , tied by the Council to a working-time directive , and the shadow rapporteur of the ALDE Group believes that these two issues will continue to be linked . Therefore , under the given circumstances , the ALDE Group shadow rapporteur would support this document , and our political group will follow her recommendations during the vote .
on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . -Madam President , on behalf of my group , I would also like to welcome this agreement .
We do not feel that we are going to get any more if it goes to conciliation , so have supported the rapporteur on this .
I admit that , in terms of the presidency looking at this as a step forward to social Europe , we would like to feel that it is a step in that direction .
I welcome - certainly as a British Member - some warm words for once about the UK Government position .
I hope they are going to be equally constructive on other matters in this field that are before the House at the moment .
I think it is very important that in the current climate we are actually making progress on workers ' rights , rather than trying to imply that those doing work on a temporary basis are somehow less important as individuals or less important economically .
As someone said , while some work this way from choice , others work in this field because they do not have a choice .
For example , in a number of rural areas you may find limited employment possibilities , with one employer basically handing out most of the jobs .
If you as a temporary worker dare to question the conditions in which you find yourself , you may actually find that you are never employed by that particular company again .
So I think that the legal certainty provided in this agreement is extremely important .
It might go some way to help , for example , a person whom I came across in London : the only individual working in a hotel kitchen who was not on a permanent contract was the one whose job was to clean the ovens and to get inside them using heavy-duty chemicals , with no training or protective clothing , because that worker was only temporary and therefore health and safety did not matter so much .
So , for people like that , this legislation will be extremely important , and we look forward to its rapid implementation .
on behalf of the UEN Group . - ( PL ) Madam President , the consistently high unemployment rate in recent years has led to an imbalance in the respective positions of employers and employees on the labour market .
Workers found themselves in very difficult positions , and were obliged to accept work of any kind in order to support their families .
They therefore agreed to so-called flexible employment conditions that did not guarantee decent working terms and conditions .
The majority of employers ruthlessly exploited the situation .
The directive guaranteeing equal pay , health and safety at work , maternity concessions , and opportunities for vocational training for temporary workers represents an important step towards reintroducing civilised conditions in the labour market .
It is significant that these equal conditions are to apply from the first day at work .
The agreement reached between the social partners confers special value on this directive .
Temporary workers must not be deprived of protection .
That is why we consider it essential to adopt this document without any amendments .
Legal protection should be put in place at the earliest opportunity .
( Applause )
on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group . - ( PT ) Madam President , this new proposal for a directive which we are now debating , despite proclaiming the principle of equal treatment between workers with regard to working conditions , a maximum limit on working time and weekly rest periods , allows a series of derogations which , in practice , may jeopardise these very principles , all the more so as what we really need to do is combat and minimise the proliferation of temporary employment agencies in order to put an end to precarious work and stop workers ' rights from constantly being called into question .
Through a series of amendments , we therefore want to ensure that , for example : recourse to temporary contract work is restricted to exceptional situations , such as times of extraordinary activity and periods of temporary impediment of the permanent worker ; temporary contract workers can enjoy the labour and social welfare rights granted to other workers , including the rights enshrined in collective labour agreements for the relevant sector ; temporary work is not used to put at risk the right to strike , and temporary contract workers are covered by the same provisions on health and safety at work as workers of the user undertaking .
on behalf of the IND / DEM Group . - Madam President , this has been batted to and fro between the Commission and the Council ever since 2002 : six years .
There has been no common position until June of this year - but now they pass it to Parliament like a hot potato .
Is this sudden change of mind due to the current economic downturn , I wonder ?
Whether that is so or not , it will not help in these times of rising unemployment , because the report says that temporary workers are to be paid the same as permanent , full-time workers .
Wrong !
At one end , temporary agencies use this to get young people a start in life , or another go .
At the other end , inexperienced workers will be paid the same as experienced , long-time employees , which goes right against established practice .
This discourages employee loyalty , which every firm needs .
More experience equals more skill , equals more pay .
It is a bad move .
Reject it .
Madam President , this is a bad piece of legislation - not as bad as it might have been , but nonetheless bad .
Like so much employment regulation in this Parliament , it is introduced in the name of workers ' rights and yet its main effect will be to deny thousands upon thousands of people the right to work at all .
It makes our labour markets less competitive and less flexible .
It damages our economies at the very time we can least afford to have them damaged .
Temporary work is widely and correctly recognised as a ladder back into permanent employment for those workers who for some reason have been temporarily out of the labour market .
What we are doing in this House today is kicking away that ladder which helped workers back into employment .
The British Government has been resisting this measure for a long time but has finally found itself unable to resist it .
You could not ask for a clearer example of the way the EU subverts democracy in Member States .

( PT ) Madam President , Mr Bertrand , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I am very pleased with this report which concludes an issue pending since 2002 .
In my opinion , this is a balanced result which protects temporary workers , increases the flexibility of the labour market and respects the principle of subsidiarity .
This proposal generally ensures equal treatment from day one for workers provided through temporary employment agencies .
However , it also offers social partners the option to agree otherwise , if they so wish .
Bearing in mind the different practices and legislation of the Member States in this area , it is encouraging that Parliament , the Council and the Commission have reached agreement .
This agreement will ensure a stable framework for temporary employment agencies whose role in the European labour market is undeniable .
The increased regulatory transparency may help to create jobs and allow for new and more flexible forms of working .
I know that economic development requires the labour market to be more flexible , but this flexibility will only be beneficial for all if it is achieved while ensuring respect for workers ' rights in all aspects , in particular in relation to health and safety at work .
In my opinion , the final text of this directive is a good example of this balance .
I hope , Mr Bertrand , that I will be able to say the same next month on the Working Time Directive .
I must thank Mr Désir for his work and also the shadow rapporteur , Mrs Morin , who is from my political family .
I congratulate her on having contributed so significantly to this end result .
( CS ) I would like to begin by saying that I will be voting in favour of the proposal since the current version clearly represents the best that we can manage .
I feel that the next step is to closely monitor how it is put into practice by the Member States .
Some Member States have proper legal arrangements regulating the position of agency workers , but the arrangements for accrediting newly-established agencies are woefully inadequate .
In other words , anyone at all can employ people and there are virtually no controls at all over the activities of some dubious employment agencies .
I refer to the situation in the Czech Republic , of course .
In order to boost their earnings , agencies often employ workers not on the basis of employment contracts but on the basis of work performance agreements so that they can avoid paying social and medical insurance for their employees .
As a result , wages can be set at the minimum wage , but the workers are clearly left out of pocket after their contributions have been paid .
It is generally suspect that the numbers of agency workers are constantly increasing at the expense of those working under permanent full-time contracts of employment .
It is therefore the task of labour inspection bodies and trade unions to draw attention to the crooked practices that go on in some countries and not to allow any restrictions on the right of agency workers to join trade unions .
Despite the apparent good intentions in the current version of the draft directive , much remains to be done in terms of putting it into effect .
And in response to what has been said here by certain members of the European Parliament , may I say that I would take great pleasure employing them as agency workers so they can see for themselves what fun it is .
( ET ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen .
In Estonia we say : ' better late than never ' , and it is a positive development that we are finally passing the temporary agency worker directive .
Temporary agency work is becoming increasingly widespread , and thus it is very important that it be regulated .
The directive is also of great significance to those countries that do not yet have access to the labour market of the European Union countries , and whose workers are primarily used for improper purposes , violating their equal rights .
We know today that the protection of temporary agency workers is guaranteed very differently from one Member State to another .
There are Member States in which such protection is completely absent .
As a result I believe that the draft directive in its present wording will help to ensure throughout Europe at least a minimum level of fundamental protection for temporary agency workers , which will rule out the discrimination of workers who use this form of employment , compared to other forms of employment .
I hope we will pass this directive , and I also hope that we will not give it a very long term of implementation .
( PL ) Madam President , in the context of the debate on the directive concerning temporary workers , I should like to point out that the number of temporary workers in the European Union has increased significantly , especially in recent years .
This increase is often caused by the economic situation , and it is therefore essential to speed up legal regulation of the phenomenon at European level .
Another issue I would like to mention is how unfortunate it is that , although the European Commission made proposals on this subject , proposals that were then amended by the European Parliament back in 2002 , it was not until June 2008 that the European Council reached a compromise on them .
More than six years had elapsed by then .
In particular , we should support the solutions contained in the draft directive concerning equal treatment of temporary workers and other workers regarding status and safety , together with respect for the social standards required of enterprises in the area of equal treatment , in terms of remuneration and working conditions for temporary workers and other employees .
( EL ) Madam President , temporary workers suffer exploitation at the hands of employers and they need equal treatment and for their security to be defended .
However , the intentions of the European Commission tend towards the deregulation of employment relations and the development of flexible forms of work .
According to the Commission 's official statistics , unemployment reached 4.7 % in 2007 , with long-term unemployment standing at 2.8 % .
Promoting the flexibility and security model gives employers a strong weapon with which to increase temporary agency work , which results in less favourable working conditions and waters down collective agreements .
The aim of abolishing the facility for such matters to be regulated by the Member States and transferring them to the social level is to achieve the financial integration of the European labour market .
We are opposed to the steps constantly being made in this direction , because they are steps which strengthen the facility for the European Union to promote neo-liberal policies at the expense of the workers .
Our main objective should be to protect all workers .
Temporary workers need to be protected , but the main priorities must be no less than peace and security at work and defence of all the rights acquired by workers .
Madam President , may I start by congratulating the rapporteur on his report , not just for what he said , but also for the length of the report - or , should I say , the shortness of the report ?
In my nine years as a Member of this Parliament , it is the shortest report I have ever seen from any Socialist in the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs , and I hope he has set a precedent for some of his colleagues to follow - but we shall come back to that later .
I was also glad , and I thank him for this , that he said that the reason for this short report was because , quite correctly , the major stakeholders had both said they were in favour of this common position , leading the Council to support it .
The trade union side and the business side - not just the general business side but the specific business side , those responsible for agency workers - all said collectively , for whatever set of reasons , ' yes ' : they could sign up to it .
I think there is a moral for us as politicians here that , when the stakeholders themselves say that this is what they want , I do think we have a responsibility to try and facilitate that , wherever possible , so I do thank him for using the argument of consensus to get that through .
I would finally thank the Minister for his reminder to those who may need reminding , that , when the Council put together this common position , it was done as part of a package with the working time directive .
Indeed , our group briefly considered that maybe in the timing of the parliamentary work we should put both dossiers together and discuss them in December .
But , having reflected further and because I know the French presidency was very keen to get this show on the road , we were very happy to go along with that , so that , indeed , we could ' move on ' .
That , I think , is the message of this dossier : let us move on .
When we come to the second part of the package on the working time directive , I hope that from our part we will also show responsibility and move on .
( DE ) Madam President , employers , in particular , are taking every opportunity to call for more and more mobility and flexibility on the European labour market .
Equal treatment and minimum social standards are the only way of alleviating the unease on the part of workers about open labour markets and deregulation .
The European Union needs preventive measures for the labour market , which is fortunately opening up more and more .
The present draft report on temporary agency work shows how difficult it is to make progress in this field .
For six years , this Directive has been blocked in the Council by arguments of widely varying validity .
This proposal guarantees that temporary workers receive treatment equal to that of other workers from the first working day onwards , albeit subject to restrictions .
The right to benefit from labour law , equal pay for equal work - these are key principles of equal treatment .
The regulations in Member States , on very diverse bases , that are better than the present Directive are not impaired by it , which is crucial .
The right course has been taken on this under the French Presidency .
Those who have blocked the Working Time Directive - and this also goes for the Portability Directive - should likewise now correct their flawed thinking on social matters and understand that a social Europe needs minimum standards .
This is the only way to improve approval and understanding of , and even identification with , the European Union .
( HU ) Madam President , Minister , Commissioner , fellow Members , from the perspective of creating a single European labour market and guaranteeing equal opportunities to all EU workers , the directive under discussion represents significant progress .
Of course , this is not to say that this piece of EU legislation will bring about a harmonised , Community-level framework for the employment of temporary agency workers .
Nor is this even necessary or desirable , since , in keeping with the principle of subsidiarity , the fundamental regulation of employment will , in this regard , continue to fall under the competence of the Member States .
The effort , however , to introduce clear and unambiguous minimum requirements throughout the territory of the EU , by means of which temporary agency workers will be protected across the Community 's territory , is certainly to be welcomed and is a step in the right direction .
It is my view that without any ideological overtones and independently of our party affiliation , we can all agree that the protection of pregnant women , the guarantee of equal treatment for men and women , the combating of all discrimination based on ethnic origin , religion , beliefs , age or membership of a minority group are objectives of fundamental importance .
All these considerations justify the effort to regulate these matters in a uniform way throughout the EU .
It is with a view to achieving this goal that the EU legislators have worked out this system of minimum requirements .
It is important that in addition to fostering individual professional development , the directive also serves Europe 's economic interests by ensuring that temporary agency workers will also enjoy equal opportunities in the areas of access to training , child care and other infrastructure programmes .
This applies in the times between assignments as well .
It is in all our interests that temporary agency workers should not be subjected to discrimination , that they too should be able to increase their knowledge and that achieving a work / life balance should not become an insurmountable problem for them .
In this area we definitely need a unified position and therefore , I personally support the approval of this directive . Thank you very much , Madam President .

( RO ) Based on what the rapporteur , Mr Désir , has done , we can describe it using the Latin phrase Multum in parvum ( many in one ) .
This is how we can categorise today 's proposal for a directive , as it offers a guarantee of the right to work even when the activity being performed by the employee is temporary due to certain specific aspects of the work being carried out .
I believe that , thanks to a measure of this sort , professions which are rare or hardly employed at a particular workplace will be promoted through them being combined by those holding some of these skills and according to market demand .
It will provide a professional mosaic offered by people who can be referred to by the description of homo universale from the Renaissance period .
( RO ) I would like to thank the rapporteur , Mr Désir .
This debate forms part of the measures which we need to take in order to establish a European framework which can guarantee European citizens decent working and living conditions .
Guaranteeing a minimum level of protection for temporary agency workers is part of constructing a social Europe .
For the European Union to become the most competitive , knowledge-based economy , European companies need to be able to choose the staff and skills they need .
I personally believe that if we guarantee temporary agency workers the same conditions enjoyed by workers from user companies , we are not only protecting temporary agency workers but , above all , local permanent staff .
These equal conditions relate to working hours , rest periods , paid leave , salary level , status and safety .
Guaranteeing proper working conditions for temporary agency workers will get rid of illegal work and social dumping .
In my personal view , social Europe will be enhanced if the trade unions are involved in making the decision to grant certain exemptions through the use of collective labour contracts .
( DE ) Madam President , as my colleague Mrs Lambert has already said , this is a very important breakthrough on the road to a social Europe , albeit just an initial step .
Citizens expect us to take real steps towards a social Europe , and to ensure that employment rights in the internal market and equal pay for equal work at the same location play a part .
The European Parliament has managed to establish in the Directive this principle of equality , which had been lacking in the original Commission proposal .
It is very important that the Council has supported us on this , as it is essential that competition in this internal market be based on quality rather than on wages .
I should like to add one thing by way of conclusion .
Just as important as this breakthrough is a breakthrough on the Working Time Directive ; not of the kind proposed by Mr Bushill-Matthews , however , but with absolutely no opt-outs , as proposed at Parliament 's reading .
I can only call on the Council to support us on this , too .
( PL ) We are dealing with a particularly important subject .
I am aware of the many concerns relating to the status and situation of persons employed on a temporary basis .
I have in mind formal and legal issues as well as employment conditions .
This is particularly noticeable in relation to the employment of a large number of individuals from the new Member States .
These persons are prepared to accept any kind of job offer at home or abroad because of the high unemployment rates .
Working terms and conditions cannot be driven by the situation on the labour market , and availability for work .
I stress that they must comply with the working standards and requirements currently in force .
This applies to safety , social conditions , insurance , and remuneration rates .
Madam President , I am very proud to have taken part in the vote in committee on this directive and to be participating in the debate today on the vote to deliver the temporary agency workers directive .
It was a key priority for the Labour Government in my own country , Britain , part of a deal with our trade unions known as the Warwick Agreement , and today that promise is being delivered .
I am delighted to be supporting it and have campaigned for this directive for three reasons .
One is that temporary agency workers are vulnerable workers - whatever the protestations of some people opposite .
Eighty per cent in a British Trades Union Congress ( TUC ) survey said that they were treated less well in relation to pay , training and paid time off , and they want better .
The second is that the biggest number of migrants from Eastern Europe since the enlargement who have come to work in Britain have come to my own region , the East of England , often through temporary work agencies , which , unregulated , have too often been responsible for abuses .
Those abuses will end .
The final reason is that we have a social partnership agreement , rarely seen in Britain , between the British TUC and the Confederation of British Industry ( CBI ) : that agreement is being translated into law in this vote .
( EL ) Madam President , I too should like to congratulate not only the Presidency and the Commission , but also the rapporteur and everyone who helped to pass the directive and mark a new achievement for the European Union for the benefit of the citizens .
I should also like to remind the House that a large proportion of temporary workers are women .
It is especially gratifying to know that female temporary workers will also have vested rights from the very first day , as will parents in general , and will not therefore be at a disadvantage , because the aim of this new proposal by the European Union for citizens , employers and workers alike is to introduce humane treatment , given that a single day 's work or several days ' work is of equal value and must be shown the same respect .
I hope that it will be possible to apply all that has been agreed , because it is in the application of the law that we fall down .
In Greece , for example , the law has entered the statute book and provides for equal treatment for temporary workers and permanent workers .
The difficulty , however , is in the application of the law .
Madam President , I should like to echo some of the previous speakers in confirming that the adoption of this new directive on temporary work will be a real step forwards .
Somebody called it a ' breakthrough ' , and I think that is just the right word .
The only thing is that , as I am well aware , it does not represent the end of our work .
We will have other opportunities , over the weeks to come , to show that we are able to make more progress with a social Europe .
I am thinking here , of course , of the Working Time Directive , which is the other strand of the common position adopted in Luxembourg on 9 June .
I am aware of the problems that some of you have with this text , but I would like to remind you this evening that the only way we could get approval from the Council for the text you are about to adopt , strengthening the rights of temporary workers , was by linking it to the Working Time Directive .
I am also thinking of the European Works Councils Directive , which needs to be revised .
Fourteen and a half million Europeans work in businesses that have set up such councils ; they are waiting for that directive to be revised to improve the protection of their social rights in the future and , to be frank , the current economic climate means that this revision is all the more relevant , all the more necessary , and all the more urgent .
This issue will be our first opportunity to show that the Council and Parliament are willing to take on their role as colegislators .
As you know , the European social partners have already demonstrated that they understand what is at stake by presenting , at the end of the summer , eight joint proposals on the basis of which they are prepared - they have said they are prepared - to accept the Commission 's proposal , my dear Vladimir .
It is now up to us to show that we are equally determined to take action .
Ladies and gentlemen , Mr Désir , Commissioner , up until now , the growth of the temporary work sector in Europe has often taken place in a complete legal void , with no true safeguards for workers .
As of the day after tomorrow , we will be able to say that this situation has come to an end .
The day after tomorrow , we will also be able to say that , at a time when our continent faces serious economic and financial problems , we as politicians are willing to join forces and take action to restart social Europe .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , the debate has in my view clearly shown the importance of this directive , given the huge number of workers it affects and the great improvements that it will bring about .
It has also shown how the directive has attracted a genuinely strong consensus , which has emerged from the far-reaching debates and the agreement and support of the social partners .
We have also heard in the debate that the directive is overdue , but as the saying goes in some languages ' Better late than never ' .
In Czech we have a similar saying and I am sure there are similar sayings in other languages .
After a prolonged efforts we have made real progress , because this directive is just as relevant , if not more relevant , today than it was six years ago .
Ladies and gentlemen , there is one more thing I would like to mention which I find worth noting , which is that this directive , this very challenging directive , which genuinely opens the door to a social Europe , has been adopted in a twenty-seven member Europe , after having been bogged down for years in a fifteen-member Europe .
In my view this constitutes a clear example of the fact that a twenty-seven member Europe is capable of social progress .
Ladies and gentlemen , many of you have mentioned the other directives which are under debate in this House .
I believe that the step we are taking today is a promising sign of how we might also approach future directives .
Challenging and complex issues remain of course , but in spite of this I believe that a certain dynamic has now been created and that our chances of achieving positive results are better than ever before .
rapporteur . - ( FR ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I should like to start by thanking my fellow Members for their comments , and the shadow rapporteurs , the coordinators and everyone else involved in this debate for the support they have given to me , and equally to the finalisation of this process .
It is true that this report boils down to an explanatory statement and a single request : ' let us say yes ' .
The imminent adoption , I hope , in two days ' time of this directive is a victory for the European Parliament , and a victory for the social partners , and I should like to take this opportunity to respond to the members of the Confederal Group of the European United Left / Nordic Green Left , who tabled a number of amendments .
I understand where these amendments are coming from , in essence , but I should nevertheless like to emphasise the fact that the European Trade Union Confederation once again spoke to the chairmen of the political groups , a few days ago , to say that the adoption of this directive , in unamended form , would send a strong signal that social progress at EU level was both necessary and possible , and that social Europe was still alive .
At a time when the temporary work sector is growing , as are other atypical forms of employment contract , we need to have a legal framework , and that is the decision that we are now taking .
Europe is an area of justice : it needs to be so in the interests of civil rights , and also in economic and social terms .
We have already enshrined in various directives the protections and rights enjoyed by all workers .
Now that more and more people are temporary workers , we need to ensure that they have the same rights , and that temporary work cannot be abused as a way to evade either the rights of workers concerned or those of other workers who would consequently suffer from pressures and social dumping .
We also want to show , in adopting this directive , that social Europe can move forwards , and that it can have real substance , contrary to what we have sometimes heard from the Commission - not from Mr Špidla , but from other Commissioners .
We can legislate - we can colegislate - on social matters , too , and thus show the members of the Council , who have , for too long , blocked the adoption of this and other legislation , that they need not be afraid of the progress of social Europe , and that , if we can show that Europe is defending citizens and workers , this may also help to bring about a reconciliation between the citizens and the institutions of the Union and to assuage the concerns expressed in Ireland , the Netherlands and my own country , France .
I believe that further progress with regard to social directives will also help to foster further progress with regard to political Europe , and with regard to people 's support for the progress of political Europe .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place on 22 October 2008 .
Written Statements ( Rule 142 )
in writing . - ( RO ) Using a directive to establish the rights of European citizens involved in temporary employment in EU countries has been a real success for social Europe .
The problem is whether the Union 's Member States and employers comply with the provisions of this directive , because specific examples from the labour market contradict the theory on many occasions .
One specific example of this is the non-recognition of Romanian and Bulgarian citizens ' education diplomas after both countries ' accession to the EU , while the directive on this matter was enforcing something different .
The question is what can be done to stop citizens from the new countries which have joined the EU from losing confidence and saying that one thing is approved in Brussels , while something different is decided by the governments in European capitals .
Consideration must also be given to the fact that there is an economic crisis going on , which will , in any case , influence how labour-related directives are applied in the national territories of Europe .
The European Commission ought to set up immediately a proper system for monitoring the application of labour-related legislation and apply indiscriminately punitive measures against the relevant countries .
Applicable law in matrimonial matters - Amendment of regulation as regards jurisdiction and introducing rules concerning applicable law in matrimonial matters ( debate )
The next item is the joint debate on :
the report by Mrs Gebhardt , on behalf of the Committee on Civil Liberties , Justice and Home Affairs , on the proposal for a Council Regulation amending Regulation ( EC ) No 2201 / 2003 as regards jurisdiction and introducing rules concerning applicable law in matrimonial matters - C6-0305 / 2006 - and
the oral question by Mrs Gebhardt and Mr Deprez , on behalf of the Committee on Civil Liberties , Justice and Home Affairs , to the Commission , on the Council Regulation amending Regulation ( EC ) No 2201 / 2003 as regards jurisdiction and introducing rules concerning applicable law in matrimonial matters - B6-0477 / 2008 ) .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , today , we are discussing an issue that is of the utmost importance to citizens .
Our Europe is a pleasant place where people enjoy increasing mobility .
It is a place where , increasingly , marriages are taking place between nationals of different countries or couples are moving to a different country , and of course this is a good thing and is one of the accomplishments of the European Union .
Unfortunately , there is also a drawback to this accomplishment , however , which is that these marriages often end in separation , and then there is the issue of the necessary divorce .
Current law is so unsatisfactory in some respects that a couple may be unable to find a competent judge or law for their divorce .
Naturally , this is a very unpleasant situation for these citizens , and we must come up with a solution and an answer .
This concerns people 's lives , which are of the utmost importance .
I am pleased that the European Commission has tackled the subject , therefore , and I should like to reiterate straight away that there is to be no harmonisation of the law in this matter - indeed this is not permitted , and it is stated quite clearly in the Treaty on European Union and the Treaty establishing the European Community that the law in such matters is the domain of Member States .
Yet we must ensure that there is transparency and that citizens are able to use this law .
After all , the legislation is very diverse .
There is Malta on the one hand , with no divorce at all , and Sweden on the other , where it is possible to obtain one within six months .
There is the Netherlands , where homosexual marriage is permitted , and Poland , where such a thing would be inconceivable .
These are all questions that arise and need to be answered .
We have done good work in the European Parliament and enjoyed constructive cooperation on this with the European Commission and also the Council .
The Council is key - it has to decide unanimously what will be done in this field in future .
Unfortunately , it is there that the problem now lies , but I shall return to this later .
The response that the European Commission has suggested to us is very positive .
Firstly , it would like to increase the choice of law under which a couple can divorce , provided both parties are in agreement - although it goes without saying that , if this is to be truly applicable , there must be a connection to the life , place of residence or place of marriage of the couple or to other aspects .
The question also arises as to what happens if a couple or just one of the partners wants a divorce and the couple cannot agree on the law to be applied .
In these circumstances , we take the view that there cannot be such great freedom of choice , as we need to ensure that there is a catalogue .
We cannot accept ' forum shopping ' .
We cannot accept a situation in which the stronger partner chooses the law most favourable to him- or herself and the other is disadvantaged .
That is unacceptable .
This is why we have two different responses in these matters .
One particularly important principle quite clearly applies in both cases : we must ensure that both partners are very well informed about the consequences - both social and legal - of the choice of law .
Examples are custody matters , alimony and all such issues that are connected in this case too .
The parties concerned must be aware of this before they take a decision .
We are asking that judges verify that the partners are really aware of the consequences of their choice .
It is also important that we prevent the application of law from somewhere or other that is unacceptable in accordance with the principles of the European Union - for example Sharia law , Chinese law or whatever .
In this regard , too , we have come up with clear wording - particularly in Amendments 25 and 30 , which I have attempted to reinforce with my Amendment 36 - namely stating that the respective law must be in keeping with the basic principles of the European Union or it cannot be applied .
This goes without saying as far as we are concerned .
The Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats has tabled a number of amendments that I find absolutely impossible to accept .
These impose a total limit on what we already have , and in addition would violate existing international law , for example that of the Hague Convention .
We cannot accept this .
We need further dialogue , and I hope that we do manage to find a solution to the problem by tomorrow .
At all events , I am much obliged to Mr Demetriou for his cooperation with me ; it has been very constructive .
The Council has a major problem : it has to take a unanimous decision , and there is currently one Member State that is quite simply standing in the way of this unanimity .
That is why our committee tabled this oral question to the Council and the European Commission .
I consider it very regrettable that the Council is not present at this time to reply to this question .
The Minister has just left .
It is essential that we know what to do now , for our own sake and that of citizens and the future of the European Union .
The first question to the European Commission - I am pleased that you are here to reply , Mr Barrot - is as follows : do you intend to withdraw your proposal ?
The second is : do you intend to submit a proposal to the Council to establish an enhanced cooperation procedure according to Article 11 of the EC Treaty and in compliance with Articles 43 and 45 of the Treaty ?
I should have liked the Council to tell me whether it really intends to take this course , as that is the big question that arises .
Madam President , honourable Members , I will start by trying to respond to Mrs Gebhardt 's report , and will then turn to the oral question that you have very opportunely linked to the report .
I am glad to see that Mr Deprez is also here .
Many , many thanks , Mrs Gebhardt , for your report , which is quite remarkable , not least for your excellent degree of cooperation with the Commission on such a delicate and sensitive subject .
The Rome III proposal is , indeed , very close to our hearts , and not only for the Commission - I know that it is also of great interest to the European Parliament .
I believe that it will be very important in supporting the free movement of people within the European Union .
I should just like , Madam President , to go over some of the data we have available : there are currently 2 200 000 weddings each year in the European Union , 350 000 of which are international marriages .
That is already a considerable number and , clearly , it is a phenomenon that will increase .
Around 170 000 divorces a year are affected by this proposal , which is around 19 % of the total of some 875 000 divorces a year within the European Union .
20 % - that is a significant figure !
That is why the Commission broadly shares your view , Mrs Gebhardt , regarding the importance of the Rome III proposal : it provides greater predictability and legal certainty for the couples concerned .
As you pointed out , in the absence of a framework , either couples go ' forum shopping ' or the dominant partner has the final say .
The Commission therefore broadly supports the European Parliament 's report on the initial Rome III proposal , with certain reservations .
The Commission supports Parliament 's amendments aiming to ensure that spouses can make an enlightened choice .
The Commission therefore agrees with Parliament on the need to tighten up the formal conditions for the conclusion of marriage contracts and to protect the weaker spouse , but we also need to take account of the differences in the legal systems of the Member States in this regard : as you have quite rightly emphasised , this is not a matter for harmonisation .
In a similar vein , the Commission welcomes Parliament 's proposals aiming to improve the public 's awareness of national and European laws concerning marriage and divorce contracts .
There is one point on which we disagree : the Commission sees no need to include a new competence criterion based on the place where the marriage was celebrated , as the link between the place where the wedding takes place and the couple 's situation when they separate may be very tenuous .
Nevertheless , the Commission endorses Parliament 's amendment concerning the spouses ' option of going to this court as a last resort , if it proves impossible to obtain a divorce from the court of habitual residence , but we see this more as an exceptional case .
The Commission would also prefer to leave it up to the Court of Justice to interpret the term ' habitual residence ' .
This term already appears in a number of instruments and has not , to date , been formally defined , but national judges do not seem to have had too many problems in applying it .
We feel that , for the sake of respecting the diversity of the Member States ' legal systems , we can put our trust in the Court of Justice .
We also do not consider it necessary to restrict Rome III solely to the law of the Member States .
This is an important issue , because the Member States will want to continue to apply the divorce laws of third countries that share our democratic values : for example , if a German or French woman marries a Swiss man , it seems reasonable that it should also be possible to apply the rules we have set for ourselves to this marriage , or to this divorce .
Bear in mind , though , that the Commission agrees with Parliament on the need for Rome III to include an antidiscrimination clause , of course , which would allow any European judge to exclude foreign laws that are incompatible with the principle of equality between spouses .
No doubt this antidiscrimination clause will still allow us to apply it , for example , to Switzerland / Member State or Norway / Member State marriages .
I will now turn to the question of how we can make Rome III a success , and I should once again like to thank Mrs Gebhardt and Mr Deprez for their oral question , pulling me up on the progress of Rome III .
Obviously , I am with you in regretting the deadlock in the Council regarding the negotiations on Rome III .
Last July , we had a debate between the justice ministers on the possibility of enhanced cooperation on Rome III and , at the end of July , nine Member States presented the Commission with a request for enhanced cooperation : that is more than a third of the Member States involved in the adoption of Rome III .
It is therefore clear that the Commission needs to look into this request for enhanced cooperation , but , as you will understand , if we want this to be a success we will need to pay attention to the whole context .
I should now like to respond to three questions that you have asked the Commission .
First of all , I can tell you that there are no plans to withdraw the Commission 's initial ' Rome III ' proposal .
If the Commission agrees to present the Council with a proposal on enhanced cooperation within the sphere of ' Rome III ' , however , it may , in the interests of legal clarity , withdraw its initial proposal once the decision has been taken , in order to amend it , but that would only be if we really had the possibility of launching enhanced cooperation .
In any event , withdrawal is not on the agenda .
I should like to take this opportunity to briefly recap the procedure followed by the enhanced cooperation mechanism .
A request must first be submitted to the Commission by at least eight Member States , as occurred in this case .
If the request meets the other criteria set out in the Treaty on European Union - if it complies with the rules on the single market - the Commission may submit the request to the Council .
If it chooses not to do so , it must provide reasons for this .
Enhanced cooperation must then be authorised by the Council , following consultation with or assent from Parliament , depending on the situation .
The request for enhanced cooperation does , of course , raise certain questions , in both legal and political respects .
We need to face up to the need to continue with our joint action with regard to family law , as close as possible to the citizens , and to balance this need against the risk of fragmentation of the European area of justice that could result from a series of enhanced cooperation agreements .
Before I make a statement , I should of course like to hear the views of the Members of Parliament , and I certainly want the Member States to clarify their position .
At any rate , I should like to assure the European Parliament that it is my intention - and not just my intention but also my desire - to move forwards with judicial cooperation on civil matters in Europe .
Family law must not be the poor relation of civil law - that would be rather paradoxical given that the issues it covers are closest to people 's daily lives .
Fortunately , progress has been made with regard to the circulation of divorce decisions , parental responsibility and rights of access to children .
On that subject , I should also like to say that , now that we have the texts , I as Commissioner will need , with your help , to ensure that the rules are followed .
I am thinking in particular of rights of access to children and custody , with regard to which the current situation in Europe is not entirely satisfactory .
In summary , we will indeed be able to come up with a legislative proposal on the applicable law on the subject .
I would also add that we are simultaneously drafting a law applicable to matrimonial systems that could be adopted in early 2010 .
That , Madam President , is where we stand with this issue .
Of course , I cannot anticipate the result of the consultation we will very soon be conducting with the Member States .
What I can say , though , is that the Commission wants to make real progress , whilst nevertheless once again ensuring that we can bring along the majority of Member States with us .
That , in brief , is my point of view , but I hope , like you and like Parliament - though I will listen to you closely - that things will move forwards .
Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the proposal for a regulation in question was examined in depth by the Committee on Legal Affairs , for which I have the honour of being the draftsman .
The suggestions put forward in the opinion approved unanimously by that committee met with only partial approval , however , within the Committee on Civil Liberties , Justice and Home Affairs .
Nonetheless , I have to say that together we have tried to rationalise the Council 's initial proposal as far as possible , adding elements of legal certainty .
The compromise amendments approved by the two committees with the help of Mrs Gebhardt , whom I would like to thank , have been welcomed and have bolstered the principles we referred to with the aim of getting this regulation off the ground .
In this regard , the authorities of a state which makes no provision for divorce and which does not recognise the type of marriage in question will not be obliged to dissolve that marriage .
On one point , however , there remains a difference of opinion - that mentioned earlier by Mrs Gebhardt .
The basic issue is this : the choice of law is entirely new in the legal world , since it is not normally possible to choose the law , only to choose a judge , making this a completely new concept .
Given this choice of law , to which law do we want to refer ?
To the law of one of the 27 states of the European Union , or to the law of any country in the world ?
It is true that there is a limit .
The limit is that already established by public policy and the non-applicability in a given state of any law providing for a type of marriage not considered to exist in that state .
I believe that if we really want legal certainty - my objection is a technical one - if we really want to introduce ' shopping around ' with regard to the choice of applicable law , if we really want to abide by the weakest code of law - because let us not forget that to choose a law you need consensus and that consensus can also be subject to considerable pressure - if we really want to construct a European legal area then , in my opinion , it is a good thing for all of these amendments that the choice of law be limited to the laws of the 27 states of the European Union .
In this sense , though we have tabled several amendments , they are in essence one and the same , and since it is a technical amendment that does not alter our overall opinion of the proposal , we appeal to the common sense of all Members in order that this amendment be approved .
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - ( EL ) Madam President , first may I thank the rapporteur for the long period of cooperation leading up to the report tabled for debate before us today and remark that we held several meetings at which we discussed all the material .
Family law is a serious matter and the particular aspect which we are examining in connection with divorce , by which I mean jurisdiction and the choice of law , is and always has been one of the most serious aspects of family law .
May I point out that our policy is to support the institution of the family , not to encourage the dissolution of marriage .
However , divorce is a social phenomenon nowadays and we must deal with it in reality .
We do not wish to make it easier but , when a marriage reaches the point at which it cannot continue , we must be in a position to provide legitimate ways out , so that neither of the parties has to bear all the distress and punishment .
I do not believe that there is an easy way of choosing the applicable law in relation to divorce , but we could be clearer in terms of public policy and human rights in order to give the courts the powers of discretion to reject laws which are not in keeping with European customs , human rights and public policy .
As far as enhanced cooperation is concerned , I take the view that the Commission - and I congratulate you Commissioner on the position which you took today - should advance this matter even further so that we arrive , if possible , at the point at which enhanced cooperation is acceptable .
on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( SV ) Madam President , I want to begin by thanking Mrs Gebhardt for the constructive work she has done and to say how sorry I am that it was not possible to come to the same view as Sweden and myself .
As a result , I was unable to vote in favour of the report either in committee or in plenary .
For me as a Swedish Social Democrat , this proposal is a retrograde step in terms of equality between women and men .
These issues should therefore be resolved at national level in the future too .
I think that it would have been enough if divorce were only to have been granted when the parties were in complete agreement .
The proposal means that the weaker party , more often than not the woman , can now have solutions forced on her by the man , either because he acts first or uses coercion .
The courts can thus be compelled to apply laws of which we are highly critical - laws that are abusive and that take an antiquated and old-fashioned view of women , marriage and divorce .
For me , quick divorce settlements are less important than equality and women being able to feel secure .
I shall therefore persist in my efforts and go on voting against this proposal until we find another solution .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - ( NL ) Madam President , before I address the matter in hand , I should like to propose that , in future , we ask each Council presidency to bring a wax doll or a blow-up doll to this Chamber , since the Council itself is always absent from debates of this kind and I do like to address somebody .
You may be able to pass on this request formally to the presidency .
I gather my fellow MEPs are in agreement with me .
First of all , I should like to congratulate and , also on behalf of my group , express my support for the rapporteur , who has done an excellent job over the past year .
All credit to her .
Madam President , the EU is not , of course , concerned with conjugal ethics , but with guaranteeing the rights of EU citizens wherever they may be and whomever they decide to marry .
Indeed , it is none of our business who they decide to marry , but what we have to do is to safeguard citizens ' rights .
In this light , it is extremely unfortunate that the Member States have failed to reach agreement .
I should like to say to my very esteemed Swedish fellow MEPs that I have the feeling that there is a huge misunderstanding .
I believe human rights , those of women in particular , to be strengthened , not weakened , by this .
Indeed , I welcome the fact that , in the 21st century , people can make individual decisions about their own lives - and divorce may be part and parcel of this .
Moreover , like the rapporteur , I should like to say that my group will also be voting against the amendments put forward by the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats , and I also disagree with Mr Casini 's arguments .
It is also a question of principle , because I think we should decide for ourselves what we want for our citizens , and we should not let fear for the sharia get the better of us .
There are sufficient guarantees built into the present proposal and in the additional amendment by the Socialist Group in the European Parliament , which we will be backing .
This has been the subject of previous discussions .
Furthermore , I should like to say the following - and with this , I am reacting to the comments made by Mr Casini - that it is actually very harsh that the same arguments used to rule out certain systems of law - sharia for example - are also used , or referred to within the European Union , not to recognise totally legal marriages contracted within the EU , purely on account of the couple 's sexual orientation .
This is , to my mind , a complete anomaly .
I should like to repeat that I find it extremely unfortunate that the Member States have failed to reach agreement .
If I understand it correctly , the Commission is hanging onto a European solution for the time being .
This fills me with great pleasure .
I realise that it is an extremely difficult thing to do : if this problem , even despite Mr Sarkozy 's enormous drive , has not been solved , it must be very difficult indeed .
Finally , I can only express the hope , should closer cooperation be achieved against all odds , that all 26 Member States that had reached agreement , including mine , would conform .
on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - ( NL ) Madam President , according to a study by the Commission that was published this week , long-distance commuters often suffer with headaches , sleep deprivation and poor relationships , and it follows that in all these international environments , including ours , there is probably a very high divorce rate .
Anyhow , the figures which Commissioner Barrot quoted a moment ago once again suggest that international relationships are far more likely than national ones to end in divorce .
It is far more difficult , though , to formalise these divorces , while their impact is massive , for one of the partners is invariably based in a foreign country , where they do not have a social safety net or are not sufficiently familiar with the situation in that country , which makes it very difficult to reach a fair settlement .
This is why I should like to express my appreciation for the work of the rapporteur , Mrs Gebhardt : I think she has been very conscientious and has made sure that particularly the rights of weaker or less informed people are enhanced and that all partners are really well informed of their rights and know what is best for them .
What I do find important in this respect is that the website not only contains some kind of summary of the finances and how quickly you can get a divorce , but that , for example , attention is also devoted to the possible parenthood options .
I happen to be of the opinion that the rights of the children should be safeguarded , although that is up to the parents .
Whilst it is the parents , and not the government , who should determine what is right and in the interest of the child , it should be possible to reach a suitable solution , preferably one where the children are cared for by both parents .
An agreement should in any event be on the table .
Not everything should land on the woman 's shoulders , but there should be an agreement about how both parents deal with the matter .
I too found the comment made by our Swedish fellow MEP puzzling , because , if a woman wants to leave a marriage , surely it is awful if her husband should not be in agreement .
I should like to finish off by saying to the rapporteur that gay marriage does not exist in the Netherlands .
We have a marriage that is open to all couples , irrespective of their sex .
It is simply one marriage and it is therefore only the European Union , and not the Netherlands , that draws a distinction within our Dutch marriage
on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group . - ( SV ) Madam President , the proposal is intended to ensure that people getting divorced can genuinely enforce their rights and obtain the information they need .
However , the right to information and knowledge is not dependent on common regulations .
These do not in themselves increase awareness or make people better informed .
The rule in my own county , Sweden , is that , unless they have young children together , it is enough for people merely to give notice of the divorce .
There are also examples of other EU countries where divorce is completely prohibited .
If anything proves the need for legislation in this area , it is this state of affairs .
Certainly , the Treaty of Lisbon puts certain aspects of civil and family law on a supranational basis , but we have no Treaty of Lisbon as matters stand .
I question why the Commission is putting forward proposals in a sphere that , to date , has been an area of national competence .
My group will not vote in favour of the proposal .
I also thought that an extremely good case was put by my fellow Member from the Socialist Group in the European Parliament , Mrs Segelström .
on behalf of the IND / DEM Group . - ( NL ) Madam President , international private law pertains to two questions .
The first question is : which court is authorised ?
The second question is : which law should the court apply ?
It is understandable , in my view , that the first question is dealt with at European level .
This guarantees that every European citizen can put their case before a court of law .
The second question relates to an area that is typically dealt with , and indeed should be dealt with , by the Member States themselves .
Existing national legislation is subject to many national principles , and these should be observed .
The Commission 's proposal also intends to harmonise these collision rules , though .
Mrs Gebhardt 's report respects most of the Commission 's report and does not attempt to remove Chapter IIa from the proposal .
For this reason , I shall be voting against the report and against the proposal .
I would therefore ask the Council to reject the Commission 's proposal too .
( RO ) First of all , I would like to thank the rapporteur , Mrs Gebhardt , for the excellent work that she has put in .
Regarding the proposal for a regulation , it is gratifying to see that a clear , complete legal framework is being established covering both rules relating to jurisdiction , the recognition and enforcement of judgements in matrimonial matters and rules relating to the applicable law , by allowing the parties a certain degree of autonomy .
The Commission 's proposal offers the parties the opportunity to choose by common agreement the competent jurisdiction and applicable law .
The fact that the spouses enjoy this right in the divorce procedure increases the parties ' degree of autonomy and enables them to choose freely , in accordance with certain optional criteria .
We must ensure that the choice made by the parties is an enlightened one .
In other words , both spouses have been duly informed of the practical implications of their choice .
In this respect , it is important for us to consider the best way of ensuring that comprehensive information is made available before the act is signed .
Similarly , access to information must be provided , irrespective of each spouse 's financial situation .
Madam President , Dr Johnson was once asked what advice he would give to a young couple contemplating marriage .
His reply was ' don 't ' .
He also described second marriages as ' the triumph of hope over experience ' .
This report must elicit similar responses .
What advice should be given to nations contemplating having their divorce laws made by the European Union ?
The answer is obviously ' don 't ' .
To do so , given all the precedents of incompetent and damaging EU legislation , is surely the triumph of hope over experience , to say the least .
Amazingly , that also seems to be the conclusion of the Council in this case .
The Council does not want the proposals made by the Commission .
The Council seems to be very sensibly pulling back from the brink and listening to that old adage , ' marry in haste , repent at leisure ' .
What fun it is going to be when the Commission comes up with proposals to harmonise gay marriage and sharia law !
( PL ) We are living at a time when borders are disappearing , and our citizens can move and marry freely .
Nonetheless , we have so far been unable to make things easier for those who have decided to go their separate ways .
One example of the problems relating to the lack of uniform divorce law in Europe is the case of marriages between Poles and Germans .
Some 100 000 such couples have registered since 1990 .
Many of them failed to stand the test of time .
Last year , the European Parliament hosted several Polish people who have lost contact with their children as a result of rulings by the German authorities responsible for children and young people .
Allegations of kidnap and a ban on using the Polish language are just two examples of the humiliating treatment meted out to these parents and their children .
In response to the violations of human rights perpetrated by the aforementioned institution , a Polish association of parents opposed to discrimination of children in Germany was formed .
If we succeed in introducing the proposed changes to divorce law we would be helping many of our citizens to bring a particular stage of their life to a civilised end .
Most importantly , we would not have to allow children to be separated from one of their parents .
( PT ) Madam President , Mr Barrot , in the Committee on Civil Liberties , Justice and Home Affairs I witnessed the work carried out on this report by Mrs Gebhardt and also my colleague , Mr Demetriou .
Mrs Gebhardt has already pointed out that increased mobility is resulting in increasing numbers of marriages , but also in increasing numbers of divorces .
The differences in national legislation result in legal uncertainty and , in particular , in unfair opportunities given that the better-informed spouse can resort to the courts governed by the law which best serves his or her interests .
I therefore support this initiative which is , in my opinion , extremely important as it provides a clear and complete legal framework on the jurisdiction , recognition and enforcement of these judgments .
I must say that , in my opinion , anything which reduces unnecessary conflict not only ensures more justice for the people , but also , in particular , creates more confidence between those involved in the legal process .
It also establishes the area of freedom , security and justice that we all desire .
( PL ) As far as I am aware , there is no provision anywhere in the treaties for matrimonial law , that is to say , family law , to be dealt with at Union level .
I therefore believe that the Commission 's proposal is a typical case of a certain hyperactivity that is totally unnecessary and will only serve to generate confusion as to the nature of the European Union 's real competences .
I think this represents a deliberate intrusion into the field , in order to undertake further work on matrimonial law and its harmonisation .
Such activity is quite unnecessary , as existing private international law copes very well with matrimonial problems , and also with divorces at an international level .
( SL ) I would like to be able to say that the number of divorces in Europe is declining .
Regrettably this is not the case , so we need to address the question of how we can improve the position of those who represent the most vulnerable link in the chain , namely children .
Unfortunately children are the principal victims , particularly in countries where major delays in judicial proceedings occur .
My own country , Slovenia , is an example of a country where children suffer greatly before the courts can decide with which parent the children will live .
This also leads to major family tragedies and has severe psychological effects on many children .
I know of a number of such cases and I hope that this common directive will also contribute to an improvement in the situation in individual Member States .
( RO ) In the case of the former Communist countries , one way for girls from this region to escape from the state of oppression they were subjected to was to get married , sometimes actually for love , but in most cases for gain .
This has resulted , however , in a series of kidnappings , incidents involving psychological and physical torture and in the destruction of human beings .
As a consequence of this whole saga , the children who resulted from these marriages have the most to suffer .
Ignorance of the law is used as an excuse , but this is totally wrong .
Let us consider , in cases of this kind , recommending that , once the marriage is over , when an atmosphere of love , understanding and friendliness prevails , very clear divorce terms should be drawn up , taking into consideration the children resulting from the marriage .
Madam President , I am grateful to all the speakers .
I should like to confirm to Mrs Segelström that I certainly have begun discussions with the Swedish authorities .
Nevertheless , we are having a great deal of difficulty in understanding your country 's position .
As Mrs Gebhardt said , Rome III really has at its heart the intention of protecting the weaker spouse at the point when marriage contracts are being concluded .
It is truly in this spirit , and it is quite true - perhaps we must continue our dialogue - that we have failed to understand that , in the case of a couple one of whom is Swedish , we also have to take account of the fact that in the absence of any rules , well , it is the ' might is right ' principle that prevails .
That is where our difficulty in understanding stems from .
However , once again , we take note of your position and of that of your Swedish colleague .
In passing , I should also like to correct certain misapprehensions .
It is not within our competence , some have said , these questions are exclusively a national competence .
Look , there is a paradox here .
A Member State cannot exercise a national competence over questions involving two individuals , where one of them is a national of that Member State and the other is not .
It is logical that the European Union should surely try to organise matters a little , especially as , contrary to what has been said , international private law has no real answer to this type of problem , and in view of the fact that we have a space in which there is freedom of movement and that space is naturally going to pose more and more problems .
If this concern preoccupies the Commission , as it does Parliament , it is not a form of delusion to grapple with the whole problem ; it is instead a response to the expectations of a growing number of couples who want to avoid finding themselves in a very confrontational situation in cases of disagreement or break-up .
That is where the problem lies !
To be sure , I must not let it be said that the Council has said no .
It has not said no , it has issued differing opinions !
However , for all that , there are nine Member States that are asking for enhanced cooperation .
Here is what I wanted to say in conclusion .
I remind you that Rome III contains an anti-discrimination clause that allows foreign laws that would not guarantee equality of the spouses to be sidestepped .
That much is clear .
We are not talking here of sharia , it is a question of this principle of the equality of men and women , and the text enhances the integration of women who are living on our common European soil by giving priority to the law of the country of habitual residence .
These women will be able to ask a judge to apply European law in their case if it conforms more closely to the equality of rights .
I believe it is this that we should bear in mind .
That being so , this debate has been interesting and I am grateful to all the speakers .
I should also like to thank Mrs Gebhardt and Mr Deprez for having willingly taken this opportunity to find out whether , on the eve of a new round of consultations with Member States , we are committing ourselves to an enhanced cooperation exercise .
This debate is drawing to a close and I thank the European Parliament very much , for I believe that a great majority of Members really do want us to go down this road , while taking all the care necessary to arrive at the greatest possible consensus . My thanks to Parliament .
Mr President , I should like to thank all the speakers .
I wish to make it clear once more that we have further reinforced the provisions which the Commission has proposed and which are already laid down in Rome III , by stating quite clearly the following , for example , in Amendment 25 : Should the law indicated [ ... ] not recognise legal separation or divorce or do so in a form that is discriminatory as regards one of the spouses , the lex fori shall apply .
This means that , in such cases , in Sweden , for example , the jurisdiction is located in Sweden .
We have stated quite clearly that , if such cases should arise , there is a clear answer .
Indeed , this could not possibly be laid down any more clearly in a text - which is why I do not understand what the problem is .
However , we should endeavour to understand what it is - and I am obliged to Mr Barrot for expressing his views so clearly and for his willingness to speak to our fellow politicians in Sweden once again - as I am still at a loss .
After all , this regulation is intended to further improve all the existing provisions .
Finding a positive answer is very important to me as a woman who has always played a role in shaping women 's policy , as the weaker partner tends to be the woman .
We must pay particular attention to ensuring that a good position is established .
I also hope that , in the spirit of the compromise for which we have been striving time and again - I am much obliged to Mr Demetriou in this regard - we shall yet succeed in convincing Mr Casini that we have a good position on this .
A basis for this is also found in Amendment 38 , where we make clear once more - even though this is already stated in the text - that , naturally , only law that is really in keeping with the principles of the European Union and of the Charter of Fundamental Rights should be applied in the Member States , as that goes without saying as far as we are concerned .
Anything else would be out of the question ; no court in the Union would apply in any way law that was not .
I find this utterly inconceivable - which is made clear , of course .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place on Tuesday .
Written statements ( Rule 142 )
Increased social mobility has led to a higher number of mixed marriages and also of divorces .
Difficulties have often arisen concerning the choice of law to apply when each member of a couple hails from a different EU Member State or when one partner is a EU national and the other is not .
That is why harmonisation of the provisions on mixed marriages is urgently needed , so as to pre-empt discrimination during the divorce proceedings .
The choice of jurisdiction should be made on the basis of access by both members of the couple to comprehensive information on the most important aspects of national and Community law .
They should also be informed about the procedures relating to divorce and separation .
The opportunity to choose the appropriate jurisdiction and law should not infringe the rights and equal opportunities of each of the spouses .
Consequently , the choice of the law of a particular country must be a choice between the law of the state in which the marriage took place , or the law of the state in which the spouses have had their habitual residence for the last three years or the law of the country of origin .
In addition , it seems appropriate to apply the so-called principle of the law of the state in which the court is located when there is a danger of discriminating against one of the spouses .
One example could be the case of women from third countries where divorce is not recognised , but who are resident in the EU and apply for divorce or separation .
In such situations , the benefits to the individual of obtaining a divorce or separation , as an expression of their independence as a person , should outweigh arguments for implementation of national law .
Hungarian popular opinion is stirred up from time to time by cases in which children of a Hungarian parent are taken abroad by a foreign spouse .
Popular opinion sympathises in the first instance with the mother whose child has been taken away , but also feels sorry for the father who has been deprived of his child , if the child ends up in alien and unfavourable circumstances .
There are increasing numbers of ' mixed ' marriages within the European Union , yet the rules governing the dissolution of marriage and child custody are often chaotic and ambiguous .
Community law has hitherto regulated only the framework for disputes , such as the question of jurisdiction , that is , which court is competent to hear divorce or child custody cases .
It has not , however , provided solutions with regard to the applicable law in matrimonial matters , in other words , to determining which state 's law the courts should apply in legal proceedings .
The great divergence between the legislation of Member States thus gave rise to legal uncertainty , often compelling the parties to initiate proceedings as quickly as possible so that the most favourable legal rules might be applicable .
The Regulation now in preparation aims to remedy this situation , first of all , by favouring an agreement between the parties .
This may be suitable in the case of divorce by mutual consent , but knowing how things often are in practice , I am afraid that this will resolve few legal disputes .
The correct solution would be if , over the longer term , we succeeded in developing a unified set of European child custody regulations .
We support the increased cooperation mechanism in this case as it will ensure greater legal certainty and stability , avoid ' forum shopping ' and take European integration forward .
In addition , the new system is beneficial as it sets the law of the spouses ' common habitual residence as the first applicable law .
In the case of Spain , this will replace the criterion of the law of their common nationality , which , bearing in mind the number of immigrant couples living in Spain , is very practical for the courts and citizens seeking justice .
Evaluation of the Australia-EU PNR agreement - EU PNR ( debate )
The next item is the joint debate on :
the report by Mrs in 't Veld , on behalf of the Committee on Civil Liberties , Justice and Home Affairs concerning the conclusion of an agreement between the European Union and Australia on the processing and transfer of EU-sourced passenger name record data ( PNR ) by air carriers to the Australian customs service and
the oral question - ( B6-0476 / 2008 ) to the Commission concerning the European Union and PNR data by Mrs in 't Veld , Mrs Roure , Mr Bradbourn , and Mrs Kaufmann on behalf of the Committee on Civil Liberties , Justice and Home Affairs .
rapporteur . - Mr President , I will start with another remark on the absence of the Council , because in my speaking notes I had some remarks about good cooperation between the European Parliament and the Council , dialogue , spirit of the Treaty of Lisbon etc . , but the Council is absent for this debate as well .
I think that is absolutely disgraceful , because it is the Council that is hammering out a PNR policy and is required to reply to questions , and it is not here .
The Council has publicly made solemn pledges to involve the European Parliament , but now we see what the pledges of the Council are worth - nothing .
I think this is an affront not to the European Parliament but to the citizens who are entitled to answers and transparent decision-making .
So please , Mr President , pass on my discontent to the representatives of the presidency .
It is a joint debate on , the one hand , the proposals for an EU PNR and , on the other hand , the agreement on PNR between the EU and Australia .
They are essentially the same problems , and the problems have already been raised in the context of the agreement with the US and , later on , with Canada .
One of the main issues is that of purpose limitation , because everything else follows on from that - purpose limitation or , in other words , the justification for the proposal to begin with .
Now , everything is wrong with the justification , everything is wrong with the purpose limitation .
I shall describe this to you .
To start with , subsidiarity : the Commission and the Council state that the aim of the proposal is harmonisation of national schemes .
However , only a few Member States - I think it is three so far - have either a PNR system in place or plans for such a scheme .
Therefore , the proposal cannot possibly harmonise national systems , because they are non-existent .
It merely creates the obligation for all Member States to set up such a system for the collection of PNR data .
I would call this ' policy laundering ' , because whatever we cannot achieve at national level we try to achieve via the back door of the EU .
I am very pro-European , but I do not like this .
Moreover , the Commission has proposed a decentralised scheme so that the European added value is even less clear , and it creates an unworkable patchwork of rules and systems for the carriers and a very intransparent system for citizens .
The stated purpose in the proposal of the Commission is to identify persons who are , or may be , involved in a terrorist or organised crime event , as well as their associates , create and update risk indicators , to provide intelligence on travel patterns and other trends relating to terrorist offences to be used in criminal investigations and the prosecution of terrorist offences and organised crime .
The Commission , in its proposal , claims that the EU has been able to assess the value of PNR data and to realise its potential for law enforcement purposes .
However , to date we have not seen any concrete evidence to substantiate this claim .
Any evidence so far provided by the US is anecdotal and , to be honest , the information that we got from various US government agencies over the last year or so only seems to demonstrate that the mass collection and processing of PNR is not useful at all .
There has only been a single evaluation of the US PNR scheme , which did not assess the results .
As a matter of fact , a recent DHS-funded report raises substantial doubts over the usefulness of behavioural surveillance as a tool to identify potential terrorists .
This is easy to understand , because how are you going to develop risk profiles of potential terrorists on the basis of PNR data ?
It is blatant nonsense .
How are you going to determine if anybody has bad intentions on the basis of his telephone number or his credit card number ?
In other words , the purpose stated in the Commission proposal is demonstrably invalid and unfounded , and yet that is the basis on which the Council is working .
The Commission and Council seem to be confused as to what can and cannot be done with PNR data .
PNR records tend to contain very summary data and , on average , no more than 10 fields , with very basic information .
So it is totally unclear how this data could serve to identify high-risk persons .
Law enforcement authorities already have the necessary powers to obtain PNR data on a case-by-case basis in the context of an investigation or prosecution into known suspects and possible associates .
So the Commission proposal would merely remove the obligation of getting a warrant and due cause .
So if law enforcement authorities need new powers , it is for them to demonstrate when and how the existing powers were insufficient .
So far we have never had an answer to that question .
We already have a directive on API data , and they can indeed be used for the identification of persons and they can be used to run persons against a watch list .
This is not possible with PNR data .
So if we have a directive on API data , then why do we need more ?
That has not been demonstrated .
Automated systematic analysis of PNR of all passengers can be useful for other purposes , for example combating drug trafficking or illegal immigration .
They may be very legitimate and valid purposes , but let us have it on the table and let us not talk about the prevention of terrorist attacks , because that is something completely different .
If the Commission and the Council intend to expand the scope of the proposal to cover other purposes , as I have just said , they should clarify in detail , for each stated purpose , what use will be made of the PNR data .
In other words , you can use PNR data in a targeted manner in the context of a specific ongoing , concrete investigation .
You can use PNR data for automated systematic analysis , for example against drug trafficking , but in that case you do not need to store the data .
So we need to know exactly what the purpose is .
That brings me to the issue of , let us say , the legal base , because if you read the small print of the EU-Australia PNR - and this also applies to the EU-US PNR - it is not only about the fight against terrorism and crime but also about immigration , public health risks , administrative purposes , customs , immigration , supervision and accountability of public administration .
That has nothing to do with the fight against terrorism .
The Commission and the Council have chosen a third-pillar instrument for the PNR proposal and also for the agreements with other countries , but the third pillar is about police and justice cooperation within the European Union .
It is not about security in other countries .
The Commission may argue that , indirectly , if we provide data to the Americans , the Australians and to South Korea , for example , we will benefit from it in terms of security .
That may well be true , but then I would like to understand where public health comes in .
Where does immigration come in ?
Where does the supervision and accountability of public administration come in ?
It has nothing to do with it .
I will not go into all the other details of the implementation , but the question of purpose and justification needs to be answered before anything else , because the claim that it has been so useful in the fight against terrorism has not been substantiated to date : we are still waiting for evidence , and I would very much like to have that .
And , if there is no evidence , then we should look at the proposal again .
Mr President , honourable Members , we have heard a lively speech for the prosecution .
I do not know if I shall reply to all these questions , but I shall begin by thanking you , Mrs in 't Veld , for the opportunity you have given us first of all of discussing the PNR agreement concluded between Australia and the European Union on 30 June .
This agreement is the fruit of negotiations that began in March this year and which have been conducted by the Slovenian Presidency , assisted by the Commission .
This agreement is valid for seven years .
It is intended to provide legal protection to air carriers and reservation systems within the European Union with regard to PNR data transfer to the Australian Customs Service , while remaining compliant with EU data protection legislation .
The agreement contains important undertakings taking account of concerns in the data protection field , of individuals ' rights to have access to personal information stored as a result of the agreement , and of the rights of individuals , regardless of their nationality , to lodge complaints with the Australian Privacy Commissioner regarding the manner in which their data have been processed .
Parliament has always been in favour of PNR data transfer based on what is known as the ' push system ' .
After a transitional period , PNR data will be transferred to Australian Customs using only this ' push system ' .
In other words , the Australian Customs Service will not have authorised access to these data directly from databases .
Equally , the agreement contains important safeguards concerning the storage of PNR data , the transfer of such data to other agencies or third countries , as well as a clear reference to the purposes for which the data may be used .
As far as the purpose of the PNR data is concerned , the draft recommendation asserts that this is not compliant with Article 8 of the European Convention on Human Rights .
In reply , I should say that the agreement provides that PNR data may be used for three purposes , which are specified .
These are for combating terrorism and related crimes , combating serious crime - including organised crime - of a transnational nature , and third , combating the flight of persons from warrants and provisional custodial measures for the same crimes .
If you so wish , I believe you can say in this case that the purposes have been defined .
For the sake of clarity , the agreement also provides that PNR data may be processed on a case-by-case basis where necessary for the protection of the vital interests of the person concerned .
For the sake of clarity , the agreement provides that PNR data may be processed on a case-by-case basis where this is required by court order , for example in a case where the processing should be carried out in order to verify that the PNR data are being processed in accordance with Australian human rights law .
I should like to tell you that in future I shall take great care that Parliament play its part in such negotiations .
I am completely cognisant of the need to keep you well informed .
That being so , it seems to me that a certain number of guarantees have been obtained on the purpose of the data , on the use to which the data may be put and on the storage of the data .
That being so , I have tried to be objective and I do nevertheless think that this agreement was necessary .
Given that we have a willing partner , one with an institution charged with data protection , I really believe we have reasons for hoping that this agreement will be applied with complete respect for data protection .
I turn now most importantly , if I may say so , to the oral question that you put and which clearly poses the whole problem of PNR .
International terrorism and crime constitute a serious threat , and it is true that the collection and analysis of PNR data appear to be an effective tool in the fight against terrorism and crime .
PNR data are effectively commercial information provided by the passenger to the carrier on a voluntary basis .
This is the information that is collected by carriers to operate their reservation systems .
Recently , some countries have begun to require carriers to transfer their PNR data to them as a means of preventing and combating terrorism and serious crime , such as human trafficking and drug trafficking .
These countries include the United States , Canada , the United Kingdom , Australia , New Zealand and South Korea .
Those are a certain number of third countries , not the United Kingdom , who have begun to require carriers to transfer PNR data to them .
Certain Member States - France , Denmark , Sweden and Belgium - have embarked upon legislative processes towards the same end or are considering the possibility of commencing a legislative process .
Several other countries have begun to consider the idea of using PNR data .
However , we are in the initial stages only .
We should take account of the fact that PNR data are simply a tool that can be used by the law enforcement authorities along with other tools and information , because the question you have raised , to find out what the usefulness of such a use really is , cannot be appreciated except in a context in which police authorities use PNR data in conjunction with other instruments .
Clearly , it is much more difficult to grasp exactly what the usefulness of PNR data is .
Nevertheless , it appears to be the case that , in certain countries that have used PNR data , they have genuinely proved to be a useful weapon in the fight against terrorism and crime .
PNR systems have been evaluated by the authorities in each country .
The results of these evaluations are on the whole positive and confirm that recourse to PNR systems has been effective .
While preparing its proposal for European PNR , the Commission was in close contact with Member State police authorities .
The Commission was clearly quite satisfied by the evidence offered by the Member States .
The majority of evidence was based on confidential information and could not be shared in an open forum .
Parliament held a hearing on PNR , at which four Member States and three third countries made presentations on their use of PNR and testified to their success .
Given the confidential and sensitive nature of this information , however , the hearing was held in camera .
I should like to say a few words on automated analysis methods , as this is a real issue .
It is true that PNR are normally analysed automatically on the basis of risk indicators , but I must emphasise this : the Commission wants a guarantee that this sort of automated analysis will never lead to a decision directly affecting an individual .
The results of automated analysis should always be analysed afresh manually by a specialist officer .
The Commission 's proposal suggests that PNR data should be used to prevent and combat terrorism and organised crime , and particularly drug trafficking and human trafficking , something you have certainly been prepared to recognise .
I should add that PNR may be useful in combating other kinds of serious crime that are nothing to do with the world of organised crime .
Despite that , we have limited the proposal to organised crime for reasons of proportionality .
Some Member States consider that PNR data could be of general use in combating illegal immigration , in safeguarding public health and for air safety .
In the fight against illegal immigration , PNRs would be useful , since it is true that they make data available more quickly than Advance Passenger Information data .
In the field of air safety , PNRs could be useful if the PNR system offered the possibility of refusing criminals or potential terrorists permission to board an aircraft , but the Commission 's proposal does not incorporate these powers .
As far as issues of public health are concerned , PNRs could be useful in preventing potential epidemics .
If a passenger were to discover that he or she was suffering from a disease that had the potential to cause an epidemic , PNRs could be used to communicate with other passengers on the same aircraft and to offer them advice accordingly .
Here too , however , the Commission 's proposal does not go this far , as proof of proportionality was lacking .
I am sorry that I am unable to agree with you completely , but it seems to me that the purposes specified in the proposal are sufficiently precise to provide the legal safeguards that we should all wish to see .
You also raised the question of subsidiarity , and wondered whether a European initiative was needed .
The Commission considers this European Union proposal to be necessary .
Three Member States have already enacted domestic legislation on PNR data ; several other Member States already make use of PNR data in other ways .
A comparison of these systems reveals many differences with respect to both the duties placed on carriers and the purposes .
Such differences make passengers ' lives more complicated and certainly cause problems for carriers .
The proposal is therefore intended to harmonise carriers ' responsibilities and to provide uniform rules for Member States making use of PNR data .
At the same time , it also requires them to comply with our data protection mechanisms .
Besides , this proposal will allow for more effective cooperation between police forces .
Above all , the Commission believes that , in these times in which we find ourselves , international terrorism and crime pose serious threats , and that these measures must be taken to deal with these problems , while remaining completely respectful of human rights and fundamental rights .
You also raised the question of our choice of a decentralised framework for data collection , by saying : ' Is it not the case , really , that in choosing a decentralised system , we lose the power of oversight ? '
The Commission examined the alternatives of a centralised system as opposed to a decentralised framework , and , during our consultations with Member States , it became obvious that the processing of PNR data requires the use of information the source of which is extremely sensitive .
For this reason , therefore , Member States were unwilling to share such information with a centralised European PNR entity .
It is true that a centralised system would be less expensive and would have certain advantages , but for reasons of practical politics we have chosen the alternative of a decentralised framework .
From a data protection point of view , the decentralised option also allows each Member State to establish its own safeguards for access to and exchange of data .
By way of conclusion , Mr President , I apologise for taking a long time , but this is an important matter touching on the exercise of democratic control by the European Parliament and national parliaments .
The Commission is certainly aware that its proposal will be adopted according to a process of consultation .
The Commission wants to be in close contact with you , with Parliament .
National parliaments will be widely involved in the procedure , since the proposal is being or will be considered by most national parliaments .
Data protection authorities will be involved in the PNR system and will be responsible for independent supervision of these systems .
That is why , Mrs in 't Veld , I recognise that your objections are serious .
I have done my best to reply to them honestly .
Nevertheless , I do think that this European framework is useful if we do not want each Member State to embark upon and commit to a completely divergent PNR initiative , carrying with it the definite risk of failure to observe a certain number of data protection rules .
As to usefulness , it is true that we must define usage and that we must pay close attention to proper use of these data , but it is also true that , in the fight against organised crime , we have such a need to become more efficient that I am inclined to think that an extra resource does not deserve to be overlooked .
That is what I have to say quite simply in reply to your objections , to which I have listened with great care .
I should like to thank the rapporteur very much for her introduction and detailed explanation .
I also wish to inform the rapporteur that , although the agenda is decided by the European Parliament , it is proposed by the Conference of Presidents .
The decision as to where on the agenda each item is placed determines whether or not a representative of the Council will be present .
At the Conference of Presidents there was no suggestion that this item should be placed on a day other than Monday .
As a rule , representatives of the Council do not attend our Monday debates .
I therefore suggest that , if the rapporteur has any comments to make on the subject , she should address them to the leader of her group , who could have intervened but failed to do so .
Accordingly , no Council representative is present today but that is not indicative of disregard of the European Parliament .
The reasons for this absence are procedural ones .
Mr President , I would just briefly like to reply to that because I think it is a matter of courtesy as well as political interest for the Council to be here and I am sure they can spare one minister to be present .
We have had previous debates in the past two months where the Council was present but left the debate half-way through .
I think that is unacceptable and it is not for me to report that to my group .
It is for the presidency of this House to transmit our discontent to the presidency of the European Union .
Thank you very much .
I have taken note of your dissatisfaction , but please address any complaints to your group leader , who could have acted to ensure this item was discussed when a Council representative was present , but who failed to do so .
I did not put any questions to the rapporteur , but I understand she has expressed her concerns .
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - Mr President , of course , passenger name records are not a new concept for aviation security .
This House has debated both shortcomings and merits on many previous occasions .
In general , my concerns are - regardless of whether the system is between the US , Canada , Australia or in a general EU framework - who will use the data , what will it be used for and how will it be protected ?
In my opinion , PNR systems are a valuable tool in the fight against terrorism , but we must ensure that the system does not just become another tool to keep data on citizens .
The purpose of PNR should be to combat terrorism , and I have to say - I am very sorry to say this - that the Commissioner , in his opening statement , did not give me the confidence that that would be the purpose limitation which we all seek .
It should be purpose-limited to the organisations whose remit is to fight against terror .
Counterterrorism measures must not be made an excuse for a catch-all system for personal data .
In essence , we must ensure that such systems stick to what they are designed for , which is an aid to the security services to identify and target the people who are the biggest threat .
I welcome PNR systems as one part of our approach to counterterrorism but , to the same degree , believe that we must be flexible in our approach when negotiating with third countries .
We must approach the important issue of data protection on EU citizens and whether - and in which way - this data is passed to others .
Thus I urge this House to take PNR seriously as part of a global tool to make our skies safer .
As long as we approach the issue in a proportionate manner and reduce the potential for misuse , PNR could serve as a vital tool to protect the innocent traveller and disrupt the potential terrorist .
In conclusion , I have always said that , personally , these systems would make me feel safer at 35 000 feet .
on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( FR ) Mr President , today we are debating two related issues : the Australia-European Union agreement on the transfer of passenger name record data - PNR - and the setting up of a European PNR system .
The agreement entered into with Australia seems to us far more acceptable than other agreements entered into with countries outside the EU .
Thus , it is particularly welcome that data has been made anonymous and that limits have been placed on the transfer and further use of data .
We are also particularly pleased that the Australian authorities have confirmed that it is not worth collecting sensitive data such as food preferences .
We do , however , still have some concerns , since the purpose for which the data can be used is not very well defined .
Additionally , the length of time for which the data is kept and the number of items of data requested seem to us excessive .
Finally , I believe it is vital to have a clearer definition of the data protection that will cover European citizens .
We also call upon the Council and the Member States to step up democratic control by involving the European Parliament before agreements are finalised .
The issues raised by the agreement with Australia show the problems that are posed by the setting up of a European PNR system .
We must not be satisfied with merely responding to requests by countries outside the EU .
The European Union ought to set an example by continuing its traditional protection of citizens ' private lives .
We refuse to simply adopt an identical copy of the PNR agreement entered into with the United States for the European Union .
We need to have an open debate to ascertain whether the use of PNR data is genuinely useful and , if so , under what conditions .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - Mr President , I gather there is a new rule , at least for the Council presidency , that they do not turn up on Mondays !
As someone who comes to Strasbourg only under protest , I would quite like that rule to apply to me .
As the rapporteur said , the schemes for using PNR data are unclear and legally insecure and risk looking like a surveillance state for its own sake .
My particular concern is the practice of data mining , and behavioural and identity profiling .
Apart from the questions of legitimacy and effectiveness , I worry about what happens to a person singled out for attention .
This could be because they had an associate of interest to the police .
Vice-President Barrot says that enforcement action cannot be taken solely on the basis of automated processing , but what happens to the original singling out of someone as being of possible interest ?
We need to have an absolute assurance that that trace is deleted .
If data are shared and stored , the dangers of a nasty fate , as happened to Maher Arrar , rendered to torture for seven months after being picked up at JFK Airport , cannot be regarded as fanciful .
on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - ( NL ) Mr President , I would like to react to what Mr Bradbourn had to say .
I too am not against passenger name records ( PNR ) per se , even though that impression is being conveyed to some extent .
What matters is , and in that respect I totally agree with the rapporteur , that you have to look very carefully at how this instrument can be best used and when usefulness and need are really defined .
I would in this context like to make another proposal to the Commission .
Commissioner Barrot stated that he would very much like to work with the European Parliament , and I appreciate this , but when it comes to usefulness and need , then we still have some loose ends to tie up , and these , I believe , are at the very centre of the debate between the Commission , Council and Parliament on this topic .
Commissioner , you say that you have a whole ream of assessments that demonstrate a high level of usefulness .
To my knowledge , based on what I have read on the subject , it mainly provides information about migration , and it solves a number of issues , but , as far as I am aware , it has not really done anything to benefit the fight against terror .
I am quite happy , though , to look into this with you at some stage .
I would therefore suggest that an inquiry be carried out and that you and we sit down to determine the research question , that we have an enquiry carried out and that we then discuss this at length .
We have nothing against PNRs in principle , but we do want the records to be handled with care , in line with the principles of our privacy policy .
I hope that you are willing to back this up .
Could you respond to this ?
As for your agreement with Australia , it may well be a cut above other agreements , for example with the United States , but my question is : which other agreements are still in the pipeline ?
You said a moment ago that , whatever happens , none of this should fall into the hands of repressive authorities .
I can , in this light , assume that we will never negotiate with Russia or China .
Could you in any event confirm this , and maybe provide us with a list of the countries with which negotiations are already underway , of which we will not learn until a few months down the line ?
on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group . - ( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , what Commissioner Barrot has said does not convince me that there is any real benefit to be gained from using this PNR data .
There is still no clear evidence that this data can make a genuine contribution to the fight against terrorism and organised crime .
The fact is , in this frenzy to identify alleged terrorists , everyone has become a suspect .
I believe that certain points need to be clarified with regard to the use of the data that will be collected and the way in which it is to be handled .
By contrast , we are often witness - from the information at our disposal - to arbitrary and indiscriminate activity where data is frequently passed from hand to hand and is not always transferred correctly .
In my opinion , this eagerness to extort information does not help the defence of our personal protection .
The undue precedence of security over freedom has often resulted in the removal of safeguards of our rights .
( PT ) Mr President , I particularly want to talk about the agreement with Australia and to congratulate Mrs in ' t Veld on her excellent work on this report .
I also want to congratulate Mr Barrot on the successful negotiations carried out by the European Commission .
The agreement with Australia is generally positive .
It is a good example of the long road travelled since the start of the initial discussions on the PNR issue .
At the time the European Parliament felt that it was unacceptable for PNR data to be transferred unless guarantees were given that they would be appropriately protected and that current Community rules would be observed .


This agreement responds to most of the concerns that we raised and guarantees adequate data protection : firstly , because Australian law will protect the privacy of Union citizens ; secondly , because a system is planned which will guarantee that individuals , regardless of their nationality or country of residence , can exercise their rights and have access to a conflict resolution mechanism , even including the possibility of suspending data flows in the event of infringement of the agreement by the data protection authorities ; thirdly , because of the obligation for a joint review involving the data protection authorities , and , fourthly , because , on the issue of sensitive data , I am delighted and welcome the fact that Customs have specifically stated that they do not want or need sensitive data .
I agree with Mrs in ' t Veld that this is a good example for other countries .
However , Mr Barrot , I can only regret that neither the Council nor the Commission has kept the promise made in this plenary to strictly cooperate with the European Parliament on this matter .
I note Mr Barrot 's statement that this will not happen again in the future , but the truth is that yet another agreement has been reached without Parliament having at any time been informed , either on the adoption of the mandate or on the conclusion of the agreement .
It is vital that , in an agreement so directly affecting the fundamental rights of citizens , there is democratic legitimacy .
This cannot be achieved through an a posteriori evaluation and national parliamentary approval given that , as the Commissioner knows , this national oversight is only provided for in 10 out of the 27 Member States .
Until the Treaty of Lisbon enters into force and the European Parliament can be fairly associated with the process of reviewing the PNR agreements , we hope that at least the principle of fair cooperation between the institutions can be respected .
This is my plea .

( EL ) Mr President , as far as European PNR are concerned , you made a shocking statement , Commissioner : you said in your proposal that you refuse to request information on foreign passengers travelling to Europe in matters such as illegal immigration or in matters such as diseases , because you consider that something of the sort would not be proportionate .
So why did you sign an agreement with the United States allowing precisely this information on European citizens to be given to the US administration ?
In essence , you have admitted that the Euro-American agreement is an agreement which breaches the European law of proportionality .
You said something else that was inaccurate : you repeated several times in your address that PNR data are useful without demonstrating how .
However , the European law requires these data to be necessary , not just useful .
If the European law has changed , please tell us and , if it has not changed , you are obliged to prove that PNR are necessary , and not just useful .
As far as Australia is concerned , what point is there in our debating today a PNR agreement with Australia which has been signed and sealed ?
This is not a theoretical question .
As you know , in the case of the United States , before the ink had even dried on the PNR agreement , the United States had started putting pressure on individual European countries and haggling for even more information than that provided for in the PNR agreement , in return for their inclusion in the famous visa waiver programme .
This information and these personal data were demanded outside the framework of the limitations laid down in the PNR agreement which , although very feeble , at least exist .
President Bush admitted six European countries to the programme at a lavish ceremony two days ago , but stated that he would not admit a further six , including Greece .
The clear pressure being exerted on certain European countries to accept terms which conflict with their constitution and legislation or , worse still , to adapt their foreign policy to the wishes of a third country - as we have heard in the case of Greece - requires immediate investigation by the Commission and intervention and denunciation by the Council which , unfortunately and to its shame , is not here today .
( RO ) The way in which attempts are being made to gather personal data with a view to preventing potential problems or personal incidents ( as Mr Barrot actually said : ' the fight against terrorists , serious crimes ... things which will happen , not things which have already occurred ' ) represents a blatant violation of human rights , not to mention an infringement of the legislation in this area concerning the protection of personal data and the free circulation of this data .
We believe that when anyone makes decisions for a person , either this should be recognised from the outset as a violation of human rights or it must be agreed that the actual person must give their consent , and then only on the assumption that there will be no risk to the safety of others .
This medieval castle type strategy being put forward during our discussion contradicts the strategy used at airports , where open , secure systems are applied .
( RO ) The decision about establishing a register containing passenger data mentions that this data will be passed on in the case of flights from the EU to third countries with which the European Union has signed agreements on the protection of personal data .
Commissioner , you mentioned the fact that some Member States have already implemented the specific legislation nationally .
It is important to adopt this legislation in a democratic manner , which means involving the national parliaments .
I would like to draw your attention to the fact that the legislation in one Member State does , in this respect , affect the citizens of other Member States .
For example , if a Romanian citizen , in order to fly to Australia , needs to take an international route which departs from another Member State , the Romanian citizen should be familiar with the legislation in that Member State and , in particular , should give his or her consent to his or her personal data being collected and processed .
As far as I know , the European Parliament should be involved , through the comitology procedure , in the agreements which the Community signs with third countries in this area .
( DE ) Mr President , I should like to make just two brief comments .
Firstly , I would ask our Commissioner to convey the concern resounding today to the Ministers for the Interior .
We have been told that PNR data offer opportunities for fighting crime .
Indeed , many here in Parliament have affirmed this .
The issue that preoccupies us , however , is whether this is proportionate .
We are storing millions , even billions of data for 10 years for perhaps a handful of cases .
Is that proportionate ?
This is the concern preoccupying us all .
The second thing I want to say is that I do not understand why we are talking of a European PNR system .
The proposal on the table involves the development of 27 national PNR systems , not a European PNR system .
If Member States have such a pressing need for this tool in order to fight crime , we would suggest that the Ministers for the Interior go to their national parliaments and discuss and implement it there .
Discussing common data standards is one thing - but making it a mandatory objective for the Justice and Home Affairs Council is another .
Personally , I sense that the Ministers for the Interior have been unable to push this through at home , at national level , and are consequently seeking to do so via the Council .
Therefore , we must say ' no ' .
( PL ) Commissioner Barrot , I am delighted to have the opportunity to discuss matters with you , even if you are no longer Transport Commissioner .
Nonetheless , I have many happy memories of working with you during that period .
Regarding the exchange of data , however , I recall our discussions at the Committee on Transport and Tourism , when we dealt with issues such as the safety of travellers , and the protection of personal data to prevent it from falling into unsuitable hands .
These are crucial issues .
That is why I believe that dissemination of data , the circumstances and recipients of the data , the principle of accessibility and the aims should all be vital to this agreement .
We are sensitive when working with the United States .
We know how important that country is .
I would urge you , however , to bear in mind that we Europeans are often made to feel uncomfortable at airports .
We must not forget that . Thank you .
( ES ) Mr President , Commissioner , terrorism and serious organised crime are global phenomena .
The means for fighting these must therefore be proportional and effective .
I took due note of the answers given to the questions .
These answers were quite correct : it is true that guarantees must be demanded and that this is a delicate issue .
However , it is also true that it is absolutely inexcusable to provide a globalised and harmonised response .
Those people who are somewhat detached from terrorism are more concerned about individual guarantees .
My concern is for both individual and collective guarantees .
It is absolutely vital that we start where we can .
If we have to start with air transport , given that air carriers already have this data , then that is where we must start .
We will demand guarantees , we will assess the scope and we will start with international transport .
However , it should be noted that we will then move on to domestic transport because terrorists very often do not come from outside , but are home-grown .
Ask the United States and everyone else , because that is how it is and that is how we will have to address it in the future .
Mr President , I would like to thank all the MEPs who have spoken and I can assure you that I will certainly be present at the Council that is to take place this week , where I will report on the comments that have been made .
I would first of all like to remind you that we think the usefulness of the PNR system cannot be ignored in the context of combating terrorism and organised crime .
Several of you acknowledged this frankly .
Thus , we cannot do without this PNR system , and I must tell you that the Commissioner responsible for combating organised crime is not willing to abandon useful resources .
We must , however , also use the system properly , and here I am in agreement with you : purpose and proportionality are vital .
We must keep to the purpose and - as Mrs In ' t Veld said - the purpose must be stated precisely and proportionality must be guaranteed .
I must reply on one specific point to Mr Lambrinidis , who was rather vehement : in the agreement between the United States and Europe , the purpose is terrorism and crime , full stop .
Firstly , then , we need to ensure proportionality and purpose .
Mrs Ludford , I was very sympathetic to what many of you said about the need to ensure data is not kept once it has been used for the purpose for which it was collected .
You are right to say that we must avoid any kind of storage that might subsequently lead to uses that are unacceptable in terms of our fundamental rights .
Now I would like to turn to democratic control , firstly with regard to negotiations with countries outside the EU .
We should be very clear that Articles 24 and 38 of the Treaty on European Union state that , in international negotiations , the Presidency will conduct the negotiations assisted , where necessary , by the Commission .
Article 24 does not oblige the Presidency to inform or consult Parliament , and so it is for the Presidency , where applicable , to inform Parliament of the state of negotiations .
That said , the Commission may , having consulted the Presidency and if an appropriate opportunity presents itself , keep Parliament informed of developments on such issues .
I would like to assure you that at present no other non-EU country has requested a PNR negotiation , and so matters are clear .
If this were to arise , when opening new negotiations as a new Commissioner in this sphere I would be certain to ask the Presidency to authorise me to keep the relevant committee at Parliament informed about the state of negotiations .
I would like to make that commitment to you .
Thirdly - and Mr Weber has just referred to this - yes , there are 27 national systems , but these systems are not too diverse , and the national parliaments have been consulted on this point .
To the best of my knowledge , the national parliaments have had the opportunity to express their opinions and to send us their comments .
Mr President , I am well aware that I have not responded to all of the comments , but several well-founded remarks will be taken into consideration .
What I believe , if you will , is that we cannot - and I am truly interpreting the spirit of the debate - deprive ourselves of a resource if that resource could be useful .
It has been said that this effectiveness has not been demonstrated .
While that is true , nonetheless some evidence has been given and , as I said a little while ago , in the information given in camera there were a number of witnesses who reported that the PNR system could be useful .
I remain convinced that in the fight against organised crime it can be very useful .
That being the case , the purposes must be abided by .
We must avoid data being stored and therefore we need a rather rigorous level of control .
That is why in my view we need to involve - as I said at the end - all data protection bodies .
On Thursday I attended a meeting on the subject of data protection organised by the majority of bodies responsible for data protection in Europe and I had the impression that now , in the Member States , there really is an increasing desire to entrust the task of data protection to independent authorities whose voices are truly likely to be heard .
That is what I wanted to say at the end of a debate that has been very interesting and useful for me and on which I will report to the Member States and their ministers .
I undertake to do so .
rapporteur . - Mr President , I would like to thank the Commissioner for his reply , and I will be very happy to sit down with him and talk through all the details .
I shall come back briefly to purpose , because there are many misunderstandings about what can and cannot be done with PNR data .
PNR data are already available now , today , without an EU PNR scheme , simply with a warrant and due cause .
But the need for further , unlimited powers has not been proven .
So I do not dispute the usefulness of PNR data in themselves : I dispute the usefulness of this mass collection and automated analysis .
I am not the only one who is of this view ; I am in good company .
The data protection authorities have the same view , but they are being ignored .
The air carriers are telling us the same .
Security experts from airport security tell us the same , and I will give you a quote from a report that was commissioned by the Department of Homeland Security - I will be very happy to give it to you .
It says : ' automated identification of terrorists through data mining or any other known methodology is not feasible as an objective ' .
I did not make this up .
These are security experts commissioned by the Department of Homeland Security .
There is evidence for the usefulness , as you said , Commissioner , but usefulness in combating drugs trafficking or illegal immigration or other purposes .
This may surprise you , but I am not even opposed in principle to using PNR data for those purposes .
But we must be very precise in defining the purposes so as to ensure proportionality and to ensure adequate legal safeguards .
I would like to conclude on a very personal note .
I am very unhappy about the way that we have been arguing about PNR for five years now , and the Council and the Commission just charge ahead like a runaway train .
I would like to say to my fellow Irish EU citizens that , if you share my desire to end this kind of undemocratic and untransparent decision-making , then please say ' yes ' to the new EU Treaty .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place on Wednesday .
Erasmus Mundus programme ( 2009-2013 ) ( debate )
The next item is the report by Mrs De Sarnez on behalf of the Committee on Culture and Education , on the proposal for a decision of the European Parliament and of the Council establishing an action programme for the enhancement of quality in higher education and the promotion of intercultural understanding through cooperation with third countries ( Erasmus Mundus ) ( 2009-2013 . - C6-0228 / 2007 - 2007 / 0145 ) COD ) ]
rapporteur . - ( FR ) Mr President , this evening we are debating the Erasmus Mundus 2009-2013 programme , on which we have finally come to an agreement with the Council .
It will therefore be possible for this programme to enter into force in January 2009 and thus to benefit students starting from the beginning of the academic year in September .
Here I would like to thank all my fellow Members who were draftsmen of opinions at the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs , the Committee on Women 's Rights and Gender Equality , the Committee on Budgets , the Committee on Development and the Committee on Foreign Affairs , as well as my fellow Members on the Committee on Culture and Education .
I would , of course , like to thank the European Commission .
I would also like to thank the president of the Erasmus Mundus Association and the executive agencies that have been able to help us with their expert knowledge and , above all , their experience .
Five years after the adoption of Erasmus Mundus , almost to the day , I am happy to be presenting to you this second-generation programme whose objective remains the promotion of excellence in European higher education , enabling the most talented students from non-EU countries and from Europe to follow high-level joint programmes in at least three universities and to benefit from a high-quality welcome and significant scholarships .
The previous programme 's figures speak for themselves : between 2004 and 2008 , 103 Master 's courses were selected and approved , over 6 000 students received Erasmus Mundus scholarships , over a thousand teachers from countries outside the EU came to European universities and over 400 higher education establishments from Europe and outside Europe were involved .
The new programme comprises three actions .
The first opens up the programme to doctorates and will enable European students also to receive scholarships , although at a lower level .
The second is exclusively devoted to partnerships with higher education institutions in non-EU countries , and the third covers the information campaign to be conducted on the international stage .
The budget is EUR 950 million .
By way of comparison , the first programme had a budget of only EUR 230 million .
There have been some extremely significant improvements made by Parliament to the programme , and I would like to point them out to you in order to pay tribute , in a certain sense , to you .
The first improvement is that now , the criteria for selecting students are academic excellence criteria , and this also holds true within the context of the partnerships .
Secondly , the geographical distribution criteria will be respected in order to achieve as balanced a representation as possible .
Thirdly , the principles of equality between men and women and non-discrimination will be abided by .
Fourthly , administrative obstacles and procedures , in particular in connection with visas , will need to be removed .
The Member States will have to take the necessary steps to facilitate the issuing of visas to students from non-EU countries moving round a number of Member States .
We attach particular importance to this point , even though it was a little difficult to resolve it in our negotiations with the Council .
Next , the learning of foreign languages in the host universities will be encouraged .
Doctorates will involve establishments from at least three different European countries .
This will make a great diversity of research subjects and theses possible , and will provide much more varied mobility opportunities .
The scholarships will be better tailored and will take into account the tuition fees as well as the estimated amount of expenditure for students ' studies .
Work has been done in close collaboration with the Danish permanent representation and an expert from the Danish ministry of education on tuition fees , and this has enabled us to reach a compromise that is acceptable to all .
Public-private partnerships with the universities will be encouraged , and special attention will be paid to the brain drain issue .
Within the framework of action 2 , funds will be targeted and used in accordance with the objectives of the development and external relations instruments .
The information available in the universities will be clearer .
Finally , the evaluation report that is to be completed two years from now will be more detailed , and will be broken down by actions and by geographical areas .
Ladies and gentlemen , to conclude : Erasmus Mundus is a fine programme and in these difficult times it gives a positive image of Europe .
I therefore hope that Parliament will adopt it , fulfilling the wishes of many students , academics and researchers in Europe and throughout the world .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , I am happy to be here and again express gratitude for the very strong political support of the educational agenda , namely for the Erasmus Mundus second programme for the next five years .
I think that to reach a first-reading agreement is really a good confirmation of this support .
I would especially like to thank the rapporteur , Mrs Mariella De Sarnez , but also the Committee on Culture and Education and other committees , specifically the Committee on Foreign Affairs and the Committee on Development as the partners in enforced cooperation .
As the rapporteur said , this is a programme with world-class quality .
It promotes intercultural understanding , but also people-to-people contacts and , since the establishment of the programme , we have more than a hundred European joint master programmes .
More than 7 000 scholarships to students and academics have been given .
And I think , with the increased budget , as was mentioned - particular thanks again to Parliament and to the Council - we will be able to meet the growing demand and enthusiasm for this programme .
The second phase of the programme will provide for the continuation of the existing actions , but also innovation .
There are new elements , because it means the extension of the scope of the programme to the doctoral level ; it means third-country universities are enabled to participate in the joint programmes ; it will provide full study scholarships to European students to follow joint master and doctorate courses .
As we said already , the ' Erasmus Mundus External Windows ' or cooperation windows , come into one house or under one roof .
Partnerships funded under this action will continue : they will allow the transfer of know-how and exchanges of students and professors at all levels of higher education .
Of course , they will continue to respect the needs and priorities of countries concerned , in this way contributing to their development .
To conclude , really I am pleased that Parliament and the Council have been able to support the programme structure as we proposed , and also I welcome the valuable contributions on issues like visas or disadvantaged groups or minimal requirements for the new doctoral courses .
Let me finish by congratulating the Parliament for the work done , because it was not easy .
We , as the Commission , fully share the agreement achieved , which is reflected in the compromise amendments tabled by Ms De Sarnez , Ms Pack , Ms Novak , Ms Prets and Ms Trüpel .
As soon as the formal legislative procedure is finalised , we will launch our call for proposals , in order to ensure the smooth continuation of existing courses and the selection of new programmes .
draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on Foreign Affairs . - ( FI ) Mr President , as rapporteur for the opinion of the Committee on Foreign Affairs , I wish to focus on the programme 's foreign policy dimension .
Funds for this are being taken from the European Neighbourhood and Partnership Instrument and the Instrument for Pre-Accession Assistance .
The amendments tabled by the Committee on Foreign Affairs were an attempt to ensure that the programme 's aims reflect these policy priorities .
The Committee also reminded everyone of Parliament 's right to monitor the implementation of joint assistance and called for improvements to visa policies .
Many of the Committee 's amendments have been taken on board , for which I would like to thank the rapporteur Mrs De Sarnez and the Committee on Culture and Education .
I wish , moreover , to stress the importance of the Interinstitutional Agreement on sound financial management and Decision 1999 / 468 / EC , and in particular Article 8 , by virtue of which the Commission must consult the European Parliament .
Finally , I would like to remind everyone again of the EU 's values and its foreign policy aims in the implementation of the programme and of the need for better information regarding the programme in third countries .
draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on Development . - ( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , first of all I would like to thank the rapporteur , Mrs De Sarnez , who has put together an excellent summary report despite circumstances in which the Commission , and above all the Council , have not always shown themselves to be open to appeals from this Parliament .
The Committee on Development approved my report unanimously .
Some of our comments have been accepted ; on other points we are still not entirely satisfied .
Out of a sense of responsibility , however , we have chosen to take a step back , because we believe the most important thing is that the whole package be approved at first reading , in order to guarantee that the programme can begin on 1 January next year .
It is excellent to have quadrupled the funding for students , but I would like to point out that a considerable amount is taken from resources intended for development : the Development Cooperation Instrument ( DCI ) and the Cotonou Agreement .
We will therefore take care to require absolute compliance with the overall legislative framework , in particular relating to the DCI .
For the moment , I would like to wish the very best of luck to the many young people from Europe and from all over the world who , in a spirit of friendship and sharing and a desire to learn and to grow , will take part in this extraordinary educational experience .

draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on Women 's Rights and Gender Equality . - ( ES ) Mr President , Commissioner , we in the Committee on Women 's Rights and Gender Equality believe that the success of the first phase of the programme was less encouraging in terms of the participation of women : female students did account for 44 % , but participation differed greatly depending on the country , and female academics only accounted for 22 % , which , in our view , is unacceptable .
In this second phase , our aim is therefore twofold : firstly , to once again defend an equal right to education to ensure just and democratic societies and , secondly , to increase the participation of women in order to prevent talent being wasted in science and culture .
This can all be achieved through gender-sensitive selection criteria , gender-balanced representation on the programme 's committees and gender-based data in the evaluation reports .
We are aware that the situation of women in many countries is hindering greater gender equality , but we feel an additional effort by the Commission is necessary in this respect .
I congratulate the rapporteur .
in the name of the PPE-DE Group . - ( SL ) A large number of committees were involved in discussing the Erasmus Mundus programme so it was no easy task for the rapporteur to find compromise solutions .
In the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats , we are strongly in favour of the programme being adopted as early as possible , in its first reading , so that we can begin to implement it in the new year .
Global development requires the exchange of different expertise and scientific achievement as well as the encouragement of young researchers to take an active role .
This programme promotes excellence and the equal representation of the sexes and also enables people with special needs to participate on an equal footing .
Although we wish to attract young researchers from third countries , we should not in so doing encourage a brain drain from countries which are already suffering from a lack of trained personnel for their own needs in the struggle to reduce poverty .
It happens all too often that we give aid with one hand and take back even more than we have given with the other .
With this programme as in other cases , the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats is strongly in favour of a reduction in administrative barriers and an improvement in the system for granting visas , so that the very best students and research workers will be able to devote themselves to their studies and research in their particular field and will not have to concern themselves with administrative barriers that prevent them from beginning their studies .
on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , by supporting the Erasmus Mundus programme , the European Parliament is sending the right signal in times of crisis .
Moving closer together through education and developing the EU as a centre of excellence in learning around the world are among the traditional demands of social democracy .
However , the budget of EUR 950 million for this period seems modest , especially in comparison with the hundreds of billions now being spent as a result of the failures of bank managers .
The objective of excellence that lay behind the first stage of the programme should be pursued further .
The new programme also seeks to promote intercultural understanding and cooperation with third countries and boost their development in the field of higher education .
The most important new points in comparison with the first initiative are the inclusion of joint doctoral programmes , increased grants and more intensive structural cooperation with universities in third countries .
There has been progress in all three areas .
Masters and doctoral programmes aim to promote the excellence of European higher education in the world .
There has been progress on this , too .
The increased expenditure on students from third countries has been taken into account and , thanks to our rapporteur 's negotiating skills , key criteria that Parliament wanted introduced into Erasmus Mundus III have been improved .
Our aims - geographical balance , gender balance , removal of visa barriers - have won the support of the Council .
We succeeded in this with the ' Youth ' programme , and we must also do so here with Erasmus .

on behalf of the ALDE Group . - ( FI ) Mr President , Commissioner Figel ' , I would like to begin by thanking our excellent rapporteur , Mrs De Sarnez , for this Erasmus Mundus programme .
It is very true , just as the Commissioner pointed out here , that this is an important programme : it is an exemplary one .
It is one of those success stories that we in the European Union have been able to create , see and implement , and I believe that the programme in this new format will expand and become an even greater success .
Now we are also giving students in third countries the opportunity to join this programme , use it to enhance their knowledge and skills , and go back to their own countries to build prosperity there too .
It is important that development cooperation and the social aspect are made vital ingredients , because the European approach must be such that we are also prepared to give of ourselves to other continents , thereby building not just Europe but the whole world we share .
Young researchers , young students and teachers will be in the vanguard when we build Europe in accordance with the objectives of the Lisbon Strategy .
Innovation , research , generating added value - that is what we need if we are going to ensure that economic growth is sustainable in the decades to come .
This programme has given special attention to the issue of equality .
It is important that we ensure equality is preserved , and it is likewise important to ensure that the disabled can also fully participate in these programmes .
One worry that has been expressed in many speeches is the earlier problems connected with bureaucracy and visa policies , and hopefully we will also be able to eliminate them for our part and thereby ensure that this programme produces results very rapidly .
This way we will get to see the success stories that result from it .
Thank you , Mr President and Mrs De Sarnez .
This is excellent work , and it is well worth going forward from here .
on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - ( ES ) Commissioner , Mrs De Sarnez , I believe that your readiness to reach a consensus on the amendments received virtually unanimous thanks and recognition in committee , and the same is happening here .
As you said in your speech , one of the many aims of this programme is to convey a positive image .
In our opinion , the positive outcome of this report has been the successful search for a balance between what the initial proposal termed excellence and what development cooperation really means .
The need for this excellence to avoid producing a brain drain has , I feel , been clearly reflected in the amendments .
We have managed to reach an overall consensus on this , which we regard as a clearly positive result of this report .
Another positive point is having argued for greater control throughout the paragraph on the awarding of scholarships , which was initially also an amendment by our group that was accepted .
I therefore repeat my thanks to Mrs De Sarnez and also congratulate the committee on the report .
( NL ) Mr President , I will be emphatically voting against this report tomorrow , because the Erasmus Mundus programme , in its current form , is totally unacceptable to me .
It is unacceptable because the scale at which it gives undue preference to students from outside the EU compared to European students is too great .
The numbers , after all , speak for themselves .
Since the beginning of the programme in 2004 , some 4 150 students from outside the Union have taken part .
The grant for a one-year course is EUR 21 000 , and EUR 42 000 for two years .
This means that the total cost of students from outside the Union taking part is no less than EUR 161 850 000 .
The 200 or so EU students who took part in the programme received , on average , a grant of only EUR 3 100 to study outside of Europe .
This translates into a total cost of only EUR 620 000 .
Well , discrimination of this kind is unacceptable to me and extending this programme is therefore altogether wrong .
( EL ) Mr President , Commissioner , I should like to start by congratulating the rapporteur on her excellent work and for successfully coordinating the work of the other committees .
4 424 scholarships were awarded to third country students and 323 universities participated in this programme between 2004 and 2008 .
That gives us an idea of its size .
The new Erasmus Mundus programme will need to adapt to the increased demand for mobility , while at the same time maintaining its standards .
I think it is absolutely vital for scholarships to be awarded to European post-graduate and doctoral students , in order to increase mobility in Europe and in third countries , given that their movements have , in the past , been subject to time limitations .
I also agree with the rapporteur that consideration must be given when determining scholarships to the level of tuition fees , expenditure for studies in general and costs relating to the student 's stay in the destination country .
Finally , the Commission should discuss the possibility of granting special incentives to countries such as Greece , Austria , Slovakia and the new Member States of the European Union in general who are under-represented in Erasmus Mundus associations .
This will make for a more harmonious policy to strengthen educational mobility in the European Union .
( DE ) Mr President , Commissioner , it is to be warmly welcomed that , after five years - the duration of the programme - we can already see an improvement and thus are able to take it a stage further in both substantive and financial terms .
Parliament is not normally so enthusiastic as to adopt a report as early as first reading ; but , I believe , the report is so well written and we can support the content so strongly that it is more important to wrap up at this first reading than to block the project .
None of the students would understand why we still needed a second reading .
I think it is very important that we promote intercultural understanding and cooperation with third countries and not , as some of our fellow Members in this House have just noted , fastidiously enumerate figures on what this or that does for us .
Exchange has always brought benefits , and we have always been able to gain from it .
It is a win-win situation .
Looking at this any other way is narrow-minded and a little petty .
It is also important that we improve the promotion of this programme , that we advertise even more in the countries with too little involvement , that we simplify various things .
Agreement on the visa issue is very important and fundamental , as is uniformity across all countries of enrolment fees , for example .
More comparators and more simplification are needed in order to advance the project even further .
The geographical presence of all countries should be as great as possible , of course , to make the project even more successful .
We can indeed be very proud of these five years , and we shall certainly make even greater progress on this in future .
This is in keeping with the subjects of exchange and the European Year of Intercultural Dialogue 2008 , which must not be limited to various discussions , but also put into practice .
Mr President , I would like to congratulate Mrs De Sarnez on this very comprehensive report and its generous objectives .
It is very important that this programme will help highly qualified students and academics to obtain qualifications and experience inside the European Union in order to be able to satisfy the requirements of the labour market , and within the specific framework of partnership , encourage them to share their experience or qualifications upon their return to their country of origin .
I want to stress that Erasmus Mundus will ensure a more structured international cooperation between higher-education institutes - thanks to greater mobility between the European Union and third countries - improving both the accessibility and the visibility of European higher education in the world .
I emphasise the fact that this programme should be implemented in line with the objectives for academic excellence and with a balanced geographical representation , avoiding certain European countries being underrepresented as well as avoiding an overrepresentation of Asian students to the detriment , for instance , of students from Mediterranean or ACP countries .
( EL ) Mr President , Commissioner , I should like to start by congratulating you on your assiduity and on the new programme which you have presented .
I should also like to congratulate the rapporteur , Mrs De Sarnez , and my colleagues who worked to achieve a better proposal and a good agreement .
Allow me to highlight the significance of this programme to mobility in Europe , in allowing Europeans to familiarise themselves with the outside world and in contributing to the role of Europe in the development of and in the dialogue between cultures in the modern world .
May I also remind the House that this programme can function as a complement - and we must make use here of all the opportunities without any overlaps - to two important new instruments at our disposal : the Euro-Mediterranean University and the European Institute of Innovation and Technology .
I should also like to point out that we must consider the qualitative evaluation and analysis as well as the figures , which are sometimes positive and sometimes negative .
We need to look at the countries which do not participate and why they do not participate , because the methods used to apply , approach and evaluate Erasmus really do differ from one university to another .
It is a pity , therefore , that these opportunities are being lost as a result of distortions or the wrong approach by education establishments or bureaucratic problems in the various countries .
( RO ) In 2004 , 2.5 million students studied in other countries , but 70 % of them actually studied in just six countries .
In 2007 , 1.84 % of the European Union 's GNP was spent on research and innovation .
I would like to give you a few more figures : 81 % of the funds allocated to research and development were used in the industrial sector , but only 42 % of industrial companies are involved in innovation activities .
This means that if we want to have a competitive economy , we need researchers and people with masters and doctoral degrees .
We need to continue the Erasmus programme .
We need to extend the programme to include doctorates too .
We also have to allocate more funds to the European participants in the programme .
I would like to stress the importance attached to studying foreign languages in the new Erasmus Mundus programme .
Finally , I would like to say that more funds should be allocated as well to the Erasmus section devoted to young entrepreneurs .
- ( SK ) Commissioner , the fall of the Iron Curtain has brought enormous opportunities for young people in the Europe of 27 states , especially in the area of education .
Exchange visits and PhD courses at renowned European universities are eliminating barriers to communication , and I therefore listened with interest to the detailed information from the rapporteur and Commissioner Figeľ .
I remember my own student years when , as a Slovak , I was given the opportunity to study at the architecture faculty of Budapest university .
I gazed with envy at my fellow students who were able to go to Paris for work experience .
I was not able to get a French visa .
Thank heavens our children no longer have these problems .
I would like to therefore add my voice to those colleagues who have spoken of the need to simplify the visa regime for students from third countries - students from Ukraine , Belarus , Georgia and Moldova who wish to learn how life is for their counterparts in the EU .
This would give a clear signal to those countries we want to see drawing closer to the EU .
( RO ) When we talk about Erasmus Mundus , we are talking about exchanging mindsets , an exchange which is specifically achieved through mobility and the exchange of opinions and through promoting multilingualism and , as the Commissioner was saying , interpersonal relations .
Erasmus Mundus is so important to students , doctoral post-graduates and lecturers because we are living in a mobile Europe where every country is maintaining its own identity , but at the same time , is making an effort to get to know and understand those around them .
Being able to access information in good time , in an appropriate and professional manner , is extremely important if students are to be able to benefit from all the opportunities offered within the European Union .
This is why I have tabled an amendment to this draft report , requesting a mobility scheme to be set up for masters programmes , to include an Erasmus Mundus European information portal .
This programme is important primarily for promoting publicly the values which the European Union is based on .
By this I am referring to respect for human rights , social diversity , tolerance and , last but not least , peace , which we are in such great need of on this planet .
( RO ) On the subject of mobility under the Erasmus programme , this morning radio stations in the Romanian city of Iaşi were publicising extraordinary events due to take place on Wednesday .
More than 100 young people from over 17 countries will be fêted in the university 's lecture hall as they are welcomed in the traditional manner with bread and salt by the university 's management body and all the young people from the community .
What more could you want than events of this kind involving young people from the whole of Europe gathered in the name of multiculturalism and multilingualism ?
I believe that an extension of the programme for the best students with a knowledge of the most foreign languages would be welcome , something which Europe could not fail to benefit from .
( PL ) Young people 's exchange visits are one of the Union 's flagship projects .
They are the best way we could use our resources , as these exchanges make an invaluable contribution to the development of genuine unity and cooperation the world over .
As we discuss the second edition of the Erasmus Mundus programme , I should like to raise the subject of destinations .
I have in mind Europeans travelling to developing countries or to the Balkan states .
I believe that , in addition to the bursary increases proposed , efforts should be made to encourage Europeans to travel to those countries .
Participants in exchanges with those less popular countries would be better able to appreciate local traditions , culture and politics .
They would gain an understanding of distant countries and peoples .
Our knowledge of the latter tends to be fragmented and based on often negative stereotypes .
In my view , we should promote youth exchanges with Belarus , Ukraine and Georgia .
Attendance at our institutions of higher education would be an excellent opportunity for students from those countries to develop according to Western standards .
They would be able to absorb the principles governing the working of our democracy .
The latter could serve as a model for them .
The European Union is strongly committed to supporting pro-Western politicians in those countries .
Today 's students could be tomorrow 's elite .
They could draw on what they learnt during their stay at our institutions of higher education as they seek to influence the movement for change within their home countries .
( PL ) Mr President , Europe is sorely in need of outstanding craftspeople , scientists , and highly skilled experts .
I therefore warmly welcome the next stage of the Erasmus Mundus programme aimed at producing such individuals .
The programme comes at a very apposite moment , if we consider the current world ranking of European higher education institutions .
Unfortunately they are not faring too well at present and are not highly ranked , in contrast with the situation just a few decades ago .
I wish to highlight certain legal issues relating to the Erasmus Mundus programme , however .
Dual certificates are not accorded legal recognition in all Member States .
National legislation must therefore be adjusted to enable individuals to conduct the activities in question .
Another very important issue I wish to raise is that I think we should monitor the beneficiaries of this programme .
Students from third countries are coming to us , yet some of their countries of origin are still not democratic , unfortunately .
I have been informed that Belarus is not sending us its best people , but only those supported by Mr Lukashenko 's dictatorship and by the local KGB .
( PT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I must once again beg forgiveness for my lateness .
This year we are celebrating the European Year of Intercultural Dialogue .
The need for everyone to be involved and the perception that education , knowledge and the interaction of different cultures are crucial are already well-established facts .
For this very reason , many initiatives associated with this Year have been carried out in various areas of action and intervention .
The Erasmus Mundus programme also has a role to play in this context and , within this new perspective , is already included in the new regulation .
The Erasmus Mundus programme makes an important contribution to the creation of centres of excellence in the EU which will , to a certain extent , limit the brain drain from the European Union .
It also plays a vital role in promoting European values among third-country nationals who come here to study and who find , on the old continent , an unparalleled cultural and linguistic diversity which represents a real attraction and which sets us apart from models existing in the rest of the world .
However , dialogue and intercultural understanding have faced some problems .
The issue of visas for Erasmus Mundus students and the frequent difficulties encountered in obtaining and renewing these visas often lead to students living in situations of semi-clandestinity in the European Union , as they attend the same courses but on tourist visas which have sometimes expired .
In my opinion , it is absolutely vital and urgent to find a solution allowing speed , transparency and efficiency in the issue of visas for these students .
Language knowledge is also vital as this allows cultural understanding and mutual coexistence beyond the strictly academic sphere .
As a result , we must absolutely guarantee this premise .
Finally , I must thank Mrs De Sarnez for the way in which she has conducted this whole process and for the balanced report that she has produced .
Member of the Commission . - ( SK ) I would like to express my thanks mainly for the very lively debate , which has served to emphasise the consensus for greater and better mobility , in other words for a Europe which , through education , specifically prepares not only its own students but also students from abroad for a more open international environment and greater responsibility .
I would like to add just a few comments on this theme .
I wholly agree that Erasmus Mundus is a very important instrument , not only for mobility but also for the entire process of , for example , making European universities more attractive and creating a European space for higher education , that is , the Bologna process .
And after a few years , the results are evident from the fact that not only does it cover the entire continent of Europe , but also countries outside Europe are getting involved in the process , and that Europe is playing a greater role in international mobility in today 's world .
It is , for example , partly thanks to Erasmus Mundus that we can now state - based on Chinese official statistics - that more Chinese students are now heading to Europe than to the United States at a university level .
Out of the top-rated universities in the Shanghai Ranking , 75 % are participating in the Erasmus Mundus programme .
This is a magnificent result after just four years .
Concerning the quality of selection , the very fact , for example , that for each place covered by the programme over the past four years there have been eight applicants , or a ratio of 8 : 1 , constitutes an excellent precondition for selection , and is also confirmation of the high demand for and quality of the programme .
One university or consortium out of seven is given a chance .
So one consortium is selected out of seven tenders .
The fact that 15 % succeed again confirms the level of excellence .
On the question of information , we will take every effort to ensure that it reaches the places where it is lacking , to make the distribution of and participation in the programme more balanced .
This applies in particular to the new Member States , but also to the international arena .
As you know , we are now launching a very important website called study-in-europe.org , which will be useful to anyone who is interested in obtaining specific information .
We will , in addition , be organising special targeted and focused information campaigns .
That is why the programme is being adapted , to enable two-way mobility , not only into but also out of the EU Member States , which in my view is a very important qualitative change which will bring results .
Our interest was and is for the joint diplomas and joint study programmes to assist in the process of reform and to assist in making study in Europe more attractive .
In conclusion , just as I can say today that after four years Erasmus Mundus is one of the highest quality top ranking international programmes , so I believe that over time it will make a contribution to the standing of European universities , so that they will no longer languish in the second division , but will take their place among the world 's best .
That is the point of our cooperation .
Thank you very much , and my best wishes for the implementation of the programme .
rapporteur . - ( FR ) Mr President , I would like to thank all my many fellow Members who have spoken .
I endorse everything that they have said on the substance of the issue , and am very pleased with the extremely broad consensus that unites us this evening .
Many thanks to the European Commission for all its assistance on this work .
Many thanks to the Committee on Culture and Education , its chairman and the committee 's secretariat , which has been very active .
Many thanks to all the members of the Committee on Culture .
Many thanks also to those who have spoken from the Committee on Development , the Committee on Foreign Affairs and the Committee on Women 's Rights and Gender Equality .
Briefly , I would like to say that I completely agree with your objectives .
We must improve participation by women in the programme and we must ensure that the funds used are used in accordance with development and external relations objectives .
On this point , Parliament must and will remain vigilant in the years ahead .
If we are approaching an agreement at first reading , which will , I believe , become a reality tomorrow morning , it is because each one of us has played his part fully and positively .
Our contacts with the European Commission , the amendments of our fellow Members , our discussions within the Committee on Culture , the work of the committees who produced opinions - all this has , in the end , resulted in the high quality of this programme .
I am most sincerely grateful to you for this .
I believe that in this way we will have accomplished a useful task by showing that Europe can , simultaneously , have demanding values and also be generous .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place on Tuesday .
Written statements ( Rule 142 )
Thank you , Mr President ; as I already pointed out in my earlier speech , the Committee on Development endorses the aims of the ' Erasmus Mundus ' programme and supports this proposal .
My report contained suggestions that were taken on board by the rapporteur .
However , I would like to appeal to the Commission : let us not repeat the mistakes of the past .
Only a few months ago we had to resort to the European Court of Justice to ensure compliance with the legislative provisions contained in the DCI .
The principle we want to uphold is simple and straightforward : resources intended for development must actually be used , in their entirety , for development .
We note the commitment of Commissioner Figeľ to this matter and will watch closely to ensure that the reference legislative framework is complied with in full .
As a Member of the European Parliament and a long-serving teacher of higher education , I have often witnessed the benefits of contacts between institutions of higher education and between students .
I therefore fully support the report before us and endorse the rapporteur 's proposals .
The student exchange initiated by the EU is now highly developed and has become a shining example of supranational and extraordinarily effective cooperation .
Over one million students have already benefited from the opportunity to study in another European country .
Erasmus Mundus is a newer programme for student mobility and academic cooperation .
It will continue to offer individuals from outside the EU the opportunity to study in European countries .
In addition , thanks to this programme , European students will also be able to benefit from the experience of partner institutions the world over .
The European Parliament is the only democratically-elected EU institution .
I believe that its commitment to this programme enhances the latter 's standing and ensures that it is given more prominence in the Member States , university towns and interested institutions of higher education .
That is why I support all the proposals and ideas on removing obstacles and administrative barriers that make the programme less accessible and may deter potential participants .
In particular , I appeal for maximum visa facilitation for participants in the programme .
I am sure it is worth achieving this .
Enabling a wide range of students to be covered by the programme is the best investment we could make .
It will result in latent intellectual capital that Europe will always be able to rely on .
in writing . - ( RO ) Let us all acknowledge the success of the Erasmus programme 's first phase of operation .
The amendments made to it for the second phase of operation are excellent , and the inclusion of third countries is a good idea .
At the same time , we notice a drop in the percentage of young women taking part in the programme .
I think that the objectives of providing top quality education , promoting the personal development of European university lecturers , contributing to social cohesion and promoting active citizenship and equality by eliminating social gender stereotypes must be pursued as part of the cooperation programme .
I also believe that the programme needs to facilitate access for young women living in rural areas and in economically less favoured regions and for those with learning difficulties .
This is the only way in which we can combat every form of discrimination in the long term and boost the active participation of young people and women in the social , economic and political life of their countries .
This will then allow us to provide real , useful content for this programme , aimed at all young people from schools in Europe and third countries .
Protecting children using the Internet and other communication technologies ( debate )
The next item is the report by Mrs Angelilli , on behalf of the Committee on Civil Liberties , Justice and Home Affairs , on the proposal for a decision of the European Parliament and of the Council establishing a multiannual Community programme on protecting children using the Internet and other communication technologies - C6-0092 / 2008 - .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to thank the Commission , the French Presidency and my fellow MEPs , first and foremost the draftsmen of the opinions , for their hard work in drafting a compromise text at first reading that will enable the ' Safer Internet ' programme to enter into force at the planned time , that is from 1 January 2009 .
The new programme for children using the Internet and other communication technologies , as we know , will be based on four main lines of action : reducing illegal or harmful content and combating harmful online behaviour ; promoting a safer online environment , including through ad hoc technological instruments ; information , participation and prevention to raise public awareness of the opportunities and risks associated with the use of online technologies ; and , lastly , establishing a knowledge base to encourage cooperation and exchanges of good practice and information at international level .
The statistics speak for themselves , as Commissioner Reding is well aware : the age at which children access the Internet has dropped considerably .
From as early as the age of 9 or 10 , children are going online several times a week , and 75 % of 12- to 15-year-olds in Europe use the Internet for roughly three hours a day , communicating through chat services , messaging and social networking sites .
The aim of the programme is not , of course , to criminalise the Internet in a catastrophic vision of new technologies ; quite the contrary .
Our objective is to provide suitable tools to better understand and navigate the world of new technologies , to grasp fully their positive potential , the opportunities they offer in terms of information , education and socialisation , while at the same time learning to protect oneself against abuse .
For we cannot ignore the latest figures showing that 30 % of young people have had at least one distasteful encounter online , at least one unpleasant experience in which the child has come across pornographic content , offensive or violent messages of various kinds or sexual advances or even content inciting violence or self-harm , suicide , anorexia or bulimia .
We cannot ignore the exponential increase in sites with child pornography material .
We cannot fail to consider the data supplied by Interpol reporting that at least 500 000 new original child pornography images are put online each year .
The Committee has also done well to highlight , among other things , three new trends : ' grooming ' , that is , the online soliciting of children through psychological manipulation aimed at contact in real life .
' Grooming ' is particularly insidious because the advances appear to be ' softer ' .
No explicit sexual demands are made at first .
The child is led on by the affectionate and confidential behaviour ; not understanding the danger , they enjoy the exclusive relationship that develops , and so do not discuss it with anyone , least of all with their parents .
It is therefore a highly dangerous situation because it is not perceived as such , and often ends in a meeting in person and in real abuse .
Another priority is ' cyberbullying ' , a form of bullying using the new technologies , in which the persecution of the victim is extended as they risk being tormented 24 hours a day via the web and mobile phones .
And there is yet another problem : the technological gap between the generations .
We have a generation of children born in the digital era - children who at five years old are competent users of videogames and can surf the Internet easily - and adults , their parents and teachers , many of whom do not even know how to turn on a computer or send a text message , or who use new technologies warily and with reluctance .
It is therefore absolutely essential to narrow this gap .
The programme 's objectives are ambitious , perhaps too ambitious given the available budget of EUR 55 million , but it is nonetheless a good starting point .
As usual , Parliament has sought to provide a stimulus , with pioneering proposals that I will not go into now as they are in my report and I am almost out of time .
I would like to conclude , Mr President , by emphasising that our obligation , both Parliament 's and - I am convinced of this - the Commission 's obligation , is never to let down our guard on these matters .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , I would firstly like to thank the Parliament for addressing the Commission 's proposal very promptly , allowing the programme to start as early as possible .
Secondly , I would like to thank the rapporteur , who has underlined the very important questions we have to tackle here .
The uses and applications of the internet and mobile phones have multiplied greatly since they were first introduced .
We now have interactive markets , and very young children - not only young adults - spend a large portion of their time online , sometimes even more than in front of the television .
We have a situation where the parents do not know how to operate these new technologies or what their functions are .
I do not think we should be negative .
The internet and mobile phones are a wonderful , exciting opportunity .
However , having said this , we must not ignore the other side of the coin .
In the real world there are risks associated with the use of the internet and mobiles phones , in particular for the more vulnerable part of our population - our children .
These dangers - as the rapporteur has rightly underlined - range from harmful viewing content to harassment and bullying , all of which have become easier and more commonplace .
Even worse , the internet has become a channel for sexual abuse .
Despite joint efforts to fight the production and distribution of such terrible material , its volume is on the rise .
That is why there is an urgent need to fight these negative and unacceptable practices .
The protection of children must be a shared responsibility .
Of course , it starts in the family , but we have to enable families to help their children .
It involves governments , industry , non-profit organisations and schools .
This is precisely the goal of this new , safer internet programme .
It will maintain what has been done in previous years regarding current internet protection but build on these successful activities and enhance the safety of children in the online environment of today .
We know that these joint actions by governments , private organisations and the industry are a very good example of how Europe can have a direct impact on citizens ' daily lives .
More children use the internet at home or at school but parents and teachers are not necessarily well informed about the opportunities and the risks .
That is why we will actively pursue our efforts towards creating a safer online environment for children by informing parents , empowering teachers and asking for coordinated action by national governments and educational societies .
We will , of course , retain the substance of the Commission 's proposals , but Parliament has presented a whole series of amendments which provide a fuller description of one or more of the basic objectives and which seem to reflect the broad consensus within the Parliament .
That is why the Commission can support the amendments put forward in Mrs Angelilli 's report .
They will then pave the way for a successful first-reading agreement with the Council .
I am very confident that the compromise text for the programme , as submitted to you today , will be largely supported by Parliament and hopefully also by the second legislator .
rapporteur for the opinion of the Committee on Culture and Education . - Mr President , it was a pleasure to work on this document .
It is the first time I can honestly , genuinely say it was a pleasure to work with every single person on this dossier , especially the rapporteur , Mrs Angelilli , in this subject area .
I also took the liberty of consulting my constituents through newspaper ads about this particular dossier and so some of the comments I am going to make are based on what my constituents have said about this .
In the Committee on Culture we had a genuinely pleasurable debate about a serious subject with some quite well-informed contributions .
We all realised that we did not need to reinvent the wheel .
There is a lot of good practice already happening out there as regards self-regulation : mobile telephone companies like T-Mobile are leading the way in this area with the various checks and balances they put in before a child can access any content online , let alone dubious content .
The ISPs and organisations such as the Internet Watch Foundation in the UK and INHOPE on a European basis are really working well together to fight the problems that exist with some of the online content and how minors across Europe are getting on to it .
There are problems , though .
Grooming was mentioned by the rapporteur .
There is no common definition of this even across Europe and it is not illegal in all Member States yet to groom a child in the way that Mrs Angelilli said .
That is something that we should be looking at .
Possibly Mrs Reding could suggest this at a Council meeting or two to some of the countries that are slacking in this area .
For me it was a pleasure to work on this in my committee ; some great experiences were shared , and it is the first time I can welcome a budgetary measure in this House .
draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on Legal Affairs . - ( RO ) In view of the ever-changing audio-visual sector , we need not only to educate children , but also appropriately to inform parents and educators about the risks to children and to involve them in creating a situation where online information services can be used in a safe environment .
Based on the opinion of the Committee on Legal Affairs , our aim has been to devise a European strategy for combating online grooming and protecting the physical , mental and moral integrity of children which might be affected by their accessing inappropriate content via new communication media .
We have requested the adoption of a quality label for online service providers so that users can easily check whether or not a certain provider subscribes to a code of conduct , as well as the creation of filters and effective age verification systems .
Crime in this area is not restricted by national borders .
I believe that we need a coordinated approach with regard to the various national databases and need to connect them to Europol .
At the moment , we cannot disregard , either , the economic risks involved in children using the Internet , which is why we requested mobile telephone services too to be mentioned explicitly as an area in which children need to be protected from abusive or harmful conduct .
I would like to conclude by saying that we support the adoption of the report and congratulate the rapporteur .
draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on Women 's Rights and Gender Equality . - ( EL ) Mr President , Commissioner , I think that the multiannual programme on protecting children using the Internet and other communication technologies is the European Union 's head start in the global field of child protection .
It is therefore an opportunity for us to congratulate the rapporteur of the European Parliament , because we too are part of this and are demonstrating our awareness .
In particular , as the Committee on Women 's Rights and Gender Equality , we stress in our opinion that consideration must always be given to the peculiarities of each gender , the participation of each gender , the knowledge and use of new technologies and the special protection which each gender needs separately and the protection from dangers which differ from one gender to another , from boys to girls , and which must be stated and analysed separately .
We also refer to protection for vulnerable groups , for vulnerable children exposed to the dangers of sexual abuse , harassment and bullying .
Another sector which we highlight is information for parents , carers and educators , whoever they may be .
We also stress the need for research into greater child protection .
We do , of course , know that you have carried out an impact assessment and held a public consultation on this .
However , research must continue and must refer in particular to gender differences .
We also wish to emphasise the need to develop entrepreneurship , which must overcome the obstacles and dangers , address the dangers and continue , so that we have a Europe which is strong in development and in protecting its citizens .
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - ( HU ) Thank you , Mr President .
This report was tailor-made for me , since all four of my children surf the Net , and I am confronted with these worries on a daily basis .
EU Member States are doing a great deal to make the World Wide Web more child-friendly , and we must not forget that as early as 1999 the Commission launched a ' Safer Internet + ' programme that is still in force today .
As we have heard , the programme is aimed at fighting against harmful and illegal content , and places great emphasis on increasing awareness about the use of the Internet , as well as on promoting the development of a safe online environment .
To what has already been said I would like to add only that between 2001 and 2007 , 20 000 children disappeared , 500 of whom were found .
Among the tasks listed , I would like to emphasise the fight against illegal content and combating harmful conduct online .
In this area there are great deficiencies : not every EU Member State has a hotline where you can immediately report any illegal content you have come across or if you discover sites which try to groom children .
The other important thing we must not forget is that establishing a knowledge base will require greater and more effective cooperation among Member States .
It is no accident that this programme devotes almost half of the EUR 55 million in funding to raising public awareness , since prevention is the best cure .
In any case law enforcement agencies spend all their time tracking criminals , whether we are talking about software-related or any other type of crime .
It is precisely for this reason that we would like to draw the attention of Member States to the fact that they could set aside funds of their own , in addition to the European Union 's EUR 55 million , and could cooperate more effectively in implementing the programme laid out in this report .
The Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats supports the approval of the report .
Thank you very much .
on behalf of the PSE Group - ( BG ) Thank you , Mr President. ladies and gentlemen .
Mrs Angelilli , please allow me to extend to you my thanks and my heartfelt congratulations on your report .
Now with the world financial crisis as the main issue , it is right that we are focusing all our attention on it .
But somehow the issue of computer crime against children has been sidelined , even though we are aware that we may at any moment face a major threat in the form of a real pandemic of illegal web content .
Just today the BBC broadcast a study , a survey it had conducted , which showed that three out of four children have come across websites with harmful content .
This report does not just sound the alarm , but also offers a real raft of ideas on how to combat illegal web content .
I worked on the issue as a shadow rapporteur .
Last week I organised a round-table meeting back home in Bulgaria .
It was attended by representatives of the police services , the non-governmental sector , the Child Protection Agency and mobile phone operators and suppliers .
The theme of the meeting was this report .
We had an earnest , detailed discussion which reached a number of conclusions .
Firstly , a lot of work needs to be done to raise awareness of the gravity and reality of this problem throughout European society .
Unfortunately it is a problem that is frequently off our radar .
Secondly , the upbringing of children should start with the family and the school , which in turn brings about the need for specialised instruction for parents and teachers .
Individual efforts are doomed .
What is very important is coordinated action , information exchange , the creation of a database and international cooperation .
Many of the institutions I mentioned urged the European Commission to recommend that Member States increase penalties under national legislation for distributing , creating and trading in harmful and illegal content .
They also recommended setting up a European legal framework for conducting criminal proceedings .
From now on there should be greater awareness of the programme among European institutions and citizens .
Continuing to set up hotlines is also extremely important .
It is also very important for us to cooperate with the police authorities and set up this database .
A ' child-friendly ' common label is needed to help parents and children recognise safe sites .
I am convinced that the programme will continue after 2013 and that there will be further programmes in the European Union .
Mr President , freedom of use of the Internet , mobile telephones and other kinds of communication technology is very valuable for adults , but may prove harmful to children , because the latter are not fully mature and lack the necessary experience .
The Internet is an extremely useful tool for us all , yet it has been exploited to set up sites for the exchange of paedophile and pornographic material , and also used to attempt to contact minors .
The same is true of mobile telephony .
Other less extreme activities may also be harmful .
Advertising of unhealthy foodstuffs on television and the Internet targeted at children impacts negatively on their health .
It may also lead to family disputes and result in inappropriate eating habits within peer groups .
The House recently debated issues relating to obesity and overweight in children .
Spending many hours a day in front of a computer monitor or television screen reduces a child 's physical activity and is detrimental to his or her proper physical development .
On average children spend three hours a day in this way , but many actually spend much longer in front of a screen .
The aggressive behaviour presented in television programmes has a negative psychological effect on children .
It is therefore very important to implement the programme aimed at ensuring responsible use of new communication technologies by children and young people .
I congratulate the rapporteur and the European Commission on tackling this issue .
- ( SK ) As one of the co-authors of the report on the strategy on children 's rights I am delighted that we are now debating in this House a bill on the protection of children who use the Internet and other communications technologies .
The Internet is a classic example of something which is can greatly benefit people , but which can be harmful to society when exploited by criminals .
Every day we hear how children are lured and abused through the Internet and led into prostitution , paedophilia and pornography .
It is therefore the duty of everyone , starting with parents of course , to explain to children the rules for using and not abusing the Internet , as well as the risks it brings .
Children are attracted by computers from a very young age .
We adults often envy them their technical skills , but in their childish naivety they can easily be abused .
I am thankful that this House is prioritising activities of this kind , and I support accelerating the proposed programme so that implementation can get under way by January 2009 .
( SV ) Mr President , I want to begin by thanking Mrs Angelilli for a constructive report in which she followed up the decisions from the children 's strategy .
Last week I presented a report on young people and the media - a major investigation into young people 's media habits , in which we also discuss parents ' views .
What is new is that a majority of young people in Sweden have their own computers in their rooms and that TV sets have been thrown out .
There is a big difference between girls and boys when it comes to what they use the Internet for .
Girls chat , socialise and send text messages , while boys play computer games .
Girls are contacted for sex contacts .
Fewer girls come in contact with porn sites than they once did , and they take a dim view of porn on the Net .
In reality , very few meet strangers off the Internet .
Today 's young people have a healthy view of the media , but high consumption on the part of some of them is a matter of concern both to parents and to ourselves as politicians .
That particular group of young people needs to be involved in future Community programmes .
We have defined a high consumer as someone who uses a particular medium for more than three hours a day .
That applies to approximately eight to nine per cent of young people as a whole .
In today 's Sweden , however , 96 % of all young people and 70 % of younger children have mobile phones , so matters are developing at a record rate .
Our task as MEPs is to address the downside .
( PL ) Mr President , I should like to thank Mrs Angelilli for tackling this very important issue .
The report before us is excellent .
It would be far better , however , if we did not have to debate this matter .
It would be so much better if we did not have to deal with people wishing to deprave and exploit children for reprehensible purposes .
I have no compunction in referring to such people as evil .
We tend to say that our children are our treasure .
All treasures have to be protected against burglars .
That is how I perceive action to protect children using modern technologies , notably the Internet .
There are children who spend several hours a day surfing the Internet .
These technologies are part of everyday life in the contemporary world .
They enable individuals to communicate more effectively and are very helpful in our daily lives .
For example , they facilitate matters in the areas of administration , science , access to culture and knowledge .
That is the positive side , which should be supported and developed .
Unfortunately , there is also a negative side that involves exploiting the Internet and modern communication technologies to disseminate harmful content , such as pornography , drug addiction , Satanism , gaming and inappropriate lifestyles .
Paedophiles use the Internet to seek out their victims .
The Internet may be likened to a knife that is useful for cutting bread , but it may also be used to inflict grievous psychological harm on children through evil content .
Several important measures are called for in my view .
Firstly , a system should be created enabling the perpetrators of such action to be detected and dealt with severely under the law .
Secondly , all those concerned should be made more aware of the dangers posed by the Internet , mobile telephony , television , and video games .
I refer to children , parents , educators , Sunday School teachers , and young people 's organisations such as the Scout Movement .
Thirdly , better cooperation is needed between supervisory and follow-up bodies in the area , both in the European Union and the world over .
After all , servers putting out harmful material may be located in any country .
Finally , our actions should be of a preventive and systematic nature , and offenders should be dealt with severely .
Mr President , can I use my speech tonight to appeal to all EU countries to follow the practice in Britain for hotlines to be given notice and take-down powers , namely that when online images of child sexual abuse are discovered and reported , the hotline can immediately order the content to be removed by the service provider or host company .
This proposal is being championed by the Internet Watch Foundation based in Oakington in Cambridgeshire in my constituency .
Indeed , I want to thank Commissioner Reding for the EU-wide remit she has given to them .
Our parliamentary Amendment 25 calling for the establishment of these hotlines and their close liaison with the police can advance this aim .
Speedy enforcement action is needed to stop sites simply hopping servers between countries in order to avoid detection , as well as to stop the further child abuse which is perpetuated not just when the images are formed but also every time they are viewed .
( EL ) Mr President , Commissioner , the Commission proposal to establish a European programme on protecting children using the Internet has been made against the background of European action to promote greater safety for minors using new technologies .
This is an important step by the Commission .
The increase in knowledge in the IT sector has resulted in greater exposure of children to the danger of illegal and harmful online content .
I too therefore welcome the efforts which everyone has made to achieve the Commission 's objective , which is none other than maximum safety in the use of the Internet , especially by children .
I too support the proposal by the rapporteur , whom I congratulate , for immediate approval of the programme , so that it can come into force from 1 January 2009 .
I also hope that a suitable financing framework will be put in place for the period from 2009 to 2013 , given that the increasing frequency of child pornography on the Internet is sounding the alarm and calling us to immediate action .
- ( SK ) I congratulate the rapporteur .
Water is good , but when it is not clean we must filter it .
The same thing applies to the Internet .
The Davide filter allows access to the Internet via a secure and controlled network and protects young users in particular from unsuitable websites .
It employs the most advanced technology and is constantly updated .
It is very effective .
Access is blocked to websites containing pornography , paedophilia , rape , Satanism , black magic etc .
At the same time , it signals the reason for the block .
The filter is also effective against firms using telephone numbers which charge very high call rates .
Davide is aimed at everyone who wishes to protect their computer against unsafe websites .
The code of practice which we are voting on requires that young people should be guaranteed safe access to the Internet .
All it takes to use the filter is to register at www.davide.it.
( HU ) Thank you , Mr President , Commissioner .
The Internet , games consoles and computer games contain a great deal of violent , brutal and erotic content , and can also cause dependency , insomnia , agitation and eating disorders .
Most children are not yet prepared for this type of content and there is the risk that they will grow up to be psychologically disturbed , deviant adults .
Modern technology undoubtedly makes it possible to filter out undesirable content by means of software applications , just as we are able to do with spam - unsolicited email - and to block harmful webpages on computers used by children .
Information about this facility should be made widely known among parents and computer manufacturers should be urged to make such programs available as part of the mandatory content of new computers .
What is needed is a sort of digital environmental protection .
It is obvious that some people interpret this as an attempt to curtail the freedom of the Internet , but in my opinion , protecting the mental health and dignity of our children is a higher value .
Thank you .
( CS ) Mr President , the number of Europeans connected to the Internet is growing exponentially .
Children are spending ever more time on the web and criminal activities on websites which are easily accessible to young people are mushrooming at a similar rate .
In the current situation , where the Interpol database has registered more than five hundred thousand images involving child pornography - half of children have already accessed pornographic websites at some time while only 4 % of parents even concede the possibility of their children doing such a thing - I am concerned that the budget for Internet safety is too small .
There is a need to invest in the development of computer systems which will effectively nip such things in the bud .
The European Union must join forces on this front with the USA and Japan .
The disparate projects we have seen to date must be replaced with measures aimed at children , parents , schools , telecoms operators , government bodies and non-governmental organisations alike .
On the other hand , I value the network of hotlines where both concerned citizens and parents can report harmful Internet content .
The Czech Republic , for example , has a hotline of this kind , run by the non-governmental organisation Naše dítě .
Mr President , it is an unfortunate reality that the wonderful opportunities the internet presents to us all have , in direct proportion , increased the moral , physical and social danger to our children and young people throughout the world .
This report is therefore right to focus on what we can do to thwart abuse of the internet , particularly with regard to child pornography , online grooming and incitement to self-harm , one of the most chilling aspects of which is sites which actually encourage suicide .
I trust that the Safer Internet programme will indeed successfully tackle these problems .
For me there are three key issues .
Firstly , improving the facility for effective police cooperation and I think that the European child pornography images database must be encouraged .
Secondly , better traceability of the financial movements which are linked to child pornography , and thirdly , a properly advanced common kite safety mark , so that parents can know with confidence what is safe for their children to look at .
- ( SK ) There are a couple of things I would like to say about the report .
It mentions dangers such as intimidation , child pornography , Internet grooming , bullying , spreading racist content and incitement to self-harm .
I am quite sure that the Internet is one of the greatest technical achievements of the 20th century , but it can equally deprive children of the joy of knowing pure and sincere love and of creating natural relationships .
In Internet chatrooms , those who do not use vulgar expressions and who do not boast of their sexual exploits are definitely ' out ' .
I will dwell on the horrifying statistics on child abuse via the Internet .
As an MEP for whom family values are all the more important , I would like to point out that the Internet is one of the ways in which this society can rob children of their innocence .
I would like to emphasise the need for greater responsibility , and responsibility is the key word , which both ISPs , and parents have to take to protect children from accessing content which could harm their natural development .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , I fully agree with everything that has been said in the House and I thank the parliamentarians not only for having this debate but also for taking this debate to their voters and to the people in the areas where they are active , because I believe that the basic problem is that adults do not know enough .
Children often know how to handle the new technologies very well , and it is the first time in the history of mankind that children know more than parents , educators and adults .
So here we really have to empower parents , educators and adults and I believe that this is a shared responsibility of all parts of society , not only of politicians but also of the NGOs , and the ISPs most of all .
I am also grateful that , for instance , the mobile phone industry has signed a memorandum of understanding in order themselves to inform parents and to prevent harmful content from being on the 3G phones .
The network of hotlines , which we have established by our Safer Internet programme , is very important and it is working perfectly well in most Member States .
In reply to the question from a Hungarian parliamentarian , the Hungarian hotline will restart in 2009 .
There are only two Member States that do not yet have a hotline and one Member State that leaves these problems to the police forces .
Therefore , we can already say that today the Safer Internet programme has had a very positive effect .
Personally , I would wish that the hotlines were better known : they are well known in some countries but not in all .
So , as Members of Parliament , you could help to make those hotlines more known through all kinds of activities .
I would really thank you for this and I think that both parents and children would also thank you for this .
There were some questions on the EU criminal procedures .
Here I have to tell you that it would be very good if the Convention on Cybercrime were ratified by all Member States .
I can also tell you that the interior and justice ministers under the leadership of my friend , Commissioner Barrot , are working on all these questions , including the issue of grooming , on which Mr Barrot will present a proposal shortly .
I can also assure you that the international cooperation of police and law enforcement is well under way .
So things are moving in the right direction here .
Concerning the question about filters for unwanted content , here again it is a question of informing parents .
Most parents do not know that filters exist and that they have the possibility to use these filters .
That is why I have asked the ISPs when making contracts with parents to really inform them about the possibilities they have for preventing this content from reaching their children .
That concerns very young children .
In the case of adolescents , of course we have to empower the children themselves , and that is why I believe that informing them that they can stop themselves falling into the trap is the best way , because we cannot put a policeman behind each child - that is really not possible .
But children are very capable of understanding what is positive content and what is non-positive content .
So I believe that with the Safer Internet programme we have to empower the children themselves , beyond empowering the parents and the educators .
That will be our duty during the next months and years and , if everybody participates in that , it would be the solution to the problem .
I thank the rapporteur and all the parliamentarians who are helping to make the internet a safe place for our children .

Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to thank the Commissioner ; she has given us important assurances , including the fact that the Commission and Commissioner Barrot intend to find a legally binding definition for ' grooming ' , a common definition for all Member States .
In my view this is undoubtedly a very important objective .
I believe that this programme , clearly , cannot solve all the problems , not least because it is just a programme , it has legal limitations and budgetary restrictions , obviously .
That said , it is evident from the debate that the European Parliament wishes to be active in combating harmful online content .
The aim for the future is also to improve the coordination of action against this content at European level , making available best practices , measures that have enjoyed the most success , and sharing information and methods .
In my opinion , international cooperation must be continually increased in this sector that , as other Members have said , is a sector that knows no borders .
We therefore need to move towards sharing data and information in real time .
Parliament wants to remain at the forefront in this area .
We have many proposals , some of which have been mentioned by my fellow Members : the idea of a ' child-friendly ' mark , the role of ' hotlines ' and of police forces working to prevent and combat online abuse , but also the need to implement initiatives in the area of self-regulation by mobile phone operators and service providers .
In addition , I believe that we need to work towards tracing financial transactions linked to the exchange of images of child pornography .
I share the Commissioner 's view : information and education campaigns involving not only children but also adults , parents and teachers , not for the purpose of criminalising new technologies - because they are vitally important - are essential for European children .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place on Wednesday .
Written statements ( Rule 142 )
in writing . - ( RO ) I welcome this initiative which focuses on educating both parents and children about the use of the Internet to ensure that the latter ultimately become less vulnerable to abuse online .
I think that it is a good idea to produce educational material in schools , but I feel that it would be useful to provide programmes that are adapted to the various age groups .
After all , you cannot explain things from the same perspective to a six or seven-year-old child and to a 16-year-old teenager .
I also feel that it is necessary to develop more effective filtering technologies , as it is a fairly frequent occurrence for a mailbox to receive spam messages containing pornographic material which is easily accessible to children with an email account .
Additional efforts also need to be made with regard to verifying the age of the persons accessing sites containing pornographic material , as it is very easy for minors to access sites of this kind .
Finally , I support the initiative encouraging international cooperation on this matter .
It would be preferable still to reach a global agreement , particularly with regard to labelling sites with the statement ' content safe for children ' , given that a huge number of sites which are harmful to children are hosted by domains which are not administered by organisations from the EU .
Establishing a multi-annual Community programme for protecting children using the Internet and other modern communication technologies is , in my view , of crucial importance and absolutely indispensable , since it is in our common social interest to use all available means to safeguard our children from harmful and dangerous content .
The initiatives - apart from the fact that they are intended above all to protect children - will have a multiplier effect , since they will also promote increased Internet security .
Attaining the objectives will require cooperation from parents , schools , service providers , public authorities and associations , for it is only if we all work together that we will be able to take effective action to protect our children .
In the battle against harmful content , measures adopted by Member States are also of great importance , such as the creation of national contact points and their effective cooperation .
I consider it important to create effective methods and mechanisms , which include information , assistance via a hotline , immediate action , prevention , the creation of a database of experience and best practice , as well as ongoing monitoring .
in writing . - ( HU ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , we are about to adopt a new resolution on child protection .
As a mother , I too welcome the initiative and agree that children need to be protected against illegal content on the Internet and other forums targeting them , as well as against content that otherwise endangers their development .
Beyond the above-mentioned aims , I am convinced that we will not succeed if we try to protect children exclusively by trying to shut out pornographic or illegal content from their surroundings .
Although it would be ideal if we could do so , it is impossible .
This is why I consider it important that in addition to prevention , children should be taught what to do if they receive this type of request or if they are exposed to such influences .
We need to make them aware that they can seek help - and this help must really be real and accessible .
We need to prepare every child in advance for such an occurrence , just as we teach them not to get into an unfamiliar car or accept sweets from strangers .
This type of preparation is the primary responsibility of the immediate environment : parents , the family , the school .
The proposal we are to vote on now is of particular importance , but it can only be effective if it goes hand in hand with efforts to protect the child 's environment .
I would like to congratulate my fellow Member Roberta Angelilli on her report on the protection of children using the Internet and other communication technologies , which draws attention to a rather serious and growing danger .
By means of the ever more widely accessible new technologies and computer skills , our children are increasingly exposed to the dangers of harassment , child pornography , bullying and incitement to racism .
We hear of a growing number of cases in which criminals take advantage of the World Wide Web 's chat portals to catch their underage victims off guard and gain their trust with a view to sexually abusing them .
The frightening data indicates that the new dangers brought about by the technological revolution need to be addressed by a harmonised EU action plan that is able to address the problem in all its complexity , with the involvement of children , families , schools and teachers , as well as with the cooperation of the operators in the communications industry and law enforcement agencies .
The multi-annual Community programme initiated by the Commission must include measures to combat the unfortunately increasingly widespread illegal and harmful content on the web , on the one hand , by raising awareness and on the other , by more effective and coordinated use of the instruments of criminal law available in each Member State .
Furthermore , teachers , caregivers and , first and foremost , parents must be made aware of the hidden dangers of the new communication technologies .
I am confident that Parliament - in accordance with the intention of my fellow Member - will approve this proposal as soon as possible and that the new programme can get under way starting in January .
in writing . - ( HU ) According to Eurobarometer , 74 % of 12 to 15-year-olds use the Internet on a daily basis , with many of them exposed to pornographic images .
According to the Internet Watch Foundation 's survey , the incidence of Internet child abuse has risen by 16 % in recent years .
This data clearly indicates that online child safety can be achieved only through a multilevel approach , which extends to children , families , schools , operators in the telecommunication sector , and within these , to Internet service providers and judicial bodies .
I think that with regard to protecting children on the Internet , prevention must play the key role .
I consider it important for a special permit to be required to operate and access sites with pornography , violence and other content harmful to children 's development .
Given that in certain countries it is well-established practice , with the consent of the judicial authorities , to block web pages with paedophile content on domestic and foreign servers , and since on the whole the countries ' current legal framework makes it possible to remove such content , I call upon the judicial authorities of the Member States to take the necessary steps to block such sites .
It would be worth reflecting as well on whether not only creating such web sites , but even viewing them ought to be considered a criminal offence .
For prevention purposes , suitable education and wide-ranging information are required .
Children need to be prepared with appropriate knowledge so that they will be able to use a variety of tools to identify potential abusers and defend themselves against them .
in writing . - ( RO ) Nowadays the Internet offers a world full of information and entertainment , but also an environment which is extremely dangerous for children .
This is why I consider it absolutely necessary to launch the ' Safer Internet ' programme in order to protect children who are using the Internet and new technologies .
The success of this programme will lie in the way that the EUR 55 million in funding are used , but it also depends on how successful we are at combining the technical and educational aspects .
Studies show that using a software application to filter the dangers which children are exposed to protects 90 % of children , while parents and immediate guardians are responsible for protecting the remaining 10 % .
They need to explain to these minors about not agreeing to meet any stranger from the Internet , not replying to messages with obscene content and not providing strangers with information and photographs of a personal nature .
The model used in the visual mass media sector , where TV channels mention the minimum age at which the relevant film or programme is allowed to be watched , needs to be adapted too for online media .
A first step towards protecting children from illegal online content would be to label sites explicitly as ' suitable for children ' .
The programme to protect children using the Internet and new technologies is one of the basic forms of protecting children , both in terms of dissemination of technology and of increased familiarity with the use of computers . The result is that children are currently at risk because of illegal content , and inappropriate behaviour such as child pornography , harassment , grooming , and seduction through the Internet .
According to the statistics , more than 70 % of young people aged between 12 and 15 use the Internet for approximately three hours each day .
Sadly , most of these young people have viewed images of a pornographic nature .
The growing number of Internet sites containing pornography , and the ever lower average age of children falling prey to this process is also cause for alarm .
A multi-pronged approach is the only way to increase child safety in the context of the Internet .
This broadly based programme must involve children , their families , schools , communications operators , suppliers of Internet services and other institutions .
An important role in combating harmful behaviour on the Internet should be played by hotlines serving to gather information on illegal content .
Children should be taught how to avoid dangerous behaviour on the Internet .
For their part , parents and teachers should participate in learning campaigns on computer use , so as to reduce the generation gap in the area of new technologies and ensure that dangers can be combated more effectively .
in writing . - ( ET ) As the Internet becomes an increasingly everyday part of our lives , today 's children are at ever greater risk of falling victim to abuse , contact for sexual purposes or harassment , etc. in a web environment .
According to the recently published EU Kids Online report , 68 % of children in my country , Estonia , have access to the Internet from home .
This is one of the highest figures in Europe and similar to that of Denmark , Belgium , Sweden and the United Kingdom .
High Internet availability should not automatically imply that there is a higher threat of encountering harassment or materials of an unpleasant nature , but Estonia is , of the countries that have been studied , in the group with the highest Internet availability , alongside the Netherlands and the United Kingdom .
There are many similarities throughout Europe - half of all children reveal information about themselves , four out of ten come into contact with pornographic materials , one third encounter violent materials , many receive unsolicited comments of a sexual nature , and a full nine per cent meet people they have encountered on the Internet in real life .
15-20 % of European young people have suffered harassment on the Internet .
In Estonia this number is even higher , 31 % ( between the ages of 6 and 14 ) .
I think we should direct more attention to such issues . Especially in Member States like Estonia , where children increasingly use the Internet in everyday life .
Internet usage naturally has its positive aspects .
We must , however , devote increasing attention to the dangers that accompany it .
in writing . - Mr President , the report of Roberta Angelilli is very much focused on pornography on the internet that is accessible for children , yet there is another matter of even graver concern .
It is violence .
When pornographic material can be just disturbing then viewing very vivid images of violence against others or even self-harm is something that really might provoke youths for thoughtless acts .
Just think of all the discrimination and aggression against minority youngsters or school shootings .
Only recently two school shootings occurred in Finland - very close to my constituency , Estonia .
It was noted that the shooter uploaded violent material on the internet just before committing the horrid act .
That material was accessible for other troubled youngsters and we have got no idea , what might follow next .
I find that the European Union ought to take serious steps to stop such advocating for violence , while not limiting people 's freedom of expression .
Every human life must be treasured and when our youths need help or guidance , it should be provided .
We cannot afford ruining or wasting the lives of the youngsters , who are the future of Europe .
The current situation is that young people tend to be more adept at the use of new technologies than the older generation .
The Internet holds no secrets for children and young people , who are generally better informed than their parents about how it works .
At the same time , however , it is children and young people who are most at risk from psychological violence on the Internet .
According to data gathered in a campaign on children 's use of the Internet , half of all Poles using the Internet have been the victims of insults , humiliation and threats on the Internet .
The situation is even more serious where children are concerned .
More than 70 % of young Internet users have accessed pornographic or erotic material , and more than half of them have viewed cruel and violent scenes .
It should be emphasised , however , that a large majority of these young people came across this material by chance , and did not access it deliberately .
Only 12 % of children admitted to searching for sites of this sort .
I am quoting these statistics in the Chamber to impress upon Members the gravity of the danger to which our youngest citizens are exposed , using my country as an example .
I therefore believe that the planned programme for the protection of children absolutely must be implemented .
in writing . - ( RO ) Children are increasingly using the Internet to communicate , find out information , access knowledge and spend their free time .
Children and their families need to be aware of the risks associated with this and , above all , they need to observe certain rules which can ensure their protection while using the Internet .
The Internet must remain an open medium , but safe at the same time .
The programme for a safer Internet is continuing and enhances previous programmes : ' Safer Internet ' and ' Safer Internet Plus ' .
However , I would like to draw your attention to the fact that its effectiveness depends on raising the population 's awareness and on the way in which specific legislation is enforced at a national level .
Any incident where a child or young person is confronted on the Internet with unwanted requests or even bullying must be taken seriously , reported and handled in an appropriate manner .
A recent report states that two thirds of young people have received unwanted requests while using the Internet and 25 % have viewed material with indecent content .
Unfortunately , many parents and teachers are still out of touch with digital media and do not take the necessary steps to protect children on the Internet .
I would call on the Commission to join forces with Member States in promoting the setting up of , and establishment of cooperation between , centres for reporting and responding to incidents relating to Internet safety .
Recovery of cod stocks ( debate )
The next item is the report by Mr Busk , on behalf of the Committee on Fisheries , on the proposal for a Council regulation amending Regulation ( EC ) No 423 / 2004 as regards the recovery of cod stocks and amending Regulation ( EEC ) No 2847 / 93 - C6-0183 / 2008 -

rapporteur . - ( DA ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the Commission has presented a good , constructive proposal for amending the existing recovery plan for cod in , for example , the North Sea , Skagerrak and Kattegat .
Despite the existence of the present recovery plan , far more cod are continuing to be caught than are generated through reproduction .
The Celtic Sea has been included in the recovery plan because new evaluations indicate that cod stocks are also being overexploited there and are in a poor state .
The object of these amendments is to ensure the recovery of cod stocks within the next five to ten years .
This objective is intended to be achieved by reducing fishing mortality by between 10 % and 25 % , depending on the state of the stock .
This is to be supplemented by regulation of the fishing effort as well as provisions relating to monitoring and control .
The objectives are to be revised in order to obtain the highest sustainable yield even if oceanic conditions change as a result of global warming .
The effort management system is to be simplified .
It has progressively become so complex that a new system is needed , based on effort ceilings to be managed by Member States , which will have greater flexibility and therefore achieve more efficient implementation .
The plan is to be adapted to different levels of recovery and it therefore incorporates a modular strategy where the adjustment of fishing mortality is a function of the level of recovery achieved .
Clear rules are introduced that are applied when scientists cannot provide precise estimates of stock status .
There is a need to reduce discards by introducing new mechanisms to encourage fishermen to engage in cod-avoidance programmes .
Overall , the Commission wishes to amend the existing cod recovery plan in order to make it more complete , updated to recent developments , simpler , more efficient and easier to implement , monitor and control .
TACs : New rules are being introduced to establish the total allowable catches , where the size of the stocks is measured in relation to either the minimum quantity or the target quantity .
When setting the TAC , the Council is also to deduct a quantity of cod corresponding to the size of the expected discard , calculated on the basis of the total amount of cod caught .
Other factors contributing to fishing mortality will also result in a revolution in the total cod caught when the TAC is established .
Every three years the Commission 's Scientific , Technical and Economic Committee for Fisheries will evaluate the recovery of the cod stocks .
If the trends in the stocks do not prove satisfactory , the Council shall set a lower TAC than that specified in the aforementioned rules , together with a lower fishing effort .
As rapporteur , I have tabled a number of amendments to the Commission 's proposal , and my colleagues have also tabled some amendments .
The most important amendment is to change the reference years from 2005-2007 to 2004-2006 , as the data for 2007 are so new that we cannot be certain of them , and it is therefore better to use the data that we are sure of .
Account is taken of the fact that cod stocks at a particular point in time are being rebuilt , which is why we cannot simply make reductions , but rather changes are needed .
The system of transferring from one type of gear to another is made more flexible so that it is possible to respond to external circumstances , such as rising fuel prices , which , even after the fall over the last few weeks , are at a particularly high level .
The Regional Advisory Councils are to be involved as much as possible .
Both fishermen and Member States are to be encouraged to introduce measures to reduce fishing mortality and discards .
Finally , I would like to thank the French Presidency and the Commission for their particularly constructive cooperation .

Member of the Commission . - Mr President , I would like to thank the Committee on Fisheries and especially its rapporteur Mr Busk for his thorough and well-considered report .
I am pleased that Parliament shares the Commission 's views on cod recovery .
Fishing mortality is too high .
The abundance of cod is too low .
Even though in some areas there are more young fish in the sea than in past years , this is still an opportunity rather than a recovery .
I am also pleased that Parliament agrees on the need for recruiting the Celtic Sea as well as on the need for important cuts in fishing mortality through TAC and effort reductions .
I agree with many of Parliament 's proposed amendments , but I cannot agree directly with Parliament 's texts .
This is only because similar legal texts already exist or are being developed in consultation with Member States , and I do not want to pre-empt the results of technical discussions being undertaken .
Now to specifics .
I accept your Amendments 1 , 4 , 5 , 6 , 7 , 9 , 13 , 14 and 16 .
On Amendment 2 , I agree with the principle , but the powers of the Commission and Council are already established in the EC Treaty , and the role of the regional advisory councils is set out in Article 31 of the basic regulation .
On Amendment 3 regarding discard reduction , I have been working on a separate initiative .
You will be aware of the Commission 's communication of spring 2007 concerning discarding .
This will shortly be followed up with a proposal for a regulation .
On Amendment 7 , I accept that , for stocks in very high-risk situations , a limit of 15 % on TAC increases should apply .
But Council should keep the option of a decrease that is larger than 15 % .
On Amendment 8 , I accept the inclusion of a reference to seal mortality as an example , and of considerations of climate change on cod when a review of the plan is made .
On Amendment 10 , the chapter rightly refers to a limitation of fishing effort .
Reference to determination would imply that fishing effort would only be measured , not managed .
Therefore I cannot accept this amendment .
On Amendment 11 , I can reconsider the base line for the calculation of kilowatt days .
However , Member States need to be involved in this discussion .
On Amendment 12 , the text of the proposed Article 8a , paragraph 3 , was indeed confusing , and we will be redrafting it to make it clearer .
On Amendment 15 , the proposal concerning ring-fencing of capacity was too restrictive and could prevent reorganisation of the activities of fishing fleets .
I am still discussing with Member States how to provide a suitable degree of flexibility while still ensuring that the fishing effort does not increase .
Therefore , my preference is to improve the existing text rather than delete it .
On Amendment 17 , I can accept the principle of effort transfers , subject to a correction factor reflecting the importance of cod catches in different sectors .
But the subject is complicated and needs to be looked into further .
On Amendment 18 , for legal reasons I cannot accept the deletion of the reference to the decision-making procedure .
The procedure referred to is that required by the EC Treaty .
I thank you for your attention and for you constructive contributions on this file .
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - ( NL ) Mr President , this evening , we are discussing the Busk report on the Commission proposals for a quicker recovery of cod stocks in European waters .
I should like to congratulate the rapporteur , Mr Busk , on his report .
Cod is an important fish species for the EU .
While in the past it used to be part of people 's staple diet , and cod was eaten as a replacement for more expensive meat , these days cod is a luxury fish species that is only available at high cost .
Ever since the late 80s and the early 90s , the supply of cod has been dropping steadily .
Apart from all kinds of natural causes , like the North Sea warming up and the virtual absence of hard winters , this is also attributable to intensive cod fishing .
It is particularly this cause which the Commission would like to address with the new cod recovery plan .
I can identify with the Commission 's wish to simplify the regulations that aim to restrict cod fishing .
The current regulation is too complex and leads to many differences in interpretation among both fishermen and inspectors .
Simplification would at least address this problem .
It is necessary , also on behalf of Dutch fishing , for us at European level to maintain the recovery of cod stocks .
The proposed measures have needed time to take effect .
For more than 18 months , cod stocks in the North Sea have been enjoying a remarkable recovery .
Parliament - myself included - would like to involve the fishing industry and regional advisory councils more in measures to be taken .
This will improve support within the industry .
The new rules , as far as I can see , are a step in the right direction .
The Member States can regulate cod fishing more effectively , while the fishermen know far better what is , and is not , allowed .
It will not be evident until four to six years down the line whether the measures we are now taking are effective .
I would therefore urge the Commissioner to take his time in assessing the measures taken , before producing new measures .
If not , fishermen will face an unworkable situation
on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( DA ) Mr President , I would like to start by thanking the rapporteur , Mr Busk , for his constructive cooperation in connection with preparing this report .
I think we have achieved a satisfactory result .
As a result of our amendments , the system will be simpler , more flexible , more efficient and less bureaucratic .
In the revision of the Commission 's proposal we claim , for example , that the success of the cod recovery plan is to a large degree dependent on not landing fish caught through illegal , unreported and unregulated fishing .
Monitoring and control are important instruments to ensure the enforcement of the fishing regulations .
Moreover , the fishing industry and the relevant Regional Advisory Councils in the Member States should be more involved in the evaluation and decision-making process so that account is taken of special regional characteristics and needs in the future development and extension of the management mechanisms .
Effective implementation of the recovery plan requires the involvement of all parties concerned to ensure legitimacy and compliance with the regulations at regional level .
In the report we also emphasise the fact that the recovery plan will have important consequences for the fishing industry as well as the economic and social development of local communities , and this is why the Commission should reconsider the fishing effort system once cod stocks have significantly improved .
Mr President , the constant refrain of the Commission - and , indeed , of this report - is ever-declining cod stocks .
Yet this year , within the EU , we will dump EUR 50 million worth of dead cod back into the sea .
Why ?
Because of our crazy policy on discards .
The TACs have been driven so low that massive discards are being produced .
Probably one discard for every cod retained .
Year on year , we drive down TACs and push up the discards as a result , and so perpetuate this self-defeating eco-crazy policy .
Whether a cod is retained or discarded , it reduces the biomass .
Increase the TACs , and I believe you will correspondingly reduce the discards and swell the food supply , without depleting the biomass more than we do at present through discards .
That , I believe , is the way to go , along with cod avoidance plans , and then some sense might come to this policy .
Mr President , I have to commend my good friend Niels Busk for his brave attempt at yet another cod recovery plan .
Ever since I was elected in 1999 , we have had a cod recovery plan every year .
Every cod recovery plan introduces even tougher regulations and even tougher draconian measures .
Because we are dealing with a mixed fishery where the cod is caught together with prawns , whiting and haddock , we have all these discard problems that we have just heard Jim Allister talking about .
I am afraid that I feel in this case that Mr Busk is emulating his famous Danish forbear , King Canute , who was King of Denmark and England in the 10th century and famously sat on his throne at the seaside and ordered the tide not to come in .
Of course , history records that he got very wet and narrowly avoided drowning .
Trying to introduce a cod recovery plan - a management plan that will help cod recover - is , in fact , trying to defy nature in the same way .
We know that climate change has caused the North Sea to warm up by one and a half degrees and the fighter plankton that the cod larvae feed on have moved hundreds of miles north , which is why most of the big mature cod that we buy in the shops anywhere in Europe comes from around Norway , the Faroes and Iceland .
So until the North Sea cools down again , you are not going to see the cod recovering , and all the tough management plans that we want to introduce will not make any difference .
I am delighted , in that case , that I have heard the Commissioner this evening say that he accepts my amendment that will at least look at the impact of climate change on cod recovery , as well as looking at the impact on cod predation by seals .
We now have 170 000 grey seals in the North Sea , each one eating two tons of fish a year - including a lot of cod - and previously it was not PC to speak about seals in any shape or form .
So at least looking at the impact seals have on the cod population is , I think , a very important step this evening .
I commend King Canute to the House and hope that his report is accepted .
( PL ) Mr President , the Council regulation represents a further attempt to achieve a balance between the current state of knowledge concerning the actual state of resources and the natural desire to discharge the obligations relating to the stewardship and management of European fisheries .
The rapporteur has clearly identified the new manifestation of this age-old dilemma .
He has pointed to a clear contradiction between the noble intention of protecting resources and the actual possibilities of establishing their state .
On this occasion , the authors of the regulation agree as never before with the Scientific , Technical and Economic Committee for Fisheries that there is still a lack of sufficiently reliable information to be passed to fishermen in the form of comprehensible opinions on the TAC .
At the same time , however , the Union 's institutions , doubtless not wishing to be seen as inactive , are recommending development of provisions ensuring consistent implementation of the TAC , even when , as stated , the data is known to be inadequate .
Fishermen expecting verification of fishing effort perceive this approach as being unduly cautious and as inappropriate in terms of a rational fisheries policy .
I have endeavoured to try and understand the peculiar methodology adopted by those in authority in this area .
Nonetheless , I feel it incumbent upon me to caution the rapporteur regarding the social and economic consequences of a proliferation of limitations on catches , and of irritating and bureaucratic restrictions on the activities of fishermen .
Increasingly , the latter are supporting scientists as regards establishing the true state of the marine biomass .
Polish fishermen have joined the increasing criticism of the archaic data base that is too heavily based on estimates .
Now is perhaps the time to take greater heed of fishermen 's opinions , based on centuries of knowledge and an awareness that fishermen can only survive if they respect the interests of the marine environment .

Mr President , while any cod recovery plan would need first of all to incentivise those Member States and fishermen who contribute to a reduction in cod mortality , and also secondly to reduce by-catch and eliminate discards - eliminate , not reduce , discards - no cod recovery plan has any credibility unless it factors in the whole climate change point in relation to the cod feeding and breeding grounds , as so eloquently put on the record a few moments ago by my colleague , Mr Stevenson , and that must play a large part in any cod recovery plan if it is to have credibility in this day and age .
I agree that reducing by-catch through cod avoidance programmes is of paramount importance .
However , we should refer to the need to reduce by-catch and eliminate discards .
That is to say , the reduction of cod caught in the net ( the by-catch ) , and not landed ( the discard ) , is crucial .
Without it , fishing is not sustainable ecologically or economically .
While Ireland has proposed a pilot project for 2009 to reduce cod discards in our Nephrops fishery in part of the Celtic Sea , hopefully with incentives for fishermen and a major role for them in monitoring and control which will be key to successful enforcement of the project , I must however ask the Commissioner a question in the light of what our rapporteur referred to as ' new evaluations suggesting the Celtic Sea is over-exploited and so needs to be controlled ' , according to ICES a 2009 TAC for the Celtic Sea area was recommended which indicates that the stock is stronger there than in other areas covered by the recovery plan .
Is or is not the Celtic Sea to be included in a recovery plan ?
Does it or does it not need to be ?
Who do we listen to on the scientific front ?
Mr President , I would like to inform the Commissioner that cod was once one of the most common fish in Irish waters and on Irish tables .
For my fishermen , fishing is more than a job , it is a way of life , a tradition , even a vocation .
Many of my fishermen are doing mixed fishing , and for them , discards are more than a waste and a contradiction : they are an abomination .
We have to help equip fishermen to fish more selectively in order to protect the cod and , at the same time as we hopefully reduce discards , we must start using them and putting them to good purpose , land them and give them to hospitals .
We must not only end the discard of cod and other fish , but we have to end the scandal of the discard of cod and other fish .

( PL ) I believe the amendments tabled by Mr Busk concerning the so-called cod stock recovery plan are vital for restoring stocks of this species to what they were years ago .
Protection of cod stocks is the greatest challenge to which our common fisheries policy must rise .
It should be remembered that , along with sprat and mackerel , cod is one of the species most commonly fished by the European Union 's fishing fleets .
At global level , cod is the second most popular species .
In addition to being a key catch , cod is also vital to the proper functioning of the ecosystem .
Cod naturally controls the spread of algae , notably in the Baltic Sea .
Together with climate change , the reduction of the stocks of this important species is therefore a significant factor in the changes affecting North Atlantic marine ecosystems .
Finally , I should like to present the stance of Polish fishermen , who have become the main victims of the mistaken and unfair cod fishing policy .
As Members will be aware , initially , catch restrictions were imposed on vessels flying the Polish flag .
These were followed by a ban on fishing for cod .
Not only did this have a negative impact on the fishermen 's livelihoods , but it also led to the emergence of the spectre of bankruptcy looming over the Polish processing industry .
That is why , amongst the amendments tabled , particular emphasis should be placed on research .
The latter will allow us to establish the actual state of cod stocks , which will in turn allow us to conduct a realistic fisheries policy . Thank you , ladies and gentlemen .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , first of all I would like to thank the honourable Members for the interesting debate which demonstrates the commitment of Parliament to the recovery of cod .
Indeed , Parliament 's report largely concurs with and supports the Commission proposal to make our current plan more flexible and effective and at the same time more comprehensive .
As many of you have pointed out , cod has started to show some signs of improvement , and fishers will tell you that cod has returned to our seas .
However , it is a fact that this is attributable to one particular year class - the 2005 year class - now that the cod has matured to sizes whereby it is caught within our nets .
We therefore need to be careful how to manage this , because if we reward this one particular year prematurely we will end up in a situation where the possible recovery of this stock will be lost .
This has already happened twice in the last 15 years - once in the Irish Sea and once in the North Sea - where we took premature action rewarding a particular year class and ended up with a situation where we had to start again from scratch .
It is therefore crucial that we act in a way whereby responsible management will tell us that we should do our utmost in order to reduce effort by various measures and various means , and at the same time see to it that discards of cod are reduced .
This can be done by means of results-based management which the cod recovery plan introduces , and I would encourage Member States to also work with us so that we will be able to have a cod recovery plan which will in time bring about a complete recovery of cod .
Having said that , I would like to say a word on discards in general because discards is not an issue which relates only to cod .
Obviously we speak of cod because that is of particular relevance to the North Sea , but we have various other stocks of fish that are discarded , and this is a very sensitive issue around the European Union where public opinion is mounting in a very negative way .
I am determined to tackle it , and I intend to revisit the whole issue because so far progress has been very slow .
I think that we need to look at the picture in a much more general way so that we immediately begin with significant measures to curb discarding , and later on I will come back to you with proposals as to how we can effectively curb discarding in the North Sea .
We are also discussing this with partners like Norway to see how we can take effective measures to reduce cod fishery effort , but at the same time introduce measures to reduce cod discards in particular , as well as tackling the problem of discards of other fish stocks .
Concerning the Celtic Sea , to which Mrs Doyle made reference , it is true that ICES says that the state of the stock is somewhat better than in the other seas .
Having said that , however , they still maintain that the stock is in bad shape and needs to be recovered , which is why we have included it as part of the new cod recovery plan .
It is nonetheless still in very bad shape .
The fact that a TAC is set does not mean that the stock is in good shape because most of our fisheries are regarded as being fished above sustainable levels , and you set TACs which would be on a diminishing scale .
When it is really bad then it would be a zero TAC .
In the case of the Celtic Sea , the situation is somewhat better but still the state of this stock is far from good .
Concerning the point made on cod in the Baltic Sea , although this is not part of this cod recovery plan we did introduce a cod recovery plan in the Baltic Sea in 2007 .
This year , on the basis of ICES advice and probably not so much a result of the cod recovery plan itself but of the significant efforts made by Poland and by Polish fishers , the very bad situation for eastern cod has improved but the situation for western cod in the western Baltic has got worse .
We will therefore have to take tougher measures for western Baltic cod , but can maybe take somewhat less tough measures for eastern cod .
rapporteur . - ( DA ) Mr President , I would like to thank the Commissioner and my fellow Members for their enormous effort and extremely constructive amendments , which were absolutely necessary to make this recovery plan as complete as possible .
I would like to point out that it is now extremely important for the recovery plan to succeed .
We owe it to the fishermen , but it is also correct , as has been mentioned here this evening , that we have talked about the recovery of cod and other species as well .
We have talked about it for the last ten years without achieving the objective . It is therefore important that we achieve it now . )
I would like to say something about illegal , unreported and unregulated fishing .
Of course , we do not know the extent of this , but I do not doubt that it has had extremely negative consequences for the recovery plans that we have implemented in recent years .
It is a disgrace where fish stocks are concerned and a disgrace to the fishing industry and to society as a whole , and the European Parliament has drawn attention to this time and time again .
Much better and more effective control needs to be introduced so that we can put a stop to illegal fishing .
I would also like to mention that we must also include and measure the amount of fish that seals , cormorants and other predatory birds and fish are taking , is of course an area where there is in fact no-one taking account of what the quotas are , as the situation is of course almost the same as it is where unreported fishing is concerned .
The matter of discards is another issue that we have talked about for ten years .
Discards naturally have unavoidable consequences for the quota policy but , just as importantly , we are discarding perfectly edible fish .
Commissioner , I am , of course , happy that you have this evening said that you have a plan in place , but it is totally unsatisfactory that we have talked about this matter for ten years without achieving a single objective .
This is a sad state of affairs , and we must do something about it , otherwise this recovery plan will be doomed to failure too .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place on Tuesday .
Written statements ( Rule 142 )
It is entirely reasonable for the European Commission and the governments of the Member States to be concerned about the critical state of cod stocks in the European Union 's seas .
I am concerned , however , that when it comes to their legislative proposals and decisions , the European Union 's institutions are basing themselves on research undertaken by various research institutes financed by the European Commission .
Research by independent scientists is rarely referred to .
There is also controversy concerning Council regulations ( EC ) No 812 / 2004 and No 2187 / 2005 introducing a ban on the use of drift nets in the EU .
At a meeting with DG MARE I organised a month ago , it became evident that the European Commission is determined to avoid all questions put to it on this matter .
It is failing to provide specific answers and is not meeting its obligations pursuant to the provisions of the aforementioned regulations concerning research to confirm the appropriateness of implementing bans .
Where cod is concerned , there is , for example , a lack of detailed statistics concerning catches from vessels less than 8 metres in length .
No comparison has been made either of the quantities of processed fish products as compared to the size of the catches declared in individual Member States of the Union .
The institutions have failed to provide specific information and plans .
In addition , undue generalisation in research has contributed to heightening the controversy .
In view of its social and economic base , fishing is increasingly becoming a motive for demonstrations and protests by fishermen in Poland amongst other countries .
Many families are being deprived of their livelihood through cuts in fishing quotas and the ban on the use of drifts nets , for example .
Management of fishing fleets registered in the Community outermost regions ( debate )
The next item is the report by Mr Guerreiro , on behalf of the Committee on Fisheries , on the proposal for a Council regulation amending Regulation ( EC ) No 639 / 2004 on the management of fishing fleets registered in the Community 's outermost regions - C6-0298 / 2008 -
rapporteur . - ( PT ) In view of the permanent structural disadvantages and conditioning factors affecting the outermost regions , specific measures to promote their socioeconomic development must be adopted .
These should not be based on transitional criteria or circumstantial or artificial wealth trends .
The fishing sector is strategic for these regions , in terms of both supplying fish to their populations and ensuring employment in and the economic sustainability of their fishing communities .
However , despite the improvements observed , their fishing fleets consist for the most part of ageing vessels which , on average , are more than 30 or 40 years old , particularly the small-scale fleets .
New financial support to renew and modernise the fishing fleets of these regions is vital and it is incomprehensible that this support is being blocked by the European Union .
Continued support for the renewal and modernisation of the fishing fleets is a sine qua non for improving the working and safety conditions of fishermen and the conditions of conservation of fish stocks .
The European Parliament 's Committee on Fisheries only proposes extending public aid for the renewal of fleets in the outermost regions until 2009 and allowing these vessels to be registered until 2011 .
Despite going beyond what the European Commission proposes , we feel that these proposals are still insufficient as they fail to respond to the real needs of fishermen in these regions , particularly the small-scale fleets .
That is why we have tabled amendments which aim to ensure public aid for the renewal and modernisation of fishing fleets without any time limits and in line with the needs of the sector in these regions .
Although it is not strictly necessary , we can say that this measure will not add any costs to the Community budget and will not increase the fleet capacity .
In fact , these are proposals previously adopted by the European Parliament itself which reiterated , in 2005 , the need for future support for the renewal and modernisation of the fishing fleets , in the interests of the profitability and competitiveness of the sector in these regions .
These proposals have also been agreed by this Parliament 's Committee on Fisheries which , earlier this year , indicated the need for new support for the renewal and modernisation of the fleets in the outermost regions , given that the elimination of Community aid for fleet renewal would make it difficult to remedy a situation in which they are lagging behind the fleets from the European mainland .
As a result , when the crucial moment comes for a decision to be made , we simply call on this Parliament to remain consistent with its own positions .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , I would firstly like to extend my gratitude to the Fisheries Committee and especially its rapporteur , Mr Guerreiro , for his report .

The Commission understands the difficulties encountered in outermost regions in executing the decisions on fleet modernisation taken in 2006 .
It cannot , however , accept the continuation of granting public aid to renewal and modernisation of the fleet , since this leads to fleet overcapacity and low economic efficiency in the medium-to-long term .
However , we understand the point raised by the rapporteur that , in certain cases , the decisions we have already taken have led to a backlog in shipyards which cannot cope with the work foreseen before a given deadline .
Therefore we are ready to accept the extension of the deadline for the entry into the fleet up to 2011 , as suggested by the rapporteur .
Thus I am willing to accept Amendments 2 and 7 .
However , the Commission also believes that the basic rules of fleet management - that is , an entry and exit regime guaranteeing no increases in capacity and the withdrawal of public subsidy to such capacity increases - must be safeguarded .
Otherwise outermost regions would be at risk of generating - as happened with the metropolitan fleets - an excess of fishing capacity that ultimately would undermine their economy .
Let me also mention in this connection the fuel package that was adopted in July of this year in the context of the economic crisis driven by high fuel prices .
I would like to invite all actors concerned in the outermost regions to make best use of this package in order to improve the energy efficiency of their fleets and to make the fleets more economically viable through schemes offered in the package , such as restructuring and partial decommissioning .
This is why the Commission , on the basis of what I said before , is not ready to accept Amendments 1 , 3 , 4 , 5 , 6 , 9 , 10 and 11 .
Finally , Amendment 8 could be accepted as long as it is understood that the Commission report should be delayed until all information is available on the utilisation of the derogations provided for in the regulation .
Regarding the call made to the Commission to eventually propose new measures , may I emphasise that this lies within the right of initiative of the Commission , which will in any case propose new measures if it is felt that it is necessary and appropriate to do so .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , with regard to this report I must firstly highlight the necessity of taking into account the needs of the fishing sector in the outermost regions .
Secondly , I must highlight the extension of the derogation from the general fleet entry / exit regime in favour of the outermost regions .
This extension agreed in the Committee on Fisheries means that fishing vessels having benefited from state aid can , under the respective derogation , enter the fishing fleet of these regions until 2011 without the entry of new capacity having to be offset by the exit of equivalent capacity .
This amendment proposed by the Committee on Fisheries was the result of an agreement between the Socialist Party and the PPE-DE Group and involved Members from these two groups who originate from the outermost regions and also the rapporteur , Mr Guerreiro , who , as we have just heard , wanted to go further .
As shadow rapporteur for the PSE Group , I am committed to this objective and therefore urge Members to vote in favour of this report tomorrow .
I call on the Commission , the Commissioner and the Council to take account of the European Parliament 's legislative resolution which I hope will be adopted tomorrow .
on behalf of the IND / DEM Group . - Mr President , the critical issues that affect fishing in the outermost regions seem to be the same as those that all fishermen face , only they are more amplified .
There is a very real threat to the future of these fisheries - piracy , discards , dwindling stocks etc . , ageing vessels and fleets - but for them these problems are even more of a burden , because they are already very vulnerable .
We need to help our most remote fishing communities to maintain not just their livelihood but their skills , which they have honed over generations and which , without protection , are in danger of being lost - not just to them but to us .
We must all take heed of the changing socioeconomic needs of these outermost regions , taking into account the impact which they are experiencing in their sector .
In order to help them survive , we must allow them more participation in their management , as well as specific measures like the extension of time for fleet renewal .
( PT ) Mr President , I believe that the work carried out in the Committee on Fisheries involving our rapporteur , the various political groups and the European Commission was extremely fruitful .
It has resulted in a conclusion , on which almost all are agreed , including the European Commission , that the extension of the deadline until 2011 , together with the preparation of a report assessing the possible need for a further extension of this measure , is the most appropriate way of tackling this problem .
I must thank all our colleagues from the PPE-DE Group who agreed on this position with us and also the European Commission for their efforts in reaching this conclusion .
All we now have to do is hope that the Council will also be sensitive to what we have decided and that it will understand the need to allow the outermost regions longer to meet this requirement .
( PT ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , should authorisation for state aid to be granted for the renewal and modernisation of fishing fleets in the outermost regions be given only until the end of 2009 or should it continue indefinitely ?
The particular nature of the fishing industry in these regions justifies this aid being granted beyond 2009 , without the marine environment being harmed in any way .
Indefinite state aid for the renewal and modernisation of fleets in the outermost regions does not mean permanent and eternal aid .
This will be immediately halted if the studies and evaluations of the Scientific Council and the Regional Advisory Councils indicate this need .
This is the solution which is best suited to the very specific situation of the fishing industry in the outermost regions .
The same reasons which justify why fishermen from each outermost region enjoy an exclusive fishing reserve up to 100 miles also justify different treatment with regard to aid for renewing and modernising the fleet .
I am delighted that the Committee on Fisheries has found the best solutions to meet the particular needs of the fishing sector in the outermost regions .

Mr President , I would just like to show some solidarity , coming from an island nation where , in our peripheral regions , the fishing community is extremely important - the culture , the traditions and skills - and where in these regions , alternative industry and alternative ways of life or occupations are extremely difficult to attract .
If we can show that solidarity towards the peripheral regions in Europe , what must we show to the outermost regions , which are at the extreme edge of peripherality , if you like ?
I would like to support the case made here to support the skills , traditions and culture of the fishing communities in these outermost regions and in very isolated , often very small island communities in the peripheral areas of the EU .
I would like to support what colleagues have said , and I would urge Commissioner Borg to ensure that , if it is a question of an extension of state aid in terms of timelines for renewal of fishing fleets , whatever needs to be done , let us be as generous as we possibly can .
( ES ) Mr President , the Commissioner spoke about an excess of fishing capacity , or fleet overcapacity , in the outermost regions .
I agree with him .
My question to the Commissioner is as follows : Is the Commission aware that the outermost regions - the Canaries , Azores and Madeira in the Central Atlantic ; Guadalupe , Martinique and Guyana in the Caribbean , and Reunion in the Indian Ocean - are surrounded by vast maritime areas in which , as a result of overfishing , fishery resources are gradually declining ?
Does the Commission have any data on this ?
Does the Commission believe that it could assist the fishing fleet in these regions by helping to preserve fish stocks in these areas ?
Member of the Commission . - Thank you very much for your comments .
I can assure you of my commitment to assisting the fleets of the outermost regions as far as I can and as far as this is possible .
However , let me stress that maintaining or even increasing capacity of these fleets is not the solution and can indeed be part of the problem .
As I stated in my opening remarks , if there needs to be a measure of restructuring of these fleets , I would urge you to consider the recently adopted fuel package that provides for a number of possibilities that may be beneficial to the fleets of the outermost regions .
Again , as I said , I can accept the extension of the deadline for entry into the fleet register in view of the backlog problems faced by shipyards , but I cannot accept the further extension for the granting of public aid for construction and for the entry-exit regime beyond what had already been granted under the European Fisheries Fund , where special consideration was made for the outermost regions , since this will not solve any problems but will only serve to generate more problems .
We accept that there is overfishing and we acknowledge that this is due to overcapacity .
The Commission does not want to contribute to overcapacity in peripheral regions as well , because this will only cause problems for the future .
With regard to the possibility of overfishing around the peripheral regions , we have been looking into this and the Council has just adopted a regulation on IUU fishing , with the European Parliament 's blessing .
As from 1 January 2010 , no fish that are not certified as having been legally caught can enter the European market .
We are also taking the lead in regional fisheries organisations in order to propose sustainable fishing in the oceans wherever we have a voice , and that is in virtually all regional fisheries organisations .
We intend to persevere with this effort so that in this way we can guarantee sustainable fishing , not only in our waters but in international waters , which are so crucial for our outermost regions .
rapporteur . - ( PT ) While thanking you for your words , I would also point out that , according to the provisions of the Treaties , measures to support the outermost regions are possible and desirable .
This possibility must therefore result in specific action .
The fishing sector is strategic for these regions .
It needs support for its renewal and modernisation which is why this is a perfectly natural issue .
Community funds exist and , as proven by this debate , there is not a single valid argument for continuing to prevent public aid from being granted for the renewal and modernisation of the fishing fleets in these regions .
Contrary to what has been said , the renewal and modernisation of these fleets will not necessarily lead to overcapacity or increased overcapacity .
The question must therefore be asked as to why measures are not being taken to support this sector ?
Following this debate , we are more convinced than ever that not only is it necessary to extend the deadline for the entry of vessels having benefited from state aid for modernisation , as proposed by the European Commission and the Committee on Fisheries , but it is also necessary to ensure the possibility of public aid for the renewal and modernisation of the fleets in these regions , particularly the small-scale fleets , without being subject to time limits , as we have once again coherently argued .
We therefore want the amendments that we have tabled in this respect to be adopted tomorrow .
The situation demands it , and time will prove us right .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place on Tuesday .
Written statements ( Rule 142 )
in writing . - ( FR ) I am delighted that the European Parliament has authorised the construction of fishing vessels until 31 December 2011 , for fleets registered in the outermost regions and in receipt of State aid for renewal .
I would like to thank those fellow Members who took action with me during the fierce negotiations with the Commission , in order to obtain two years more than the initial proposal .
In fact , the late adoption of the law authorising the Member States to grant this aid and the limited capacity of shipyards would not have allowed these new vessels to be built in time .
I am happy that the European Commission has listened to the fishermen 's demands , although I regret the fact that the Communist Group decided not to support us .
This agreement demonstrates that the European Union is continuing to take into consideration the specific circumstances of the outermost regions , and is in fact doing so more than ever , by agreeing to extend their exemption system .
Let us not forget that State aid for the construction of new vessels has been prohibited in the rest of the European Union since 2005 .
I call upon the fisheries ministers to issue this decision very quickly , so that the fishermen in the outermost regions can acquire modern vessels that provide optimum safety conditions .
Building a Global Climate Change Alliance ( short presentation )
The next item is a brief presentation of the report by Mr Wijkman , on behalf of the Committee on Development , on building a Global Climate Change Alliance between the European Union and poor developing countries most vulnerable to climate change
rapporteur . - Mr President , this report is a response to the Global Climate Change Alliance , which was launched by the European Commission towards the end of last year .
Basically , the Global Climate Change Alliance is a very good initiative .
It is , first and foremost , a recognition that low-income countries will be seriously at risk because of climate change .
It is an irony that , only eight years ago , the Millennium Development Goals were agreed upon in New York .
There was hardly any mention of climate change , yet it was obvious - already then - that many low-income countries would suffer badly from the adverse effects of climate change .
The way we are organised , however , in national organisations , in governments etc . - climate change on its track , development cooperation on another track - was already a real impediment or hindrance towards fully recognising the threat of climate change to development and poverty reduction .
The challenge is , of course , great .
In order to assist low-income countries in adaptation and risk reduction and in mitigation efforts , and to look for synergies between the two , there must be a special focus on deforestation and then , finally and most importantly , implementing all these concerns in the context of development planning and poverty reduction .
It is crucial that we do not end up with a series of stand-alone adaptation projects .
Rather , we have to mainstream adaptation and risk reduction into development cooperation .
The big question when we discussed this in the Committee on Development was how to finance this .
The Commission proposal entails only EUR 60 million .
It is a drop in the ocean .
Nobody knows how much adaptation risk reduction will cost ; nobody knows what technological cooperation will cost in terms of mitigation .
The World Bank , Oxfam , UNDP and others have come up with estimates ranging between USD 10 billion and , I would say , USD 100 billion yearly .
Some measures need not cost more : if you do development planning and poverty reduction strategies taking into account the adverse effects of climate change at the beginning , you may not end up with increased costs .
But in many areas we know that there will be additional costs .
Farming practices , risk reduction for extreme weather events , sea level rise , health measures : you name it .
The question is : where will the extra or additional funding come from ?
In the report we make a few suggestions .
One of them , quite naturally , is to use some of the revenue from the expected auctioning of emission permits in the future .
It is very important to somehow earmark funding for developing countries in this context .
Another suggestion is that Member States should support the Commission initiative and not embark on their own initiatives .
This is a new area , where it makes sense to pool resources .
Finally , all that we do in this area must be seen in the context of next year 's climate negotiations in Copenhagen .
Proactive action from Annex 1 countries - in particular the EU - in this field is crucial for a global deal to be struck .
The Development report deals with the issues mentioned - and many others - in the spirit of supporting the European Commission initiative and with the primary aim of strengthening it , both in terms of substance and finance .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , I welcome Mr Wijkman 's report and thank him for his continuing support for the Global Climate Change Alliance .
Overall we believe that the report highlights the right issues and identifies the key challenges the international community currently faces in providing support to climate change mitigation and adaptation in developing countries .
We appreciate , in particular , the report 's proposals , firstly to develop the Global Climate Change Alliance into a clearing house for Member State initiatives .
We agree that current efforts to assist developing countries in this important area are fragmented and not well coordinated , and do not correspond to the Paris principles on aid effectiveness , to which all EU Member States have signed up .
Secondly , the proposal to set a long-term financing goal for the GCCA .
It is pivotal , however , that EU Member States fully align themselves to this initiative and make increased ODA commitments and innovative sources of financing available for the GCCA .
The financing goal set by the European Commission alone would be meaningless .
Finally , the proposal to spend part of the expected revenues from auctioning emission rights within the EU emissions trading scheme on funding for the GCCA and other climate change measures in developing countries .
We need - particularly in the current context - continued European Parliament support in the realisation of these proposals , in particular through engagement with decision-makers at Member State level .
The report highlights a number of points for further clarification by the Commission , who would respond , in particular , on the distinct added value of the GCCA .
Overall the GCCA is intended as a key component of the European Union 's climate change policy .
Traditionally , this policy has been focused on mitigation inside and outside the Union .
The Green Paper / White Paper process now deals primarily with adaptation inside the Union .
The GCCA represents the external dimension of our adaptation efforts .
Besides , it is important to underline the fact that the international community needs to arrive at the conclusion of a global climate change agreement at Copenhagen in December 2009 , so as to avoid a gap between the Kyoto Protocol and the follow-up agreement .
Developing countries will only enter such an agreement if adaptation is specifically considered .
The European Union must also assume its leadership role in this context , and the GCCA is a vehicle to demonstrate our commitment .
Mr Wijkman 's report could have made stronger reference to this political imperative .
Furthermore , the European Union is the largest provider of development assistance .
Climate change , clearly , is a threat to development .
The GCCA aims at placing climate change adaptation firmly within EU development policy .
Finally , the GCCA would like to employ different means in developing climate-related assistance , away from project funding and towards programme-based approaches .
We believe that resilience to climate change can only be built effectively in this way .
The Commission has already entered into the initial implementation stage of the Global Climate Change Alliance .
In doing so , it is paying due attention to the report 's proposals , in particular as regards close involvement of partner country representatives and close coordination with other , related bi- and multiannual , multilateral initiatives .
Finally , the Commission recognises the need for better mainstreaming of climate change into its own aid programmes , in close coordination with the partner countries and development partners at country level .
Ongoing work at the OECD on the development of guidelines for mainstreaming adaptation into development cooperation will assist us in these efforts .
That concludes the item .
The vote will take place on Tuesday .
Written statements ( Rule 142 )
in writing . - ( RO ) This initiative is justified in the context of the responsibilities assumed by the European Union towards developing countries and by the fact that the European Union is the world 's largest donor of humanitarian aid .
In this respect , it is important for us to avoid duplication of initiatives involving developing countries that we have launched at Community or Member State level .
I believe that it is vital for concern about climate change not to be a one-off commitment , but for us to take into account the importance of preventive action in all the measures adopted by the EU , especially those linked to development aid .
Last but not least , I think that preventive action must be made a priority , more so than actions linked to humanitarian crises , bearing in mind that the costs of reconstruction are much higher in the wake of disasters .
The European Union needs to show not only solidarity but also responsibility towards other regions in the world , which makes the Global Climate Change Alliance an important step in this direction .
in writing . - ( FR ) The Global Climate Change Alliance must become an effective instrument enabling the poorest countries to adapt to the consequences of climate change , of which they are the prime victims .
Through the Socialist Group in the European Parliament 's amendments tabled in committee , it has been possible to improve on the excellent work done by the rapporteur .
With regard to the funding of the Alliance , the PSE joins with the rapporteur in deploring the low level of the annual amount laid down by the European Commission .
We also deplore the quasi-systematic recourse to the EDF to fund new initiatives such as the Alliance .
This use ought to be strictly controlled , to ensure that it actually does finance development actions , and that it is restricted to the first year of the Alliance 's operation .
The Commission must therefore abide by its undertaking to find additional funds for the Alliance .
The PSE has also voiced its support for the establishment of a close link between climate change and the current food crisis .
The Alliance should put forward concrete initiatives on this front , such as the creation of green belts around towns in the global South in order to promote food-producing agriculture .
Finally , we have called for environmental , social and economic criteria to be drawn up relating to the production of biofuels , and for food security to be guaranteed before agriculture for export is promoted .
Governance and partnership at a national , regional and project basis in the field of regional policy ( short presentation )
The next item is a brief presentation of the report , by Mr Beaupuy , on behalf of the Committee on Regional Development , on governance and partnership at national and regional levels and a basis for projects in the sphere of regional policy .
rapporteur . - ( FR ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I must tell you that I had an enormous amount of pleasure in applying , myself , the principles of governance during the preparation of this report with the various stakeholders .
Additionally , this method of working demonstrated its value in the preparation of the report , because it enabled me to take into account almost all the proposals made by my fellow Members , and on 9 September that was reflected in a unanimous vote within the Committee on Regional Development .
This consensus would , however , be worthless had it not found concrete form in a text that is both specific and consistent , as I will demonstrate to you in a moment .
I would therefore like to give my very hearty thanks to all my fellow Members who participated in this report , and in particular to the shadow rapporteurs , who would very much have liked to have been here this evening to display their commitment .
Commissioner , all my thanks go , of course , to the Commission departments , and I would be grateful to you if you would pass them on , since this cooperation has been both constructive and pleasant .
I will also thank the European Economic and Social Committee and its rapporteur , Mr van Iersel , the Committee of the Regions , Mr Kisyov , and the many bodies that have played a part .
So , what are governance and partnership about ?
Well , we need to draw up an own-initiative report on this issue of governance and partnership because ' governance ' and ' partnership ' are terms that are used every day .
You only have to pick up the newspapers or reports and you will always come across those words .
Commissioner , there is a time for words and there is a time for action .
There is a time for setting targets and there is a time for giving oneself the means to achieve them .
For some years now we have been hearing the constant refrain that governance must be improved .
It is incorporated into our regulations , it is discussed in our debates , but not much progress is made .
What is really happening , when we see that the integrated approach appears in the many reports issued by the Commission and Parliament ?
Do our European policies on transport , the environment and regional development really take account of one another ?
Where is the integrated approach that we are hoping to see ?
Each policy has its own budget , its own minister , its own Commissioner and its own timetable .
We can also see , just in relation to the Structural Funds , that the ERDF , the ESF and the EAFRD are applied on the ground separately .
Commissioner , in carrying out your duties , with your colleagues , you know that we all consider it very important to attain the Lisbon objectives .
If we go on in this way , though , with such a compartmentalised approach on the ground , do you believe that this will be possible ?
Do you believe that an organisation , regardless of how powerful and how determined it is , can succeed by allowing this ' each for himself ' approach to be adopted on the ground ?
Today , the time has come for the various private and public stakeholders to bring together our skills and to bring together our budgets and our timetables when we are involved in the same subject in the same geographical area .
My report puts forward 37 specific actions intended to achieve this , but I am not going to list them , I am just going to indicate three key points .
The first key point is to give the various stakeholders , whether private , public , individuals or organisations , the means to implement this governance .
The first point , and I stressed this to your colleague , Mrs Danuta Hübner , is to develop a practical guide to governance .
No longer are we talking about abstract messages - this must be a practical guide .
The second point is the training of elected representatives within the framework of an Erasmus programme .
Our local and regional elected representatives should be the real engines for change in this new governance of the territories .
In addition - and this is the second key point - our European and national institutions must set an example .
That is why I call in my report for an annual meeting of the ministers responsible for cohesion policies within the Council .
Commissioner , as you know yourself , there are also differences between the Commissioners and the various directorates-general .
We need to have more effective inter-departmental work .
As for the Committee of the Regions , it has anticipated my request because two weeks ago it responded to our proposals .
Thirdly , it will of course be necessary , Commissioner , to have binding procedures .
Since my time has run out , I will not be able to go into them in more detail , but please note that we expect the Commission to act now as the spearhead for this revolution in current practices .
We must move on from words to actions .
I and my fellow Members who have worked on these texts expect the Commission to take decisions that are both swift and effective .

Member of the Commission . - Mr President , on behalf of the Commission I would like to thank Mr Beaupuy for his report on governance and partnership in the fields of regional policy , given that partnership and governance are , indeed , key principles of cohesion policy .
Mr Beaupuy 's report makes many recommendations and advocates , in particular , the need to strengthen the integrated approach , the need for more decentralisation of the cohesion policy and the need for full recognition and association of the various partners in the programmes of regional policy , in particular the local and urban authorities .
The report also proposes the development of tools to strengthen partnership and new governance .
I can assure Mr Beaupuy that the main messages of his report are in line with what the Commission is defending and promoting .
Practice has shown that the ability to establish genuine partnerships is often a condition of the success and effectiveness of the programmes supported by structural and cohesion funds .
That is the reason why this principle has been maintained and strengthened in each programming period by expanding the composition of such a partnership and extending the range of its scope .
Thanks to the combined efforts of the Commission and Parliament and to the pressures of civil society , the 2006 regulations for the current period went a step further and included , explicitly and for the first time , new partners from civil society .
The delivery mechanisms were discussed during the negotiations of each national strategic reference framework and operational programme for the period 2007-2013 , and the Commission has tried to improve it in order to make it less institutional .
There are still important variations between the Member States and regions , but on the whole there have been real improvements in the application of the partnership principle .
In Poland , for instance , the dialogue with civil society and , especially , with NGOs has been pushed forward thanks to the cohesion policy requirements .
Over time , cohesion policy has developed a powerful multilateral governance system involving a large number of partners , both at a vertical and a horizontal level .
Since there is no ' one size fits all ' recipe , greater involvement of the regional and local authorities - as well as all relevant stakeholders - in the design , implementation and evaluation of the interventions according to a scheme adapted to the team and , of course , to the region is essential to ensure the success of the policy .
Nevertheless , it must be acknowledged that there is still a lot to be done in order to have real and active partnership and governance , not only in the preparation and negotiation process but also in the other phases of the life of the operational programmes , that is : implementation , monitoring and evaluation .
I can inform Mr Beaupuy that , in order to have a clearer view of the current situation and practices , Commissioner Hübner 's services are presently working on a study of regional governance in the context of globalisation .
It should provide us with substantial information as to whether a guide , as requested by Mr Beaupuy in his report , would be helpful on the subject .
The Commission is also convinced that cohesion policy must be simplified , must bring added value for regional development and , at the same time , must be closer to the European citizen .
The Commission agrees that it is necessary to offer an integrated approach of the different sectoral policies on a given territory so as to achieve better results .
We should deepen our reflection on the way the cohesion funds are currently implemented and coordinated on the one hand and , on the other hand , on the way they could be articulated for the next programming period after 2013 in order to keep a real coherent strategic development at regional level .
This is actually a concern expressed in many contributions received in the framework of our public consultations on the future of the policy .
Among the tools mentioned in the report to improve the new governance , there is the suggestion of the creation of an Erasmus of local representatives .
The Commission will do its best to implement this interesting idea , although it might be difficult to do so if it is approved as a pilot project by the budget authority .
Beyond the rationale of cohesion policy which is , and should remain , a central pillar for achieving the new sustainable development goals , and in order to help regions to face forthcoming global challenges which will impact more and more on their development , the Commission believes we should all keep on strengthening the delivery mechanisms of cohesion policy built upon the principles of an integrated approach , partnership and multilateral governance .
The Commission is convinced that Mr Beaupuy 's report and Parliament 's support will help a lot to improve the situation .
This concludes the debate .
The vote will take place on Tuesday .
Written statements ( Rule 142 )
in writing . - ( GA ) I wholeheartedly welcome this excellent report from Mr Beaupuy on Governance and Partnership .
It is unfortunate that the partnership principle is not always adhered to in the spending of structural funds .
Nevertheless , I have witnessed very good examples in Northern Ireland of how partnership should work and I have seen the benefits of partnership when done correctly .
I also welcome the calls in this report for closer cooperation and contact between local and regional authorities and other levels of governance , especially with the European Commission .
The Northern Ireland Assembly must build on the links already established by the European Commission .
This is especially true for work of the Task-force which was created by the President of the European Commission , Mr Barroso .
The Northern Ireland Assembly and our local communities are prepared to play a greater role in the implementing of EU programmes at community level .
This report sets out how they may be empowered to do so .
It is essential to abide by the principle of partnership at all levels of management when implementing regional policy .
This is particularly important in relation to effectiveness .
If they wish to mobilise society fully , national and regional authorities must aim to include and engage local residents , both in planning changes and subsequently in monitoring use of structural funds .
Failure to identify with regional objectives always generates controversy and holds up action , causing numerous delays .
Genuine , not superficial partnership is also essential in the context of the European Community , because it is the only way of ensuring that the citizens receive information about the nature of the European Union 's activities .
Partnership is vital but it also costs money .
It is therefore necessary to earmark 2-3 % of structural funding for that purpose .
The current voluntary principle is not working .
If regions are not obliged to spend money on organising meetings , workshops or assessing implementation , they simply do not do so .
More often than not the principle of partnership is reduced to sending the plan through the post , allowing as little as a week for comments in some cases .
I believe it would be wise to pay significantly more attention to this problem if we wish to ensure that Europe becomes a community of active , aware and cooperating citizens .
Better lawmaking 2006 pursuant to Article 9 of the Protocol on the application of the principles of subsidiarity and proportionality ( short presentation )
The next item is a brief presentation of the report by Mr Medina Ortega , on behalf of the Committee on Legal Affairs , on better lawmaking 2006 pursuant to Article 9 of the Protocol on the application of the principles of subsididarity and proportionality ..
Mr President , I am presenting an own-initiative report on ' Better lawmaking 2006 ' pursuant to Article 9 of the Protocol on the application of the principles of subsidiarity and proportionality .
The report is rather wide-ranging so I should like to concentrate on two or three aspects .
The first aspect is the importance of the legislative process within the European Union .
There seems to be a gradual drift towards adopting what is termed ' soft law ' , whereby certain communications , reports or documents come to be regarded as binding legal rules .
The concern expressed in my report is for a clear distinction to be made between simple guidelines issued by administrative institutions and the legislative process .
The legislative process , involving regulations and directives , is currently fully provided for by the Treaties of the European Union and requires an initiative from the Commission which must be approved either by the Council on its own or by the Council in a codecision procedure with Parliament .
In this respect , I believe it is vital to stress the importance of this legislative character , because it is this which takes account of the public interest through the submission of petitions to the bodies having legislative power .
There is a danger , and another potential deviation , in allowing certain bodies or certain sectors to self-regulate .
This may be appropriate , for example , for certain associations , professional bodies , corporate bodies and so on but , in my opinion , allowing a given sector to self-regulate is a very serious error .
We have recently witnessed the results of deregulation in the United States , which allowed the financial sector to self-regulate , with extremely serious consequences for the whole world economy .
In other words , regulation cannot be left in the hands of those who are subject to regulation .
Self-regulation is a contradiction in terms and is only appropriate where internal bodies regulate themselves .
It should not be considered that a given sector can regulate itself through a system of self-regulation and the same can be said for coregulation .
As far as the European Parliament is concerned , the essential requirement is to establish clear legislative procedures .
In other words , Commission proposals must be discussed in Parliament and in the Council and legislative resolutions must be adopted .
The second aspect is the increasing complexity of EU law and the difficulty encountered by the ordinary citizen , including experts in EU law , in understanding what is actually happening .
We must make it easier to understand EU law and the only way to do this is through codification , recasting or something similar .
We cannot continue developing legal rules as and when necessary and then forget what we have adopted .
It is true that , in recent years , improvements have been made in this respect as , through Parliament , the Commission and the Council working together , the comitology procedures , for example , have been amended .
However , in this era of IT , we should ideally have an automatic codification procedure in which any new legal rule adopted is immediately recognised and consolidated through codification procedures .
The report insists on periodic codification .
In my opinion , this should be virtually automatic so that , as we adopt legal rules , these are incorporated within the corpus of EU law to form the new EU code .
I am not proposing a kind of Napoleonic code with regard to EU law , but rather permanent codification , which I feel will not be difficult , as I said before , in this era of IT .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , better regulation is not an end in itself .
It is about benefiting citizens and businesses by simplifying and improving the regulatory environment in Europe .
The Commission therefore welcomes the present report by Mr Medina Ortega on better lawmaking .
It maintains the focus on the better regulation agenda in line with previous similar initiatives taken last year by the European Parliament .
I have also noted the very insightful observations just made by Mr Medina Ortega .
I would now like to recall the important steps already taken and the work which is ongoing to respond to the requests and concerns that are expressed by the European Parliament on better regulation .
Better regulation is a top priority for this and we have made significant progress in the years of impact assessment , simplification and the reduction of administrative burdens .
The Impact Assessment Board that President Barroso put in place at the end of 2006 is having a real impact on the quality of our work .
We are nevertheless aware that we must constantly strive to improve the system .
Many of the improvements we want to make will be taken forward on the basis of our revised guidelines on impact assessments .
This revision is based on the experience of the IAB , an external evaluation and then a consultation of the institutions , stakeholders and interested parties .
We are reinforcing guidance on issues such as subsidiarity , national and regional impacts and specific impacts such as on SMEs and consumers .
We are also reviewing with Council and Parliament the common approach to impact assessment with the aim of identifying where progress can be made .
Work at technical level has started , and we hope to achieve some concrete results at least by sharing common experiences within the three institutions by the end of the year .
On simplification , the Commission has adopted 119 proposals out of 162 since the launch of the 2005-2009 programmes .
One key challenge is to ensure that simplification proposals pending in Council and Parliament are adopted rapidly .
On administrative burdens , the mapping exercise of the main EU information obligations which is being carried out for the Commission by an external consortium has been completed and the costing of these obligations will be finished by the end of the year .
In the January strategic review we intend to report on progress and set out a clear road map on how the ambitious 25 % reduction target will be achieved by 2010-2012 .
Finally , with regard to interinstitutional cooperation on better law making , we must acknowledge that the Interinstitutional Agreement on Better Lawmaking in force since December 2003 has not been easy to implement .
This should not discourage us from continuing our dialogue .
On the contrary , the Commission recently expressed the view that it is time to give more political tenor to the discussions on better regulation issues in general .
I have encouraged Parliament to convene an interinstitutional exchange of views on better regulation in the near future at the highest political level , be it in the context of the high-level technical group for interinstitutional cooperation , the Conference of Presidents or the Conference of Committee Chairs .
In conclusion , I would like to stress that better regulation is a joint responsibility of all the European institutions and , indeed , of the Member States .
We can all do more and do better in improving the quality of our legislative proposals and of our overall regulatory framework .
That concludes the item .
The vote will take place on Tuesday .
Written statements ( Rule 142 )
24th Annual Report from the Commission on monitoring the application of Community law ( short presentation )
The next item is a brief presentation of the report by Mrs Geringer de Oedenberg , on behalf of the Committee on Legal Affairs , on the 24th Annual Report from the Commission on monitoring the application of Community law
rapporteur . - ( PL ) Mr President , the effectiveness of European Union policies largely depends on their implementation at national , regional and local level .
Member States ' compliance with Community law must therefore be strictly monitored .
As rapporteur for Parliament 's 24th Annual Report on this subject , I can say that there has been a slight drop in the number of cases of infringement proceedings initiated by the Commission .
Nonetheless , the number of cases continues to exceed 2,500 .
A 16 % reduction of the number of proceedings relating to failures to comply with the obligation to inform the Commission about transposition proceedings in the enlarged Union of 25 Member States should also be mentioned .
This indicates better discipline by Member States where notification is concerned .
As in previous years , the vast majority of the charges concerned inappropriate operation of the single market , notably implementation of the principle of free movement of people , goods and services .
Many charges also concerned violation of the rights derived from citizenship of the European Union , that guarantee the principle of equal rights and opportunities for all citizens .
On 5 September 2007 the Commission proposed amending the working methods used to date .
The proposal aimed to ensure more effective management of proceedings , and received the support of the majority of Members of this House .
Concern has been expressed , however , that the new procedure may result in the Commission losing institutional responsibility as guardian of the Treaties , as it provides for referring charges received by the Commission back to the Member State responsible in primis for incorrect implementation of Community legislation .
It is therefore essential for the Commission to submit to Parliament the initial report on the results obtained in the first six months of the pilot project that began on 15 April of this year , and involved 15 Member States .
The Commission is often the highest institution to which citizens may refer cases of inappropriate implementation of the law .
The Commission should therefore also keep a record of all correspondence that could be deemed to contain information on cases of infringement of Community legislation .
With regard to ongoing infringement procedure , the main problem continues to be the unduly long time taken to consider complaints .
The average is 20.5 months , which is excessive .
The Commission should make every effort to shorten the lengthy procedures and to find practical solutions .
The latter could include recourse to systems such SOLVIT , which is still not being sufficiently promoted .
The substantial increase in cases of infringement resulting from failure to comply with the rulings of the European Court of Justice recorded in 2006 .
The fact that cooperation between national courts and the Court of Justice is often inadequate is a contributory factor .
In addition , the preliminary question mechanism based on Article 234 of the Treaty is not used .
This is because there is still insufficient knowledge of Community law at the level of certain Member States .
Turning to interinstitutional cooperation , the agreements on monitoring implementation of Community legislation and close cooperation between the Council , the Commission and the European Ombudsman , together with the relevant committees of this House , should set the standard for ensuring effective intervention in all cases where the plaintiff submits a justified complaint concerning infringement of Community legislation .
The high number of complaints inappropriately lodged has remained high over the years .
Some complaints are wrongly lodged with the Committee on Petitions , and others fall outside the competence of the institutions .
Such complaints represent as much as 75 % of the total complaints received by the Ombudsman in 2006 .
There is therefore an urgent need to make a greater effort to improve information available to the citizens , providing better guidance to plaintiffs , so that they can approach the body best able to deal with their individual cases at either national or European level .
The citizens ' complaints are an invaluable indicator of their most urgent needs .
The Commission should be guided by this information as it undertakes legislative initiatives .
In the context of the analysis of implementation of Community law in 2006 I would call especially on those Member States who could benefit most from structural funding within the framework of the 2007-2013 Financial Framework to adjust their national law to European law swiftly and appropriately .
I have in mind in particular the area of environmental protection , so that effective use is made of available structural resources and the social and economic development of the regions accelerated .
Finally , I should like to express my regret that the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats , Members of the Committee on Legal Affairs were instrumental in the removal of important provisions from my report .
These provisions concerned equal treatment of women and men regarding access to employment , education , promotion and social insurance .
Equal treatment is still not the rule in many Member States , in clear contradiction to the principle of equality that should be a priority for us all .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , the Commission greatly welcomes the general support from Parliament for the Commission 's approach set out in its 2007 Communication ' A Europe of results : Applying Community law ' and thanks Mrs Geringer for her informative report .
The Commission attributes high importance to the correct application of Community law .
It figures in the priorities of the Barroso Commission and the Commission is vigilant in exercising its role as guardian of the Treaty .
This is why the Commission has made a major effort to improve its working methods for the benefit of citizens and businesses , as explained in the 2007 Communication .
These improvements include the introduction this year of more frequent decision-taking on infringement cases to avoid delays in the advancement of cases , and the introduction of the EU pilot project in April this year .
Within 15 Member States this pilot project will test an improved method for problem solving and information provision to ensure quicker and better results for citizens and businesses .
Up-to-date factual information on the functioning of this EU pilot project will be sent to the rapporteur , but a full report will only be possible , as already promised , after one year , when sufficient experience will have been obtained for first conclusions to be drawn .
We are also testing the use of officials in some representation offices in Member States to follow up on questions relating to the application of Community law to see how this might improve efficiency .
This reflects the reality that all questions concerning the application of Community law involve actions taken by Member States .
This work , therefore , requires the Commission to work closely with Member State authorities to try to find correct and quick solutions .
A common interinstitutional understanding can also play a significant role in this important part of the better regulation agenda .
It is in this context that I have offered to coordinate with the rapporteur future reviews of the application of the acquis in different areas to ensure up-to-date information .
We are working to introduce the initiatives announced in the 2007 Communication on increased transparency .
We are finalising this year 's annual report in the form of a strategic evaluation of the current position , prioritisation of issues and a programme of actions in order to feed interinstitutional discussion .
In closing , I would like to mention that Mrs Geringer 's report also supports common contact points to guide citizens .
I can confirm that the Commission is already working to this end .
We will come forward with our evaluation and suggestions as soon as possible .
You attach particular importance , Mrs Geringer , to monitoring of the implementation of the directives on equal treatment .
I can reassure you that a full assessment has been made of Member State transposition .
Over 40 infringement proceedings have been launched which are being actively pursued with a view to early results .
That concludes the item .
The vote will take place on Tuesday .
Institutional aspects of Regulatory Agencies ( short presentation )
The next item is a brief presentation of the report by Mr Papastamkos , on behalf of the Committee on Constitutional Affairs , on a strategy for the future settlement of the institutional aspects of Regulatory Agencies .
rapporteur . - ( EL ) Mr President , the 29 European regulatory agencies constitute what at first sight appear to be micro-institutions but which , in essence , have an obvious macro-impact and which have already become an accepted para-institutional component of the European Union .
The excessive increase in the number of regulatory agencies has undoubtedly resulted in inflated European regulatory intervention , the fragmentation of and a lack of transparency in European policies and , by extension , has made operational coordination more difficult .
For all European agencies , the urgent question arises of the need for an interim review of their work and performance .
What is required is a minimum total of common principles and rules relating to the structure , operation and control of the regulatory agencies , so that they integrate harmoniously within the framework of fundamental principles which derive from the Treaties .
Following the Council 's refusal to accept a legally binding instrument and the rejection of the proposal to conclude an interinstitutional agreement , the Commission decided to propose the establishment of an interinstitutional working group tasked with drawing up a common framework for the regulatory institutions and defining the competence of each of the European institutions vis-à-vis those agencies .
I consider that this proposal falls short of the European Parliament 's expectations of achieving an interinstitutional agreement .
The common approach is indeed an interim step towards the adoption of a legally binding text .
I do , of course , appreciate the Commission 's wish to find a way out of a situation of protracted interinstitutional inertia .
The setting up of an interinstitutional working group which will carry out a collective policy review of the experience gained from the activities of the regulatory agencies and whose mandate will be to clarify their position in the multilevel system of European governance is welcome .
The proposed approach - a common approach as far as possible - to the structure and workings of the agencies concerned seeks to restrict bureaucratic rigidity so that they can play their regulatory role correctly and effectively and can be supervised and so that the current requirements for auditing and accountability can , at least partially , be satisfied .
The priority of seeking a common framework for an interinstitutional understanding and approach lies in maximising the added value of the regulatory agencies in the European structures of governance in general by creating greater transparency , visible democratic control and improved efficiency .
Finally , I should like to point out that the establishment of parliamentary control over the structure and the work of the regulatory agencies is consistent with the classic democratic principle requiring political responsibility of any body wielding executive power .
The possibility of the European Parliament assigning political responsibility to the agencies concerned touches on a core principle of representative democracy , which consists in examining the legality and expediency of the choices made by the executive power .

Member of the Commission . - Mr President , the Commission welcomes the positive stance taken by the rapporteur , Mr Papastamkos , and the responsible and associated committees towards the key elements put forward in the March Communication , ' European agencies : The way forward ' .
These are the moratorium on proposing new agencies , the upcoming evaluation of the agency system and the creation of an interinstitutional working group .
As you know , we attach great importance to the relaunch of the interinstitutional dialogue on the role and place of agencies in European governance , a dialogue aimed at developing a coherent vision and a common approach vis-à-vis regulatory agencies
The Commission trusts that Parliament will now be in a position to promptly mandate its representatives to the interinstitutional working group .
We also count on a favourable response from the Council in order to ensure timely progress on the follow-up to the Commission 's Communication .
We are confident that the interinstitutional working group will be created before the end of the year .
This group will be closely associated in the evaluation process that the Commission is about to launch .
Before concluding , let me say that the Commission has left open the question on the form that will be given to the final outcome of the interinstitutional dialogue in order not to pre-empt the discussions .
It is up to the interinstitutional working group to decide what form it wishes to give to its conclusions .
The conclusions , on the other hand , can be implemented in different ways - sometimes spreading best practices could be enough , and sometimes amendments to the agencies ' basic acts might be necessary .
The cooperation between Parliament and the Commission in this field is exemplary and I am sure we will continue working on that basis .
That concludes the item .
The vote will take place on Tuesday .
Agenda for next sitting : see Minutes
Closure of the sitting
( The sitting was closed at 11.55 p.m. )
Opening of the sitting
( The sitting opened at 9.00 a.m. )
Documents received : see Minutes
Texts of agreements forwarded by the Council : see Minutes
Action taken on Parliament 's resolutions : see Minutes
Debates on cases of breaches of human rights , democracy and the rule of law ( announcement of motions for resolutions tabled ) : see Minutes
Challenges to collective agreements in the EU ( debate )
The next item is the report by Jan Andersson , on behalf of the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs , on challenges to collective agreements in the EU .
rapporteur . - ( SV ) Madam President , I hope the Commission comes soon .
They have not arrived yet .
I intend to begin by talking about the report in general terms .
In the European Parliament we have , on a number of occasions , discussed what policy to conduct in a globalised society .
We should not compete for low paid jobs , we should have good working conditions , we should concentrate on human capital , people and investments and other things in order to be successful .
We have also discussed on many occasions the balance between open borders and a strongly social EU and concluded that this balance is important .
In addition , we have often discussed the issue , and importance , of the equal treatment of people irrespective of gender , ethnic origin or nationality and established that equal treatment and non-discrimination should prevail .
The report deals with the need for us to have open borders .
The committee is in favour of open borders with no restrictions or transitional periods , but at the same time we should have a social EU where we do not compete with each other by forcing lower wages , poorer working conditions , and so on .
The report also deals with the principle of equal treatment , that is to say equal treatment and the absence of discrimination against workers , irrespective of nationality .
It must not be the case that people from Latvia , Poland , Germany , Sweden or Denmark are treated differently within the same labour market .
This is also the basis for the proposals in the report .
The most important proposals relate to the Posting of Workers Directive , as three of the judgments concern posted workers .
It is extremely important that we do not turn the Posting of Workers Directive into a minimum directive .
It is true that the directive contains ten minimum conditions that are to be met .
These conditions must be included , but the basic principle is equal treatment .
Therefore , we must be clear .
There must be equal treatment , irrespective of nationality .
In any one labour market , for example in the labour market in the German state of Lower Saxony , the conditions applying there should cover all workers , irrespective of where they come from .
It is an important principle that must become even clearer after the judgments that have been given .
The second important point is that we have different labour market models .
All of these models must have equal worth when it comes to implementation .
Certain other things in the directive should also be amended .
Moreover , we must make it absolutely clear that the right to strike is a basic constitutional right that cannot be made subordinate to freedom of movement .
This applies with regard to the new treaty , but also in a different way in primary law .
Thirdly , EC law must not contravene the International Labour Organisation Convention .
The Rüffert case relates to an ILO Convention that deals with public procurement .
In this case , those working conditions that are applicable at the place where the work is carried out shall apply .
This is the reason for the proposals that have been tabled .
I will listen to the debate and would at the same time like to take the opportunity to thank everyone involved , for example the shadow rapporteur , for the constructive cooperation we have had .
( Applause )
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , allow me to begin with an apology for the short delay .
Unfortunately , I was unable to foresee in time how busy the roads were going to be .
Ladies and gentlemen , the judgments handed down recently by the Court of Justice in the case of Viking , Laval and Rüffert has ignited a broad debate at EU level concerning the protection of workers ' rights in relation to increased levels of globalisation and labour mobility .
In order for the European labour market to function properly , we must establish good rules .
The Posting of Workers Directive is a key instrument in achieving this aim .
I would remind you that the aim of the directive is to find a balance between , on the one hand , an appropriate level of protection for workers temporarily posted to another Member State and , on the other hand , the free movement of services within the internal market .
The Commission is determined to ensure that the basic freedoms under the Treaty do not conflict with the protection of fundamental rights .
The Commission has expressed the wish to begin an open debate with all of the affected parties so that we may analyse together the consequences of the judgments from the Court of Justice .
It is enormously important to have such a debate , as it would clarify the legal position and finally enable the Member States to introduce adequate legal arrangements .
The Commission organised on 9 October 2008 a forum on this theme , in which all of the interested parties participated .
This forum should become the starting point for the debate which is so badly needed .
The Commission agrees that the increased mobility of workers in Europe has brought with it new challenges , since it involves the functioning of the labour markets and the regulation of employment conditions .
The Commission believes that the social partners are best placed to rise to the challenge and to propose possible improvements .
Therefore , the Commission has invited the European social partners to examine the consequences of increased mobility in Europe and the judgments of the European Court of Justice .
I am delighted that the European social partners have taken up the challenge .
The Commission will support their work as required .
The Commission would like to report that the Member States most affected by the judgment of the Court of Justice are at this very moment working on legal arrangements that will ensure harmonisation with the judicature of the Court of Justice .
The Commission cannot agree to the proposal for the Posting of Workers Directive also to include a reference to free movement .
Such an extension would necessarily lead to misunderstandings concerning the operability of the directive , since it would gloss over the difference between two distinct categories of worker , in other words posted workers and migrant workers .
I would emphasise that there is obviously a difference between posted workers and migrant workers .
The Commission agrees with Parliament concerning the need to improve the operation and implementation of the posted workers directive .
In this context may I remind you that in April 2008 the Commission accepted the recommendation for greater administrative cooperation called for by the Member States in order to put right the current shortcomings .
The Commission also supports greater cooperation through its plan to establish in the future a committee of experts from the Member States .
The Commission believes that within the framework of the proposed Treaty of Lisbon there will be a very significant strengthening of social rights through changes such as the new social clauses , thanks to which all other policies of the European Union must take account of social questions and also in view of the implementation of a legally binding reference to the Charter of Fundamental Rights .
Madam President , the report we are today debating has turned the current Posting of Workers Directive into a challenge for collective agreements .
I can appreciate that the rulings by the European Court of Justice may not have been welcomed by some of the Member States .
Nonetheless , they do ensure a balance between all the objectives of the directive , namely between the freedom to provide services , respect for workers ' rights and preservation of the principles of fair competition .
I should like to emphasise that maintaining that balance is a sine qua non for us .
The main problem regarding proper implementation of this directive is its incorrect interpretation by the Member States .
Accordingly , we should focus on the interpretation rather than on the provisions of the directive itself .
First and foremost , therefore , a thorough analysis at Member-State level is needed .
That will make it possible to identify the difficulties arising out of the rulings and possible challenges before us .
Consequently , I believe that at this stage we should refrain from calling for changes to the directive .
It is important to bear in mind that the posting of workers is inextricably linked to the freedom to provide services .
The latter is one of the fundamental principles of the common European market .
In no circumstances should it be perceived a restriction on collective agreements .
draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on Legal Affairs . - ( PL ) Regardless of the convictions involved , I feel it is unacceptable to criticise rulings by the European Court of Justice .
The latter is an independent and impartial institution , vital to the operation of the European Union .
We may not agree with the law and we are of course able to change it , but I find it hard to accept criticism of the Court .
The latter always rules on the basis of the legislation in force .
I would like to highlight two important points in relation to the issues we are today debating .
Firstly , the Court 's rulings do not have any impact on the freedom to enter into collective agreements .
Secondly , pursuant to the Court 's explanations , Member States may not introduce minimum standards in areas other than those mentioned in Directive 96 / 71 / EC on the posting of workers .
The Court clearly recognises the right to take collective action as a fundamental right that forms part of the general principles of Community legislation .
At the same time , together with other freedoms of the internal market , the principle of free movement of services constitutes an equally important basis for European integration .
As to the implications of this report , the rapporteur is calling for a review of the Directive on the posting of workers , claiming that the Court 's interpretation runs counter to the legislator 's intentions .
I disagree entirely with that view .
Madam President , every year , within the territory of the European Union , there are around one million people working whilst posted to a country other than the one where the head office of the company employing them is located .
During recent years there have only been a few instances of problems with interpretation of the provisions of the directive and of EU legislation regulating this area .
The European Court of Justice considered these few cases .
Broadly speaking , it found that the problem does not stem from the content of the directive , but rather from the failure of individual Member States to implement the directive correctly .
This indicates that EU legislation created to regulate posting of workers is sound and well drafted .
The only potential problem relates to its implementation in individual Member States .
Obviously , this does not mean that the legislation is as good as it could possibly be .
It should be noted , however , firstly , that the present directive does protect the fundamental rights of workers by providing minimum guarantees regarding remuneration and health and safety at work .
Secondly , the directive does not make it impossible to enter into more favourable arrangements than the minimum conditions of work through collective agreements .
I wish to highlight that fact .
At the same time , the directive achieves an excellent balance between the freedom to provide services and protection of the rights of workers posted to another country to provide services .
That is why , in the report by Mr Andersson , we agreed to ask the Commission to take another look at the directive .
We remain absolutely opposed to the view that this is a bad directive , and that there is an urgent need to implement radical changes in European legislation on this area .
on behalf of the PSE Group . - Madam President , I congratulate Mr Andersson on an excellent report .
I would like to start with a partial quote from paragraph 12 in the report .
It says ' believes that the intention of the legislator in the Posting of Workers Directive and Services Directive is incompatible with the interpretations given by the Court ' .
I agree with that .
I was a legislator on both of those directives and never expected that they - when looked at alongside the Treaty - would lead the Court to the conclusion that the economic freedoms take precedence over fundamental rights for workers .
When this sort of thing happens the legislator should act to restore legal certainty .
We are a co-legislator and this resolution makes it very clear what we think needs to be done .
But , Commissioner , we cannot discharge our duty as legislator until you exercise your right of initiative .
I co-chair and co-convene the trade union intergroup in this place .
This includes all of the main political groups and brings me into contact with many trade unionists - not only in Brussels and Strasbourg , but out in the regions - and I can tell you that there is widespread and spreading anxiety because of the imbalance thrown up by these judgments .
Commissioner , this is very serious in the approach to next year 's European elections .
If trade unionists out there decide that Europe is part of the problem , instead of part of the solution , that could be very damaging for all sections of this House and for the democratic process itself .
I am glad to hear you say that you think the Posting of Workers Directive needs improvement , because one of the things we want is a revision of that directive to at least make it clear how collective agreements can be used to put minimum terms and conditions in place and to say how collective action can be used to protect those rights .
So , Commissioner , please listen to this directly elected institution .
We do have our ears to the ground .
Use your right of initiative and show that you see the need to act .


on behalf of the ALDE Group . - ( IT ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I too would like to thank Mr Andersson for this initiative and the input of all the groups and rapporteurs to the final text adopted by the committee .
I believe that the position taken by the European Parliament is genuinely important .
Let me be clear , Parliament does not question or criticise the Court 's judgments per se ; they are always legitimate , but it seeks to respond to the questions of interpretation of the Posting of Workers Directive posed in part by these judgments .
It is wrong to suppose that this response hides misgivings about certain fundamental freedoms such as the freedom to provide cross-border services ; we intend to safeguard this freedom in full , just as we intend to safeguard the principle of healthy and transparent competition .
What is not acceptable is the kind of competition that bases itself on the advantage gained through ' dumping ' , competition drunk on the illusion that it is acceptable to infringe certain fundamental principles such as the free movement of enterprise , and non-discrimination .
No matter how much one quibbles over interpretation , this principle is based on a single truth : there should be no difference in treatment between workers , in terms of the country in which the services are provided , whether they are posted or mobile workers , and whatever their nationality .
The same rules , including the right to strike , should apply in respect of companies in the country of operation and those using posting arrangements .
We believe that any other model of Europe would be rejected and looked on with suspicion .
Free movement also applies to principles , and any derogation from this course would first and foremost damage Europe , never mind the interpretation of a particular directive .
on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - ( DE ) Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , equal treatment is a fundamental principle of the European Union .
Member States must be able to guarantee that this equal treatment is really being implemented on the ground .
The European Court of Justice ( ECJ ) has put us in a very difficult position here .
I cannot hide the fact - which of course is well known - that , in at least one case , the Commission provided a leg up .
The right to strike and the right to negotiate collective agreements cannot simply be called into question .
That is where we have to react .
The Court decision has evoked such a negative image of Europe that many people are now turning away from it : we cannot just stand by and let this happen .
Anyone wishing to promote greater mobility in Europe must ensure that there is equal treatment on the ground .
The ECJ has really done us a disservice on this , and in the process has harmed social Europe .
We as legislators must take action in the face of this mess , as the ECJ has also uncovered a weakness in the Posting of Workers Directive : it has shown that a problem arises when workers are service providers .
Workers must be treated as workers again , and that is why we need a revision of the Directive .
The principle of ' equal pay for equal work in the same place ' must be guaranteed .
It has emerged that , according to the ECJ 's interpretation , the Posting of Workers Directive no longer guarantees this .
We need this revision in order to restore Europe 's credibility , as we cannot conduct an election campaign without this project .
Otherwise , the problem will arise that the freedom offered by the internal market and the principle of equal treatment on the ground run into difficulties .
As Mr Cocilovo said , it is unacceptable for competition to be based not on quality but on social dumping .
We need to act .
I would make a renewed plea to this Chamber to adopt the Andersson report in its present form .
This is most imperative , as the report offers a highly specific strategy for action on the revision of the Posting of Workers Directive , too .
The principle of equal treatment is a principle of social Europe .
Restoring this social Europe is the reason we have been elected to this House , and this is why we must adopt the report .
on behalf of the UEN Group . - ( PL ) Madam President , I have noted with regret that all too often economic rights are given priority over fundamental rights and freedoms .
This was particularly true of the rulings by the European Court of Justice in the Laval , Viking , and other cases .
It is important to establish the correct order of importance of these rights and to take account of the fact that human beings are more important than money .
Rights relating to economic freedoms must not represent an obstacle to individuals ' right of association and to collective defence of their rights .
In particular , workers have the right to establish associations and to negotiate working conditions collectively .
The systems of collective negotiation and the collective agreements on working conditions arising out of the negotiation merit recognition and support .
After all , the consent of the responsible social partners ensures social harmony and gives the agreements entered into a chance of success .
The ILO 's conventions are an example of this approach .
The main challenge currently facing us in the area of collective agreements involves taking account of the fact that migrant workers , posted workers and workers employed in their home country must all be guaranteed the same rights .
Congratulations are due to the rapporteur .
on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group . - ( GA ) Madam President , over the years workers and trade unions have put their trust in the European Union to improve and protect their working conditions .
Workers across Europe have a right to decent work , to equality for all workers .
They have a right to organise , agitate and campaign to improve their lot at work .
They have a rightful expectation that the law should recognise and vindicate these rights .
The series of European Court of Justice rulings which the Andersson report purports to address represent an audacious attack on these basic rights .
These court rulings have given the green light to the wholesale exploitation of workers .
The court rulings are a reflection of the legal status quo , a reflection of the fact that , when workers ' rights collide with the rules of competition , it is the rule of competition which prevails .
The court rulings have given legal legitimacy to what is called the ' race to the bottom ' .
I am very disappointed with this report .
It deliberately avoids calling for the changes to the EU Treaties that we all know are needed to protect workers .
This call for Treaty change was deliberately and cynically removed from the first draft of this report , despite the overwhelming calls from the trade union movement across Europe for a social progress clause to be inserted in the Treaties .
The vulnerability of workers ' rights was one of the main reasons for the Irish vote against the Lisbon Treaty , even though EU leaders conveniently prefer to ignore this uncomfortable fact .
If any new treaty is to be acceptable to people across Europe , then it must ensure adequate protection for workers .
We parliamentarians now have an opportunity to insist that the Treaties include a binding social progress clause or protocol .
If the amendments to this effect do not pass today , then the European Parliament will have taken yet another step away from the people we purport to represent , and in this case I have no doubt that Irish workers will share my disappointment that the European Parliament has let them down .

on behalf of the IND / DEM Group . - ( DA ) Madam President , the developments we have seen in the labour market in the light of the very far-reaching Rüffert , Laval and Waxholm judgments are in stark contrast to the desire to introduce the flexicurity model as an economic model for Europe , as it seems to be completely forgotten that this very flexicurity model is based on a century-long tradition of the labour market having had the right to negotiate robust and independent agreements .
You cannot , then , introduce a model of flexibility in the European labour market and , at the same time , implement legislation or accept judgments that make it difficult for the trade unions to implement and maintain a system based on collective agreements .
If flexicurity is introduced and , at the same time , it is accepted that the EU 's internal market rules take precedence over wage negotiation and safety of the working environment , the end result will be to have cancelled out the labour struggles of a century .
The Andersson report is a bandage on the wound inflicted by the European Court of Justice on the results of one hundred years of labour struggles , and it does not go anywhere near far enough .
( IT ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , clearly this report is on the right track in considering labour before the economy and social rights before rights to free enterprise .
In essence it defends what is a general concept of social principles that are part of the European tradition .
It must be said , however , that this report does not touch on a fundamental issue of the day , and that is the extraordinarily high number of posted or foreign workers that are flooding national markets .
Therefore we need to pay attention to the ' dumping ' that is in effect occurring in countries such as Italy , where a huge number of people , for example Romanians , have overrun the labour market .
This would certainly amount to ' dumping ' , and has a positive impact on big business but a negative impact on local workers .
( SV ) Madam President , I would like to emphasise what is contained in the report and what is not .
I would like to thank the rapporteur .
He was sympathetic to the different views within the committee , and this means , Mr Špidla , that there is no requirement in report to tear up or redraft the Posting of Workers Directive .
To start with , the report contained a lot of condemnation and criticism of the Court , but this has been taken out .
This is what we are talking about now .
To emphasise this point I would like to quote in English :
I will quote the English text of paragraph 27 : ' Welcomes the Commission 's indication that it is now ready to re-examine the impact of the internal market on labour rights and collective bargaining ' ; and : ' Suggests that this re-examination should not exclude a partial review of the PWD ' - meaning ' not exclude ' .
( SV ) Madam President , this means that there is no need for an amendment .
However , a review by the Commission of how this works in practice in the various Member States is welcomed .
If this review gives grounds for amendments , these should not be ruled out .
I wanted to say this because the Posting of Workers Directive plays a very important role .
One million people have the opportunity to work in different countries .
This is also about equal treatment , about equal rights to work in all parts of the European Union , even if someone has a collective agreement from his or her home country .
This is what it is all about .
As long as people comply with the rules of the Posting of Workers Directive they have the right to work anywhere in the EU .
This was also the conclusion arrived at by the Court in the Laval case , for example .
Commissioner , Madam President , the criticism levelled at the Court is no longer included in the committee 's proposal and there is no requirement to tear up the Posting of Workers Directive .
It is important to remember this as we continue the debate .
( HU ) Thank you , Madam President .
The problem in today 's debate is illustrated by the Latin proverb : ' No wind is favourable to a sailor who does not know what port he is making for ' .
Unfortunately , neither do we see in today 's debate the port where everybody can happily cast anchor .
The regulation of the free movement of posted workers was left out of the 2006 compromise Services Directive , but the problem remains , as shown by the reaction to the Court 's rulings , and has now hit us over the head .
Similarly , the Treaty of Maastricht , the draft Constitutional Treaty and the faltering Treaty of Lisbon cannot be separated from the issues surrounding the free movement of services , that is to say from the recurring debate about which of the two deserves stronger protection : the four fundamental freedoms or social rights , even to the detriment of one another .
True , the EU rules grant a temporary competitive edge to service providers in new Member States .
On the other hand , the free circulation of goods and capital has created favourable market conditions for the more developed Member States .
I maintain that these are temporary differences , because the quality and conditions of the goods and money markets and the labour and service markets will necessarily grow closer to one another .
Therefore our first task is not to rewrite legislation and oppose court rulings but to implement the existing regulations in a consistent and effective manner .
Nowadays wars are not waged primarily with weapons , but financial crises like the current one today may wreak as much havoc as a war .
I hope that Parliament and all other EU decision-making forums , mindful of our post-WWII desire for lasting peace and cooperation , will strive for an equitable solution to ensure that we are members of a long-lasting , prosperous , mutually supportive and cohesive community .
Meanwhile , closed-minded protectionism should be left to fall by the wayside . Thank you , Madam President .
( SV ) Madam President , thank you , Mr Andersson , for an important report .
Much revolves around the Laval ruling , where the Swedish trade union went too far .
The report contains a lot of things that I do not like .
It has a particular tone when interpreting the European Court of Justice and in several places there are indications of what Mr Andersson originally wanted , that is to tear up the Posting of Workers Directive .
However , this is not stated in the revised report , as Mr Hökmark so rightly points out .
Now it is a question of not excluding a partial review of the Directive , which is more in line with the opinion of the Committee on Internal Market and Consumer Protection , for which I was responsible .
The vote will hopefully also establish that the Posting of Workers Directive does not need to be torn up .
Please see proposals 14 and 15 from the Group of the Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe .
Mr Andersson , it is wrong to believe that the Swedish model is best preserved by going via Brussels .
It is precisely the reverse .
If we go via Brussels then we may endanger the Swedish model based on responsible parties and we will get legislation and minimum wages in Sweden .
This cannot reasonably be in the interests of the Swedish trade unions .
( LV ) Thank you , Madam President and Mr Špidla .
Often , what lies behind seeming attempts to safeguard labour standards and to provide equal working conditions is in fact protectionism and a clear restriction on free and fair competition .
An individual 's pay ought to be dependent on his or her success and productivity at work , and not on what the social partners agree .
As a result of this , all the participants in the European Union internal market are currently losing out , since the EU 's competitiveness on world markets is waning .
We do not need to make amendments to the Posting of Workers Directive in order to apply it to the social welfare systems of a few Member States .
The European Union 's fundamental duty is to ensure that businesses from the old and the new Member States have equal rights of operation in the internal market in services .
If we do not like the decisions of the European Court of Justice , we change the law .
I am not sure whether this kind of thing makes the European Union more comprehensible to its citizens .
( DE ) Madam President , I should like to start by objecting to the spirit of something we heard a few minutes ago , namely that our labour market was being overrun by foreign workers .
Secondly , I should have liked to see a clearer , more unambiguous report by the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs .
Confidence in the social cohesion of the European Union can be achieved only if fundamental social rights are defined as primary European law .
We should send the Council , the Commission , the Member States and the European Court of Justice a stronger signal , and not content ourselves with just calling for a balance between fundamental rights and the freedoms of movement of the internal market .
This will not effect change .
Like liberties , fundamental social rights are human rights , and must not be curtailed as a result of internal market freedoms of movement .
The important points here are that we must defend and improve the European social model and that it is high time we introduced a social progress clause as a binding protocol to the existing EU Treaties .
It is time that the Posting of Workers Directive was amended such as to prevent requirements on wages and on minimum standards being limited to minimum requirements .

( SV ) Madam President , one of Mr Andersson 's foremost conclusions is that the labour market should be safeguarded by amending the European Posting of Workers Directive .
As far as Sweden is concerned , the best solution would instead be for it to be clearly laid down in the EU Treaty that matters relating to the labour market should be decided at national level .
If we have learnt anything from the Laval ruling it should be that our labour market should not be controlled by meddlesome EU legislation .
The June List advocates Swedish exemption from EU labour law .
It would be interesting to hear what Mr Andersson thinks of this suggestion .
Is EU legislation always the way forward ?
The Laval ruling is the result of the EU Social Democrats and right of centre politicians having said ' yes ' to amendments to the EU Treaty , thereby giving the EU and European Court of Justice even more power over labour market policy .
We will , of course , be voting against Mr Andersson 's homage to the Treaty of Lisbon .
Madam President , the PPE-DE Group did not support Jan Andersson 's report as originally drafted .
However , as the result of good work by our shadow , working with other shadows , to quite considerably rewrite the report , we were comfortable with supporting it in committee .
Indeed , our group will also be proposing to support it today in its current form .
Having said that , there are certain amendments which we are also keen to see supported .
Hopefully , he will give consideration to that on his side .
I will just pick up on one very important point .
Stephen Hughes referred to the fact - which I am sure is true - that there is widespread anxiety amongst trade unions regarding possible limitations on the right to strike .
I would not argue with that , but I hope he would not argue with me when I say that there is widespread anxiety amongst workers about potential limitations upon the right to work .
I have not heard enough - either in this debate or in the committee - about that important right .
Of course the right to strike is a fundamental right : that is not in dispute .
But the right to work - the freedom to work - is also a very important right , and that is something that , on this side of the House , we would like to see underlined .
Madam President , the internal market is not an end in itself .
It is an instrument for the improvement of living and working conditions for everyone , and therefore weaknesses in the Posting of Workers Directive which can be used to facilitate a race to the bottom must be removed as a matter of urgency .
The Socialist Group has managed to construct an overwhelming majority of members in the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs in support of such reforms .
The only groups standing aside from this consensus are the far right and the far left and they prefer to play party politics rather than seek to find a political solution to the problems .
We in this Parliament must deliver a clear demand to the Commission and the Member State governments that decent pay and working conditions cannot be sacrificed on the altar of the single market .
Europe can only be successfully competitive on the basis of high-quality services and goods , not on the basis of driving down standards of living .
I welcome the Commission 's indications today that it is now ready to re-examine the Posting of Workers Directive , that it is in need of reform , but the question , Commissioner , is when ?
When will you bring forward an initiative to this House clearly outlining what amendments you are proposing to the Posting of Workers Directive ?
There is clearly a need to safeguard and to strengthen equal treatment and equal pay for equal work in the same workplace , as already laid down in Article 39 ( 12 ) of the European Community Treaty .
The freedom to provide services or the freedom of establishment , the nationality of the employer , of employees or of posted workers cannot serve as a justification for inequalities concerning working conditions , pay or the exercise of fundamental rights such as the workers ' right to take collective action .
( DA ) Madam President , the point I want to make is , stop attacking the European Court of Justice and the Posting of Workers Directive .
It is the Member States that should make more effort .
Following the Laval judgment , we in Denmark are now implementing a change to the law , agreed with both sides of industry .
Nine lines of legislative text ensure that trade unions can take industrial action to safeguard working conditions that are the norm in the particular sphere concerned .
The Swedes are also apparently looking into how in practice to implement the Posting of Workers Directive .
We must not change the directive .
We must have better information so that employees are aware of their rights , and employers of their obligations .
What is needed is better implementation of the directive in practice .
- ( PL ) Madam President , in a few months ' time we shall once again turn to the citizens of the European Union and ask them to choose their representatives at the European Parliament .
Once again , the citizens will not understand why they are being called on to do so , or what purpose this Parliament serves .
Once again , therefore , the turnout at the elections will be low .
Today 's debate on the Posting of Workers Directive and the ruling by the European Court of Justice demonstrates that one of the purposes the European Parliament serves is to protect the citizens against certain policies advocated by their own governments .
These policies can be short-sighted and biased .
In this case they are also unduly liberal .
Currently , the European Parliament and the European Court of Justice are giving priority to defending labour rights over defending the freedom of entrepreneurship .
It is impossible to oppose the principle of equal treatment for workers across the entire Union .
We all have to pay the same prices in the shops and we call for equal pay for equal work across the entire Union .
( DE ) Madam President , one of the accomplishments of the European Parliament that has attracted the most attention is the amendment of the ' Bolkestein Directive ' by replacing the country of origin principle with the principle of freedom to provide services .
Employees need fair working conditions , and companies , especially SMEs , need protection from the cut-price competition threatening their survival .
Let us take care that the result is assured in the long term .
As this debate has just revealed , the recent judicial rulings in the Viking , Laval and Rüffert cases cast doubt on this .
Is it true that the European Court of Justice deems freedom to provide services more important than the protection of workers ?
Does it consider the right to strike subordinate to the right to freedom of movement ?
Whilst it is acceptable to question individual judgments , it is equally unacceptable to call into question the independence or legitimacy of the institution .
Obtaining clarification does not require modification of the Posting of Workers Directive but instead consistent implementation in the Member States .
This is the necessary balance between safeguarding freedom of movement and protecting workers .
The principle of ' equal pay for equal work in the same place ' must not be weakened .
Working conditions exceeding the minimum level do not hinder competition , and collective bargaining must on no account be curtailed .
We need to say a clear ' no ' to any kind of social dumping and a clear ' no ' to attempts to create ' letterbox companies ' intended to avoid minimum standards for pay and working conditions .
Social principles must not be subordinated to economic freedoms .
Only when there is fair play in the European Union can we obtain the urgently needed endorsement by companies and SMEs of the concept of the social market economy .
- ( CS ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , one of the valued characteristics of this parliament is its success in achieving consistent positions .
I do not agree with the undermining of the Posting of Workers Directive .
On the contrary , what is required is to adhere to it in full .
The judgments from the Court of Justice provide a clear direction .
The report on collective agreements strikes a blow at these judgments and also at the compromise reached in the debate on the Services Directive in the European Parliament .
I cannot support this .
Dumping works through illegal employment practices and circumvention of the directive .
I would therefore ask , ladies and gentlemen , that you support our amendment proposals , which refer to the current legislation .
Entrepreneurs have a right to provide services across borders under the terms and conditions of the current directive and I agree that there is a need to ensure that people , in other words employees , are generally aware of this .
( HU ) The bogeyman of the Polish plumber has now been replaced by the menacing shadow of the Latvian construction worker .
The re-emerging unseemly debate has caused a great deal of harm to the entire EU .
Some people are sounding the alarm bell about social dumping , an unlimited invasion by workers of new Member States .
This is factually untrue .
Let us be realistic .
Let us not threaten voters with such talk .
The twelve new Member States have almost no comparative edge .
One of these advantages , relatively cheaper labour , will only last only a few years .
Fortunately , salaries are rising in our countries too .
I appeal to you that when you talk about equal treatment - this is another aspect of this matter - , let there be equal treatment for new and old members alike .
If we limit the potential inherent in the competition within the internal market , if we restrict freedom of enterprise , this will damage the entire EU .
The social aspect , however , is extremely important for me too . Thank you .
Madam President , in the recent debate on the Lisbon Treaty in Ireland , the issues thrown up by the Laval and Viking cases were centre-stage in many of the debates and contributed to real uncertainty and unease .
I have heard many of my colleagues here this morning re-echo these sentiments , and that is why I am pleased with the efforts of Parliament here this morning .
I am also reassured by the words of the Commissioner when he says that the Commission agrees with Parliament that the Posting of Workers Directive needs to be improved and properly transposed .
The view of Parliament is quite clear .
In paragraph 33 it reaffirms that fundamental social rights are not subordinate to economic rights in a hierarchy of fundamental freedoms , and later in the report it emphasises that the freedom to provide services does not contradict and is not in any way superior to the fundamental right to strike .
These statements are crystal clear and indicate where Parliament stands , and we now look to the Commission to take the baton and run with it .
I started with Lisbon and I will finish with it : ratification of the Charter of Fundamental Rights and the inclusion of the social clause in the Lisbon Treaty would have improved the situation of workers across the EU .
( GA ) Madam President , trade unions are losing their rights to negotiate better pay and conditions for their members .
Governments are prevented from legislating to improve the lives of workers .
I agree with my colleagues here today , that a binding social progress clause inserted in the EU Treaties is the minimum requirement needed to ensure that this does not happen .
Yet , Mr Andersson 's report does not go to the heart of the matter .
It could be strengthened by several amendments .
The European Court of Justice rules in accordance with the Treaties .
As long as the Treaties allow for restrictions on workers ' rights and the lowering of pay and conditions , the Court of Justice cannot rule otherwise .
( IT ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I welcome the Andersson report because it focuses on principles by which the internal market should be governed with regard to the balance between the free movement of services and the inalienable rights of workers .
If in practice the issues will be tackled at national level , here on the other hand we need to intervene to combat the negative social and political effects of the free movement of workers .
We must therefore review the Posting of Workers Directive , summarise the social clauses of the Monti and Services Directives and approve the Directive on temporary workers , to whom the same rules should apply as for permanent workers .
Lastly , I support the urgency of taking appropriate measures to combat ' letterbox companies ' created to provide services outside of their State of establishment , circumventing the applicable rules on pay and working conditions in the State in which they operate .
In conclusion , with a few exceptions , I am in favour of the report .
Madam President , as others have said , the Laval judgment and others did cause some controversy during the Lisbon Treaty debate in Ireland and were used and abused in that regard .
This report deals primarily with the principles of the internal market , but it calls for equal treatment and equal pay for equal work , and that has to be our guiding principle here today .
Social dumping is something of huge concern , but could I just suggest that we will have a strange and unique situation in Europe , where countries like Ireland that had an inflow of workers may yet see that situation change ?
It is in all our interests that our workers , wherever they are in the European Union , have good and equal rights .
Could I also suggest that Europe has a much greater problem staring it in the face : the movement of entire businesses and companies outside the European Union , obviously taking the work and the economics of their business outside our borders , while we simply import the results ?
That is an issue we have to tackle .
( EL ) Madam President , I consider the Andersson report to be a brave move on the part of the European Parliament , because what is at stake is a balance between legal principles and political perceptions which bears directly on the lives not just of the workers , but of all citizens .
It is no accident that the cases which we are debating crystallised the objections both of legal circles- believe me , I am a lawyer and I know - and all the citizens of the European Union who feel that the European Union does not understand them .
As we have heard , they were one of the prime reasons why the people of Ireland said ' no ' to the Treaty of Lisbon .
And yet , strange but true , it is precisely the Treaty of Lisbon that would most probably be a solution in this case , because it would put the interpretation of the corresponding provisions in a different light .
The social clause and the special clauses in the Charter of Fundamental Rights would most probably force the Court to take a different view .
( DA ) Madam President , my Danish fellow Member from the Group of the Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe said earlier that the problem we faced following the Waxholm ruling had been solved in Denmark .
That is something I have to say is not true .
People may think they have solved the problem , but any solution is actually due to a decision by the European Court of Justice .
That is precisely the problem , of course : the fact that the issue of whether people are entitled to strike in various Member States is now decided by the European Court of Justice .
That is why we should have re-designed the treaty : to have it specifically laid down that such a state of affairs cannot be right .
Mr Andersson 's report does not specify that , unfortunately .
It contains some constructive passages , but has nothing to say about this particular issue .
What is also missing from it is a clear requirement that the Posting of Workers Directive should be changed , and I would therefore urge you to vote in favour of those amendments that clarify these matters so that we might obtain a clear policy from the European Parliament .
( DE ) Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , allow me to say a few more words on the subject .
Freedom of movement is one of the great achievements of the European Union .
We must also make clear , however - and certain countries with lower standards will soon understand this , as their standards will be raised - that freedom of movement must not result in a kind of competition becoming the norm that involves dispensing with the social standards that have evolved .
Europe must not stand for the abolition of social and workers ' rights that have been long fought for .
For this reason , we should make clear that this has never been our policy , and that it is one that should never be implemented .
If a job is done in one country , the same pay should be received for the same work .
There must be no class society , with foreign workers working for less money .
This is unfair on both sides ; and that is why we should make this clear .
- ( FR ) Madam President , I should like to begin by commending the work of our colleague , Mr Andersson .
What exactly does the European Union want , though ?
A single market abandoned to unbridled competition that quashes collective rights as a whole , or a regulated single market that enables the citizens to carry out decent work throughout Europe ?
The messages from the European Court of Justice , often those from the Commission , and at times those from the Council Presidency , are neither clear nor always consistent .
A society is only worth , and only survives by , the contract with which it provides itself .
Deregulation , the ' every man for himself ' approach , leads to even more deregulation and , ultimately , to the explosion of the system .
This is not what we want .
Yes , indeed , we want an internal market , but a market that serves to improve the living and working conditions of our fellow citizens .
The Treaty of Lisbon sets out a number of principles , including the right to negotiate collective agreements .
Let us ensure that this principle is respected by the European Union and by all the Member States .
( PT ) Madam President , it is not enough to criticise the unacceptable positions adopted in the rulings of the Court of Justice of the European Communities , which represent a serious attack on the most fundamental rights of workers .
We must go much further and comprehensively amend the European Treaties to prevent such situations happening again .
The rejections in the referenda of the so-called European Constitution and the draft Treaty of Lisbon are clear proof of popular discontent with this European Union which devalues workers and fails to respect their dignity .
I regret the fact that this report does not reach the same conclusions , although it does criticise the positions adopted in the judgments of the Court of Justice , in defence of workers ' rights .
However , this is not enough .
Ladies and gentlemen , I would like to thank the rapporteur and yourselves for the debate which has now begun , as it is a debate on an exceptionally sensitive and profound topic .
I think that the debate witnessed a whole range of views which might provoke vigorous discussion , as well as a whole range of views expressed in opposition .
Apart from anything else this underscores the significance and challenging nature of this debate .
I would like to stress a few of the fundamental ideas .
To start with , the rulings from the court in Luxembourg has not weakened or attacked fundamental rights .
There is simply no truth in this .
I would also like to state that the court in Luxembourg , apart from anything else , was the first to declare through its jurisprudence , that the right to strike was a fundamental right .
This had never previously been formulated in jurisprudence or in our legal system .
I would also like to respond to the notion often voiced in the debate that the question of posted workers is a matter which divides the old Member States from the new ones .
I can report that the country which posts the highest number of workers is the Federal Republic of Germany .
The country posting the second highest number of workers is Poland , the third is Belgium and the fourth is Portugal .
The idea that posting involves a movement from the East to the West , from the new to the old , is also not correct .
Equally incorrect is the idea that posting workers implicitly involves social dumping .
I would like to state that it is a basic policy of the Commission to reject and oppose actively any form of dumping , and that includes social dumping .
It is also a policy of the Commission to safeguard the social standards that we have achieved and not in any way to undermine them under any circumstances whatsoever .
I would also like to state that in the debate which was opened at the workshop , most of the Member States to which the rulings in the case of Laval , Rüffert applied did not take the view that we should amend the directive .
A clear majority of them saw a solution within the framework of applying national law and a number of them are well on their way in this process .
I would like to mention Denmark and Luxembourg , and I would also like to state that , according to information I have received from Sweden , a very important decision is due to be taken there within about fifteen days , a decision which has been discussed in great depth and detail by the social partners and the government .
I would also like to state , although this is a detail , that the so-called firms with PO box addresses are not a manifestation of the posting of workers or of freedom of movement .
You may find a few hundred examples of these within the framework of the internal market of individual states and it is in my view an open question .
Another very significant matter which I would like to stress is that the judgments handed down so far by the court in Luxembourg are responses to an earlier issue .
It rests with the national courts to make definitive rulings as this lies within the authority of the national courts .
Ladies and gentlemen , I feel it is absolutely necessary to stress that this is a very fundamental issue .
The Commission is following it from the standpoints that we have been talking about and is prepared to take any necessary measures to resolve the situation and to find a corresponding consensus , because to reiterate once again , it has not been clear even in this debate where the dividing line lies .
There is much work still to be done but allow me to state and to emphasise that the importance of the social partners in this area is vital .
rapporteur . - ( SV ) Madam President , I should like to make a few short comments :
There is a difference between the Court 's tasks and us as legislators .
The Court has had its say .
As legislators we must act now if we find that the Court has not interpreted the legislation as we would wish .
In the report , we say that we , and the Commission , should take action .
We should not exclude amendments to the Posting of Workers Directive , which is something that we also point out .
There is no conflict between freedom of movement and good social conditions .
Quite the contrary .
A few words about the amendments proposed by the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats .
Unfortunately , they contain numerous contradictions where they seek compromises .
On the one hand , they criticise one-sided opinions from the Council and , on the other , they welcome opinions .
There are many contradictions in their amendments .
I say ' no ' to exemptions for certain special countries , because these are European problems that we should solve together .
Different labour markets should operate side by side .
We say ' yes ' to the new Treaty , as the problems with the judgments occurred under the old Treaty .
I am not saying ' no ' to measures at national level .
Such measures are necessary in Sweden and Germany , for example , but we also need measures at European level .
Finally , I would like to say that it is now up to the Commission to act .
If the Commission does not listen to Parliament and in particular to what people in Ireland , Germany , Sweden and other Member States are saying , the European project will suffer greatly .
This is one of the most important issues for the citizens of Europe .
Freedom of movement - yes , but good social conditions and no social dumping .
We must work to achieve this , so Parliament must be listened to .
( Applause )
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place on Wednesday , 21 October 2008 .
Written Statements ( Rule 142 )
in writing . - ( DA ) Mobility in the European labour market must be increased .
There must therefore be more focus on equal treatment and non-discrimination .
It is only right that anyone moving from one country to another for a job should work under the conditions applicable in their new country .
Countries should look at the way they implement the Posting of Workers Directive so that it gives rise to greater clarity .
European solutions are also required , however .
The right to strike must not be subject to the rules governing the internal market .
The Posting of Workers Directive must be adjusted to the original intentions behind it .
It needs to be possible for countries to create better conditions for posted workers than the minimum requirements .
In that way we shall increase mobility and the equal treatment of employees , as well as collective agreements including the right to take collective industrial action .
in writing . - The Andersson report is a useful contribution to this controversial and highly legally complex debate .
In particular , its recommendation that EU countries should properly enforce the Posted Workers Directive , and the demand that the Commission draft legislative proposals to deal with the legal loopholes thrown up by the judgments and prevent any conflicting interpretation of the law , are welcome .
We have to ensure that the Posted Workers Directive does not allow social dumping and for collective agreements to be undermined by workers from other EU countries undercutting wages and working conditions in the host country .
We should not blame the Court , which merely clarifies what the law says - after all , the court has also given numerous favourable judgments from a social perspective - rather , we should focus our attention on rectifying the underlying legal situation .
The Commission itself stated in April this year that the fundamental right to strike and to join a trade union does not override the right to provide services .
It is vital that this report does not mark the end of the debate .
If necessary , we should use our powers to veto the new Commission if they do not include the necessary legislative proposals in their first work programme .
in writing . - ( RO ) I would like to make a clarification .
Workers from the eastern part of the European Union are not engaged in and do not want social dumping .
They are not the ones who want to sell themselves cheaply .
Unfortunately , the costs of revamping and redeveloping the workforce are comparable in both the east and west .
Some costs are even higher in Romania than in other areas , but the bills need to be paid here too .
Responsibility for creating this precarious situation on the labour market and for making working conditions worse in the European Union does not lie with the workers , but with those exerting the maximum pressure possible in order to abolish the existing guarantees under labour law , with a single objective in mind : to maximise profits by any means , including through sacrificing all the values and principles which we regard as the shared benefits gained by Europe 's societies .
It is our duty in this case to protect the entitlement of workers from Eastern Europe to enjoy a fundamental right : equal pay for equal work .
Socialists and trade-unions , primarily , need to avoid creating a false , artificial division within the group of those who can achieve these rights only if they maintain solidarity .
They do not have any other clout apart from solidarity .
in writing . - ( ET ) Workers ' freedom of movement is one of the four freedoms of the internal market .
If we wish Europe to become integrated more rapidly , it is essential that we assuage Western European workers ' fears of Eastern European workers , without at the same time closing labour markets .
Unfortunately , the desire of several Western European trade union organisations to close markets to the new Member States once again will not help unite Europe .
This is an economically incompetent path that misinforms workers , creates mistrust and is not in the spirit of international solidarity .
The movement of labour is one solution with which to overcome labour shortages in certain sectors .
There are areas where bus drivers are in great demand and areas where there is a shortage of qualified doctors .
Such movement must not be stopped .
Since equal treatment is one of the fundamental principles of the European Union the free movement of workers should take place on equal terms .
The widespread principle that foreign workers are paid less than the citizens of the host country is not in accordance with that principle .
I agree with the principle highlighted in the report - equal treatment and equal pay for equal work .
In sending workers within the European Union it is necessary that at least the minimum wage be guaranteed .
The mechanisms for the protection of workers differ historically from one part of Europe to another .
It is , however , time that we also change practices in this area .
If workers now only defend their national distinctiveness they have voluntarily surrendered .
It is very difficult to explain the impossibility of change to people from new Member States , considering that Estonia , for instance , was able to implement the entire acquis communautaire in less than six years .
The protection of workers is a sufficiently noble objective , and we should make an effort to achieve consensus .
in writing . - ( ET ) The spontaneous report under discussion is unbalanced and has protectionist leanings .
No one questions the right to strike , but this must not be allowed to go so far as to endanger the competitiveness of the service providers .
Today we have discussed specific rulings of the European Court of Justice , in particular the Laval , Rüffert and Viking Line cases .
I would like to draw attention to the fact that none of the above-mentioned judgments involve the content of any collective agreements that could be signed in Member States or the right to conclude such agreements .
The right to take collective measures belongs to the scope of regulation of the Treaty Establishing the European Community , and must therefore be justified by significant public interest and be proportional .
European Council meeting ( 15-16 October 2008 ) ( debate )
The next item is the European Council report and the Commission statement on the European Council meeting ( 15-16 October 2008 ) .


Mr President-in-Office of the Council , Mr Sarkozy , Mr President of the European Commission , Mr Barroso , over the last few weeks we have endured some extremely difficult moments in which the European Union , under your Presidency , has demonstrated its ability to take action .
Had the countries of Europe not found a common solution , had there not been an agreement between the European partners , and had there not been the euro , it is highly likely that we would have found ourselves in a disastrous situation today .
The Eurogroup proposals of ten days ago , the European Council 's decisions of last Wednesday and the commitments entered into this weekend at the Camp David Summit are a series of successes that reflect a genuine coordination of actions and efforts aimed at carrying out the reforms needed to respond effectively to the problems of the global economy .
However , the governments were not the only ones to respond to the crisis .
The European Council , under your leadership , working side by side with the European Commission and with the European Parliament , has ensured that the European Union played a crucial role regarding the well-being of all our citizens , to whom we are all responsible .
It has often been in times of crisis that the European Union has demonstrated its true strength , thanks to you , Mr Sarkozy , and thanks to the President of the Commission , Mr Barroso .
European action has been joint action .
That is why , before opening this morning 's debate , I should like to congratulate you , Mr President-in-Office of the Council and Mr President of the Commission .
President of the Commission . - ( FR ) Mr President , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , ladies and gentlemen , last week 's European Council was the climax of work of unprecedented intensity to tackle the economic crisis in Europe .
It ruled out the risk of measures taken on an ad hoc , uncoordinated basis , in order to arrive at a common position aimed at restoring the stability of Europe 's financial system .
I should like to pay tribute to President Sarkozy , whose dynamism and invaluable determination made it possible to give the necessary impetus to the action of the 27 around common objectives and principles .
I am also proud of the contribution made by the Commission , which - as President Sarkozy said - has always worked hand in hand with the French Presidency and , furthermore , has always stressed that only a European response could have an impact at the required level .
This impetus that we observed at the European Council and that has moreover enabled us to adopt a very important pact on immigration , must also guide us when it comes to managing the European agenda ahead of the European Council in December .
We need , in particular , to develop a road map for the Treaty of Lisbon in order to prepare properly for the 2009 elections .
With regard to the ' energy and climate change ' package , a very big effort will be required to sign an agreement by the end of the year .
The Commission will work closely with the Presidency to find solutions that address the concerns of all the Member States .
We are counting on Parliament 's continued support to reach an agreement .
However , I should like to focus my speech today on what has to be our immediate , primary concern : the European economy .
We need to work on three things : firstly , undertaking immediate actions at European level to overcome the financial crisis ; secondly , reforming the international financial system ; and thirdly , strengthening what is referred to as ' the real economy ' in order to minimise the consequences of the financial crisis and to create the conditions for a resurgence of growth and employment .
I truly believe that Europe is in a position , through the choices it makes , to make its presence felt in the international response to the crisis .
The Camp David Summit last weekend gave a strong indication of what Europe is capable of achieving when it is united .
Let us be clear , this was not the obvious outcome .
A month or two ago , it was impossible to have the US President alongside us .
Now , however , we have succeeded in having our US partners alongside us , and I believe that we have created the conditions for a fundamental reform of the global financial system .
We are indeed living in an unprecedented time , one that requires a similarly unprecedented level of coordination .
For this international response we require a genuinely European response .
Europe must shape the international response to international problems .
The rule of globalisation is precisely respect for the principle of openness and interdependence .
Instead of suffering globalisation , Europe must shape it with its values , and also protect its interests .
I am pleased and proud to have observed that , during this crisis , Europe has demonstrated that it was equal to these challenges .
Mr President , let me give you some more detail about our response to this crisis .
Our first priority was to play our part , as the Commission , in the rescue of financial institutions in difficulty .
In doing this we were able to count on the excellent cooperation we have had with Member States and with the ECB .
Our next step was to come forward with a package of precise , targeted measures to address specific shortcomings on capital requirements , deposit guarantees or accountancy rules .
Speed has been essential , and we have responded by accelerating our work .
In the same vein , I was grateful for the rapidity with which this Parliament was able to conclude its consideration of the changes in accountancy rules .
I know that you fully appreciate that the other proposals on the table deserve the same urgency .
We also have to look at what other proposals will be needed to update and fill in the gaps of today 's regulatory regime .
We will have the credit rating agencies proposal next month .
We will come with an initiative on executive pay , based on a review of our 2004 recommendation .
We will look at regulating derivatives .
We will work constructively with the European Parliament on the follow-up to your recent resolutions and will look at the implications for the 2009 Commission work programme .
No area of financial markets will be absent from this review .
One important input for future action will be the results of the high-level group I have set up under Jacques de Larosière to look at cross-border financial supervision in Europe .
I am happy to announce to you today the composition of this group .
It will be composed of Leszek Balcerowicz , Otmar Issing , Rainer Masera , Callum McCarthy , Lars Nyberg , José Pérez Fernández and Ono Ruding .
I am asking this group to present first results in time for the spring European Council , and I will be discussing this afternoon with your Conference of Presidents how to make sure that Parliament is plugged into this work .
But as I said earlier , we will also have to promote the reform of the global financial system .
The last months have shown that the Bretton Woods institutions have not kept up with the pace of integration of global financial markets .
European Union-United States cooperation will be essential : as you know , the European Union and the United States account for almost 80 % of wholesale financial markets .
This cooperation is important not only to get us out of this crisis but , even more , to avoid another one .
In this respect , the discussions President Sarkozy and I had with President Bush last weekend were a major step forward .
But it is not enough .
We have to get other major players on board .
I will be going to China later this week where , together with President Sarkozy , I will raise this issue with the Chinese President and Prime Minister and with other Asian partners at the ASEAN Summit .
We need a critical mass of players involved .
The goal should be to devise a system of global financial governance adapted to the challenges of the 21st century in terms of efficiency , transparency and representation .
Europe is leading the way .
This is something we can collectively be proud of , and I want to work with this Parliament to make a forceful European contribution to this international debate .
But there is also what we usually call the real economy , and we all know that , day by day , the evidence that we are facing a serious economic slowdown is building .
The impact is being felt on jobs , household incomes and on the order books of businesses , large and small .
One thing must be clear : there is no national road out of this crisis - our economies are too intertwined .
We will swim or sink together .
We must not give in to the siren calls for protection ; we must not turn our backs on globalisation or put our single market at risk .
This will remain the motor of growth in the European Union .
Neither can we go on with business as usual .
Europe 's economy needs a boost to recover , to continue to grow , to provide employment .
First , inside Europe .
We will have to redouble our efforts to address long-term issues and to be in better shape to tackle the challenges ahead , making Europe a knowledge economy , investing more in research and development and innovation .
The revised Stability and Growth Pact leaves sufficient flexibility for Member States ' budget policies to react to the current exceptional circumstances and to promote growth and jobs .
But we also need to look beyond our borders .
Trade has been key to European growth over recent years .
Now is the time to be proactive about market access , to make the case that trade barriers will help nobody .
I hope we have all learned the lesson that protectionism only makes recovery harder .
European industry needs support .
SMEs need to be free to concentrate on their markets .
That is why , for example , we recently proposed that our smallest business should be exempt from excessive burdens in terms of accounting rules and statistical reporting .
Large manufacturing needs help , too .
I want to be sure that we are using European programmes like our competitiveness and innovation programme and the research framework programme to best effect .
We need to reinforce the synergies between our Lisbon Strategy for growth and jobs and our climate and energy agenda .
Promoting investment in low-carbon technologies and energy efficiency measures will , at the same time , support our competitiveness , our energy security and our climate change agenda .
The European Investment Bank will be a valuable partner in this endeavour .
Europe 's citizens need support , too , especially the more vulnerable .
It is critically important that , at a time of rising unemployment , we maintain investment in training , we develop new skills and prepare people to take advantage when opportunities return .
Advancing on our Social Agenda for Access Opportunities and Solidarity is more important than ever .
We shall review the role the Globalisation Adjustment Fund can play .
In all these areas we need to be intelligent about how we act .
We need to get the most out of every step we take .
Smart action means hitting two targets with one shot .
For instance , helping the construction industry , yes , but doing this by promoting an energy-efficient housing stock .
Using state aid where necessary , yes , but in line with the guidelines directing state aid towards environmental support and research and development .
Helping key industries like cars - why not ? - but preparing them for tomorrow 's markets of clean cars .
Smart support : this is what our industry needs , and not protectionism .
This I want to underline very clearly .
Our Lisbon Strategy packaged in December will be the opportunity to bring these different strands together .
There is no magic bullet to turn around the European Union economy .
What we have to do is take every option , explore every potential way in which European Union policy can help Member States to seize every opportunity to put Europe on the road to growth .
That is our task in the coming weeks .
That is what we are preparing , and this is a task I want to tackle together with the European Parliament .
We are indeed living at a historic time , the kind of occasion where the crisis calls into question all certainties , and minds are more open to change .
These are very special moments , and they do not happen every day .
We have to understand that it is really one of those moments where there is some higher plasticity and then , when we can make a real change , these are moments when we know that today 's decisions will have a decisive impact on tomorrow 's reality .
Change is what we need now . Change not to go back to the solutions of the past , but to find the solutions of the future , the solutions of the 21st century of the globalised world .
Today , Europe can propose the principles and rules that will shape a new global order .
We have an opportunity to come forward with proposals based on European values , based on open societies and open economies .
As I said this weekend at Camp David , open societies need the rule of law and democracy .
Open economies also need rules - the rules of transparency , sensible regulation and sensible supervision .
Europe shows its true colours in times of crisis .
In Georgia , Europe was able to stop a war .
In the financial crisis , Europe is leading the way towards a global solution .
In the next few weeks we must show that we are able to continue to lead in the fight against climate change and to build an energy policy for the future , because we owe it to our citizens , our economies and our partners around the world , as well as to future generations of Europeans .
( Applause )
Mr President , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , Mr President of the Commission , ladies and gentlemen , twice this summer Europe and the world have faced major crises .
Twice , Europe has shown that , with political will and by being united , it can not only adopt a strong and swift position but also influence and lead its partners in the world , for example in Georgia .
On behalf of my group , I should like to pay tribute in this House to the exemplary work of the French Presidency and of its President , Mr Sarkozy , during these two major crises .
He has not taken any holiday , he has been at work since the start of his Presidency .
The current Presidency of the Union is doing Europe and Europeans a great service .
It is demonstrating that Europe can have a presence on the international stage ...
( Whispering )
Mr President , I should like it all the same if people listened to me .
It is demonstrating that Europe deserves to be built and to be experienced .
Furthermore , during the last European Council the guidelines of the euro zone countries were unanimously confirmed - whether in terms of the measures to introduce regulation mechanisms , monitoring mechanisms or ethical rules putting a stop to golden parachutes .
All this is along the right lines .
Of course , the financial crisis is not behind us , but it is in crisis situations that we can and must adopt rules for the future .
I hear it said , here and there , that we are witnessing the collapse of capitalism , that it is all the fault of the free market .
The reality is that , although the free market has proven itself , it needs to be accompanied by rules - and , clearly , not enough of these rules have existed , or they have not been applied firmly enough .
It is on this and on I know not what ideological challenge that we must work , with the help of the central banks , and with the entire international community .
Still on this subject , I welcome the Presidency 's initiative to gather together our partners for the purposes of defining a new global economic and financial order .
What we need to guarantee is that small savers do not see their efforts destroyed overnight .
What we need to ensure is that entrepreneurs , and small and medium-sized enterprises in particular , can continue to finance their activities - a source of employment and growth - at reasonable rates .
Our group will support any measures aimed at safeguarding the European solidarity and social market economy model , the great value of which we fully appreciate in times of crisis .
With regard to the Treaty of Lisbon , I would call once again on those Member States that have not yet ratified it do so as quickly as possible , so that we have an overall idea of the final state of ratification .
If we ask this , it is because we see the difficulty , for Europe , in operating effectively , with the unanimity rule and without a stable presidency .
We hope that the December European Council will decide on a road map and on a realistic , but also demanding , timetable to end the crisis .
I would also add that , were the Treaty of Nice to continue to apply in the coming months , it should apply as much to the European Parliament as it does to the European Commission .
I therefore call on everyone in this House to assume his or her responsibilities .
The Commission , which will be installed in autumn 2009 and whose president Parliament will invest on 15 July , will comprise fewer commissioners than Member States .
There is that , and there is also the Treaty of Nice , and a Parliament with fewer seats and fewer powers , and a Commission with fewer commissioners .
The European Council has adopted the European Pact on Immigration .
That is a great success , but many new and different challenges await us : climate , energy , defence , to name but a few .
It is only by working on the basis of our social model and by consolidating our social market economy that we will be able to provide credible and sustainable responses for our generations .
Mr Sarkozy , I call for progress to be made in our work .
We are going to do our utmost within Parliament to ensure that , by the end of the year , we will have a credible vision here too , for the world , and for the future of our children and grandchildren .
on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , at the weekend , we saw what was indeed a historic image .
We saw the worst President of the United States in living memory flanked by an effective President of the European Union and a President of the European Commission who is on course to see reason on the subject of European internal market policy .
This was indeed a historic moment , and indeed a great opportunity for Europe to take its rightful place in international politics .
The policies of the Bush administration , of the total deregulation of world markets , of complete laissez faire , where anyone can take any measure whatsoever anywhere , is now bankrupt , and Europe has the opportunity to fill the resulting vacuum with a new , more social , economic order in Europe and worldwide .
This is the task that lies ahead of us , and it is indeed a historic one .
( Applause )
Mr Sarkozy , the first steps have been good .
You have taken the measures necessary in the crisis , and so our group supports you in this regard .
I shall not conceal the fact that we are impressed , including with the resolve shown by you and - I shall spell it out - Mr Barroso himself , although not by his Commission .
While I am on the subject of taking opportunities , we must precede the actions that are now necessary with the words ' never again ' What happened on these markets must never be repeated .
A line needs to be drawn under the disaster of the international financial markets , and the crisis of the real economy this triggered .
That must not happen again .
To ensure that this is the case , we need new rules .
These new rules also need to come from you , Mr Barroso .
In a minute , my colleague Mr Rasmussen will describe in specific terms what we expect of you .
We expect the proposals you have just announced by the end of the year , as we need to act quickly .
We do not have much time .
If we act quickly , rules will take centre stage : not just rules for banks , but also the necessary rules for hedge funds and for private equity .
We decided this here a few weeks ago with great unanimity .
Today I have heard social democratic speaking : Nicolas Sarkozy , long-standing leader of the UMP , conservative French President , speaks like a veritable European socialist .
( Applause )
Mr Barroso , in a belated echo of his Trotskyist , his Maoist past , speaks like a true leftist .
From Mr Daul , too , I hear pure social democracy .
Application forms to join the Socialist Group in the European Parliament can be found at the entrance .
( General hilarity )
I should now like to read out a quote ; listen carefully , gentlemen .
( Cry of ' ladies ' )
' In the past decades , some of our nations and the European Union as a whole became too regulated and protective [ ... ]
This over-regulation [ ... ] undermines competitiveness ... '
That was taken from the 2006 Manifesto of the European People 's Party , signed by Nicolas Sarkozy , Mr Barroso and Mr Daul .
Gentlemen , you came late , but the main thing is that you came .
( Applause )
( Cry of ' Mr Pöttering too ' )
I ask myself , when I discuss this with you : where are the ordinary citizens of the European Union in your speeches ?
Who is talking about the taxpayers now being burdened with the risks of this disaster ?
Who is talking about the purchasing power required to revive the internal market ?
We are entering a period of threatened recession , if we are not already in recession .
We need more purchasing power .
We need not only social protection for banks but also , above all , risk protection for ordinary citizens ; for , if our plans - and there is no alternative - should fail , it will be above all the ordinary citizens of the European Union , the workers , who have to pay .
This is why we want to establish the same protection for these citizens as we have done for the big banks , by means of more rules , of more supervision , and indeed also of State protection .
This is the central requirement , above all in Member States .
( Applause )
I should also like to paraphrase the words of Angela Merkel at the 2000 CDU party conference : the State must take a back seat in the economic and social policy fields .
I disagree : the State should not take a back seat , it should intervene more , should carry out more supervision in economic matters .
I am obliged to Mr Barroso and Mr Sarkozy for affirming that we need more rules , not fewer ; we need more supervision , not less .
You are on the right track .
Therefore I say to you that you will also be on the right track if - and you will have our support in this - you do not allow the climate package , which indeed has the potential to create jobs , and enables sustainable economic management , to be played off against the financial crisis in the current situation .
As Jean-Claude Juncker rightly said , the financial crisis will pass , but the climate crisis , sadly , will remain .
That is why it is a mistake to play one off against the other .
You are right , however , Mr Sarkozy , that this too must be solved on the basis of mutual solidarity of the stronger with the weaker and also of the cooperation of all of us , both here in Parliament and in the Council .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I should like to express my sincere thanks - including specifically to the President for giving me one minute longer .
The clear position of the PSE Group remains that , in this crisis , the values on which we have always been prevented from obtaining a majority in this House are now on the agenda .
If you now give us your support , you will have finally learned your lesson , but you must admit that it has been thanks to the mistakes made by you , above all , that we do not yet have the rules that we need .
( Applause from the left , protests from the right )
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - Mr President , I address my remarks to the President-in-Office of the Council .
President-in-Office , you brought us warm and encouraging words from last week 's Council .
You said that Council and Parliament must work hand in hand - ' travailler main dans la main ' - but our job is to read the small print .
Why do the Council conclusions refer only to cooperation between Council and Commission ?
( Applause )
Why in all the paragraphs on climate change is there no mention whatsoever of the European Parliament ?
In paragraph 16 of this document , you should have invited the European Parliament - not just the Commission - to work with you ; and recognise that Council and Parliament will decide , not the Council alone .
Moreover , President-in-Office , you will find you need the European Parliament because some Member States are trying to unpick properly reached agreements .
Europe must stick to its negotiated targets .
It is dishonest of some governments to say that the new economic climate makes those agreements unachievable .
New emissions targets for the car industry will not be in force until 2012 : the emission-sharing proposals apply only after 2013 , long after the global economy is forecast to pick up .
Postponing action now will invite climate catastrophe and an even bigger bill .
We need more than the Council agreed last week .
President-in-Office , you rightly recognise the power of the markets .
Since the Berlin Wall fell , 50 million Europeans have been lifted out of poverty because the free movement of goods , services and people is the key to Europe 's prosperity .
More than that , it is vital to our liberty .
Today we are seeing what happens when markets lack accountability .
In recent weeks the global finance system has stared into an abyss and we need concerted action to pull it back .
So my group welcomes the Council 's consolidation of the measures agreed by the euro area .
They have alleviated the pressure on the interbank markets .
Now we need to steer interest rates downwards to alleviate recession .
We also welcome the Commission 's Capital Requirements Directive , the new accounting standards and the plans to control credit rating agencies .
Europe must also play a leading role in negotiating a global system of financial governance .
While rules are necessary , so are the means to enforce them .
The Summit failed to agree an effective regime to supervise the financial system in Europe .
I have made the case for a European financial services authority and it is rumoured that the President-in-Office also favours rigorous supervision at European level .
By all means , try with the Americans to get a global agreement but proceed without them if they will not play ball .
Supervision of the financial services industry remains the missing piece of the jigsaw .
President-in-Office , you are a man of action .
Your actions underline the case for a full-time President of the Council .
You draw attention to our successes .
In August , Europe kept the tanks out of Tbilisi .
This month Europe has kept the banks in business .
If , in December , Europe acts to preserve the planet then we should convince even the most sceptical that we need the Lisbon Treaty .
( Applause )
on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - ( FR ) Mr President , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , Mr President of the Commission , I would be the last person not to recognise that energy and will are necessary in politics , and it is true that the French Presidency has shown a level of energy and will that has done Europe good .
Only , sometimes , I feel as though I am dreaming .
I feel as though I am dreaming when crises are spoken about , because all crises - the financial crisis , the environmental crisis , world hunger - are interdependent , and we cannot resolve one crisis without resolving the others .
On that basis , it is wrong to say that the crisis began in July , September or August !
It began years ago - and a bit of self-criticism from a former finance minister of France , a bit of self-criticism from this Commission which , even a year ago , rejected all European regulation of financial flows , would , all the same , make them more credible in the future ...
( Applause )
It is like being in a dream !
It is as though the current crisis were a natural disaster that was impossible to foresee .
No , that is not true - and , on that basis , a debate is possible .
The logic of crises is the following , simple logic : more and more , as quickly as possible .
This is what created the financial crisis , this is what is creating the environmental crisis and this is what is causing world hunger to increase .
On that basis , let us stop talking about uncontrolled growth ... that is to say , it is the content of the change that is important .
What I have found interesting is that everyone has spoken about a radical reform of capitalism and of the market economy , but that I have not heard today what the grounds are for this radical reform .
It is an environmental market economy and a social market economy that we need , that is to say , we need to call into question the very foundations of our production method , of our lifestyle .
If we do not ask these difficult - very difficult - questions , we will once again be headed for disaster .
That is why , when you say , for example , Mr Sarkozy , that help is needed to revive the car industry , what I do not understand is that , at the same time , there is a desire , by the Germans , to impose rebates for the car industry with regard to CO2 , that is to say , in fact , to impose cut-price legislation , and moreover , to give them money . The car industry .
Especially the German car industry , which has made the most profit over the last 10 years . It is the one that is going to invest funds in tax havens .
Thus , we are going to give money to Mercedes , BMW and Audi for them to put their money in tax havens .
I do not agree with this .
( Applause )

Yes indeed , because , Mr Schulz , when you spoke just now to your colleagues from the right , I spoke to my colleagues from the right and from the left - social democrats and Christian democrats alike - who agreed with the German car industry 's lobbying to curtail the climate criteria .
Yes indeed , Mr Schulz , that is the truth .
( Applause )
On that basis ... yes indeed , I am quite right .
You can hide on this issue , Mr Social Democrat , you can hide , but it was unworthy of your policy .
I should like to continue with this point , I should like to continue with a very important matter , that of growth ( speeches off-microphone ) .
Be quiet , I am the one speaking .
I mean that , when you say ' growth ' , it is important now to talk about the type of growth and how to obtain it .
As the State has now acquired shares in the banks - part of nationalisation , and so on - the debate to be had now concerns how we are going to invest .
How and why are we going to invest ?
It is a content debate .
If we invest in environmental damage , well , we will do what we did before .
That is why , as you rightly say , we must discuss a European revival plan , but a European environmental revival plan , that which the Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance call a Green Deal , and not just any old thing .
To conclude , I should like to say two things .
On tax havens - you used to be finance minister - the obligation to make declarations must be reversed .
By that I mean that , when any person , company or bank is going to invest money in a tax haven , that tax haven has to declare to the country of origin the money that has been invested .
Reversing what has not ... Transparency is a start when it comes to tackling companies that use tax havens .
This is an important decision that would move us forward .
Lastly , I should still like to speak about the climate package .
Mr Sarkozy , you have organised - Mr Watson is right - an institutional putsch .
You have done so by declaring that a decision like this would be taken by the European Council , which must take it unanimously .
You have opened a can of worms with the German , Italian and Polish vetos , instead of leaving things as they were , that is , with the vote of parliamentary committees , with the Commission 's adopting of a position , and with the Council of environment ministers .
We had the possibility to decide on a climate package by codecision , by qualified majority voting .
By rejecting that in December , you eliminated codecision and qualified majority voting .
You will pay a very high price for that , because you are now at the mercy of the veto of the countries I have just mentioned .
I therefore support your will regarding Europe , your energy regarding Europe , regarding the fact that we need to move forward , and that Europe must be independent , but at the same time , our views still differ considerably , greatly , when it comes to the ' how ' issue , to European democracy and to the environmental content of the need for a revival .
( Applause )
on behalf of the UEN Group . - ( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , we would like to express our full support for what the President has said .
We appreciate the work done by the Presidency over these difficult months and welcome the proposals that have been made .
Nonetheless , we would like to remind the President of the Commission that in making certain assertions , that we may well support , he assumes responsibility for the course taken by certain commissioners , including the Commissioner for Competition , whose remarks on the paraffin issue have clearly not helped to improve security or bring calm on the markets .
We would also have liked the Commission to have responded more promptly on derivatives , products that have brought many citizens to their knees , as well as many administrations and EU Member States .
Mr Sarkozy 's comments strike a chord with those of us who want to see a Europe not with a president that changes every six months , but with a president who can act as a representative of a truly united - not homogenous , but united - Europe able to work as one to identify problems and formulate strategies to combat and above all to resolve them .
This crisis is undoubtedly systemic , but to combat a systemic crisis we need to devise a new system and - with all due respect to yourself , President Sarkozy - re-found global capitalism .
Perhaps there is something more we should say .
We should say that the free market does not mean extreme liberalism , and that in today 's world a system seeking to base itself on capital must be able to combine social and liberal considerations .
We have failed banks and failing banks .
How much more our European Central Bank could have done if we had put into action the suggestion made by yourself , Mr President , even before the start of your mandate , to build a closer relationship between political direction and economic driving forces .
It is impossible to manage the economy without a political vision to indicate the goals to be reached .
We hope that in future the ECB can have greater control over the quality of the financial system , but we do not want to see it closed off in splendid isolation .
I would like to conclude , Mr President , by saying how pleased I am that the immigration and asylum pact has been adopted .
At last we have common rules in an area that affects us all and which should see us particularly united .
We hope that criminal and civil sanctions can be harmonised on certain pressing issues , to combat profiteers and those who put consumer safety and therefore the stability of the economy at risk .
Thank you , Mr President , we wish you success in your work .
on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group . - ( FR ) Mr President , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , Mr President of the Commission , never in the history of the European Parliament have we had to react to a multidimensional crisis of such depth and such gravity , and one cannot help but fear that the worst is yet to come .
Firstly , a number of countries of the South , in principle partners of the European Union , are on the brink of the abyss : in addition to the food , environmental and energy crisis , there is the financial crisis .
These countries have got nothing to do with it , but it is hitting them hard .
A fall in revenue , a fall in investments , a fall in growth : they are the ones overlooked most by the international effort , to the extent that the Director-General of the FAO , Mr Diouf , was obliged to point out that only 10 % of the emergency funds pledged by the major powers in June have so far been allocated .
Those seeking to clean up capitalism have their work well and truly cut out .
For their part , emerging countries are being affected by the crisis , but it is not yet possible to assess the social consequences of this .
On our doorstep , a State not long ago presented as a model of success , Iceland , is under threat of bankruptcy .
Within the Union , new member countries such as Hungary - which cannot even invest its treasury bonds anymore - are wrestling with extremely serious problems that are going to result in unprecedented sacrifices for their populations .
The turnaround has also been spectacular in countries such as the United Kingdom , Ireland and Spain , which were cited just now as an example .
The shock has been considerable everywhere .
This is liable to be the case in France , too , if the recession further exacerbates a particularly tense social climate , with huge job cuts , a fall in public spending , financially starved local authorities and public service privatisation projects .
This is another issue , you may say .
It is not , for if each of our countries is threatened with a social crisis of unimaginable dimensions , it is because of a development model for which our people are today paying a high price .
The model was formed in the United States and in the United Kingdom , but the European Union fully embraced it as its own with the toppling of the international balances of power twenty-odd years ago .
Since then , it has been this model that the Commission has fed us with , month after month , and it is this model that pervades our treaties , the case-law of the Court and a number of our policies .
That is why , Mr Sarkozy , I cannot share your diagnosis of the terrible evil currently eating away at our societies .
The spark that started the fire can certainly be traced back to New York , but the fuel that caught fire is as much in Europe as it is in the United States , and all those political leaders who have worked on Europe 's strategic change of direction over the past 20 years owe our fellow citizens an explanation .
They must not think that they are off the hook today by taking measures - necessary measures , all the same - concerning reporting standards , financial supervision of rating agencies , or golden parachutes .
Beyond this , however , it is the heart of the system that needs to be changed : money for profit , and profit for money , that awful spiral that gives rise to the devaluing of work , salary deflation , social expenditure rationing and the wasting of the planet 's resources , as well as the marginalisation of a huge proportion of the global population .
Indexes do not lie : only 2 % of monetary transactions today concern the production of goods and services ; 98 % relate to finance .
Tackling the root of the evil from now on means attacking the increasingly drastic financial return criteria , which are absolutely incompatible with the non-discriminatory promotion of human capacities and with genuinely sustainable development .
Equally , a Bretton Woods II worthy of the name should aim to introduce collective control of money creation worldwide , that is to say , to replace the false international common currency that is the dollar with a true international common currency designed to serve as a lever to correct the intolerable inequalities that destabilise the world and to contribute to the balanced development of humankind and of the planet .
We are so far away from that that it is better , at this stage , to avoid an excess of superlatives on the radical reforms at work , unless the European leaders ' sudden propensity to want to change the world is inspired by the motto of Prince Salina in The Leopard : ' everything changes so that nothing changes ' .
They are in danger of having a rude awakening before too long , however .
( Applause )
on behalf of the IND / DEM Group . - Mr President , I address my remarks to the President-in-Office of the Council .
President Sarkozy , it was your own energy , dynamism and initiative that sent you off to Georgia and Russia to try and broker a deal .
You did it off your own bat .
You were not acting on behalf of the European Union .
It is a delusion if anybody in this place thinks you were .
There had been no Council meeting , there was no resolution and there was no mandate .
You did it as the French President , and well done to you .
However , if you are proposing that that is the model on which we should decide our foreign affairs in the future - the idea that a permanent president or a permanent foreign minister decides on the hoof what the foreign policy of all of us should be and goes off and does this without reference to national governments and national parliaments - the answer has to be : No , thank you very much indeed .
As far as the financial crisis is concerned , I am delighted that your original plan that everybody should club their money together in the middle fell to pieces .
It was a good thing that the Irish , Greeks and Germans went off and acted in their own national interests .
What happened at the summit was more a case of nation states agreeing with each other - which is fine and which I am happy with .
I have not heard anybody today recognise that this financial crisis is as much as anything else a failure of regulation .
We have not had a lack of regulation : out of the financial services action plan for the last 10 years we have had a blizzard of regulation .
It has damaged the competitiveness of places like London and it has not protected a single investor .
So please , more regulation is not the answer .
We need to rethink what we have been doing .
I think we need to start acting in our own national interest .
The fact that our banks cannot pay dividends for the next five years , whereas the Swiss banks can , is something that proves that if you have the flexibility and adaptability of being outside the European Union you can weather financial crises far better than being stuck in the middle .
- ( FR ) Mr President-in-Office of the Council and of the French Republic , we debate the palliative care to be given to the ill , but we are very discreet about the causes of the illness .
How is it that no EU institutions saw the current crisis coming ?
Not the Council , not the Commission , not the Central Bank , not even , ladies and gentlemen , our Parliament , or any of the Member States ' governments .
The crisis was predicted , it is true , by a mere handful of economists , such as the Nobel Prize winner , Maurice Allais , and political officials , for the most part from our family of beliefs , including , once again , Jean-Marie Le Pen . Unfortunately , it is a case of ' the voice of one crying in the wilderness ' .
The crisis is , however , clearly that of the Euro-internationalist system , uncontrolled free trade , and the terrifying separation between financial fiction and the realities of our declining economies and industries , which could in future be the target of sovereign funds of third countries benefiting from the current situation .
Even your work , Mr Sarkozy , testifies to the maladjustment of the Union : a meeting of 4 , not of 27 , on Saturday 4 October ; a bilateral meeting with Germany only on 11 October ; a meeting of only 15 of the Eurogroup 's members ; a meeting with the US President to convince him to organise yet another meeting theoretically designed to radically reform the entire system , to which were invited , if we have correctly understood , only 6 of the 27 EU Member States , the United States , Japan , Russia , India and China .
I am not prejudging the usefulness of those meetings .
I am saying that this is a return to bilateral or multilateral diplomacy , and it clearly demonstrates that , given its failure to react , its entanglement in bureaucratic rules and its compulsive desire for powers that it is incapable of exercising , the Union as a framework has had its day .
The European Council 's report attests to this if one reads between the lines .
It ratifies your initiatives , it begs the Central Bank in a roundabout manner to loosen ever so slightly the stranglehold of the Maastricht criteria , but it does not decide a thing .
You mentioned the situation in Georgia and your efforts , but how can you not see that unilateral recognition of Kosovo 's independence paved the way for the independence of Abkhazia and South Ossetia ?
How can you justify the indefinite extension of NATO when the Warsaw Pact has itself disappeared ?
Mr Sarkozy , the path to be followed lies elsewhere .
It involves a radical break with the internationalist system and the complete calling into question of the so-called benefits of the universal mixing of people , goods and capital .
Unequivocally defending our independence and our identities does not mean isolating ourselves ; rather , it is a prerequisite for regaining our influence in the world .
Mr Daul , thank you for your support .
The Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats has always believed in a Europe that protects , and you yourself have been involved in the dialogue with our Russian neighbours .
It was a visionary position : Russia has the energy , Europe has the technology .
Russia is facing a serious demographic problem - it is losing around 700 000 people a year , over a territory twice the size of the United States of America .
I do not see Russia as Europe 's implacable enemy ; quite the contrary , I believe that it will be necessary , in future , to lay the foundations for a common economic area between Russia and the European Union , which would also be the best way of getting them to move towards the values of respect for human rights and democracy that we hold dear in Europe .
I would add , Mr Daul , that the reason we wanted to support the banks was to protect savers .
There were a number of strategies .
Some countries - I will return to this later - wanted to protect and guarantee the banks ' products .
I fought in favour of protecting and guaranteeing the banks themselves , so that we could then leave them to do their job , and your group 's support was essential for us .
I should like to finish by saying that your call to ratify the Treaty of Lisbon was exactly right , and , furthermore , it is hardly being aggressive to ask people to be consistent : you cannot say that you did not vote because you were afraid of losing a commissioner if , in refusing to vote , you are forcing the retention of a treaty that provides for a reduction in the size of the Commission .
I respect everyone 's opinions , but I cannot agree with inconsistencies .
You cannot both be among the strongest advocates of European enlargement and , at the same time , prevent Europe from establishing institutions for enlargement .
We have seen how much it has cost Europe to enlarge without considering deepening ; we must not make the same mistakes again .
Mr Schulz , you say I am talking like a European socialist .
That may be , but you must admit that you are not really talking like a French socialist .
( Applause )
Quite frankly , in the socialist split , I would choose Mr Schulz , with no regrets and no remorse .
I should , however , like to say one more thing - the whole point of Europe is that it forces us to make compromises .
That is what Mr Schultz and I are now doing .
Europe , its institutions and its policies will one day be adopted and applied by governments on the left and the right - that is the law of alternation .
The European ideal cannot - and this is what makes it great - be reduced simply to a question of left and right .
It is fortunate , Mr Schulz , that men like you are able to recognise that others not on your own political side are not necessarily wrong just because they are not on your side .
And I should also like to say to you , Mr Schulz , both to you and to your group , that , as President-in-Office of the Council , even though my party loyalty is to the PPE , I have very much appreciated the Socialist Group 's sense of responsibility when it has acted to go down certain paths .
Reducing Europe simply to a debate between left and right , even if that debate exists , is a sin against the European compromise , against the European ideal .
I therefore do not think you are renouncing your principles when you support the Presidency , any more than I am renouncing mine when I value the support of the Socialist Group in the European Parliament .
I would go even further .
Mr Schulz says that this is an historic task , and he is quite right .
He says , as does Mr Daul , that the crisis may present an opportunity .
You are absolutely right .
And when you say ' never again ' , you are , once again , quite right .
This is not a question of Christian Democrat or Social Democrat ; it is a question of common sense .
Who brought us to this point ?
On the other hand , where I would disagree is with the idea that , for the last 30 years , only right-wing governments have erred , and left-wing governments have always been right : that would be a rewriting of a painful history on both sides .
I would add , with regard to your comments concerning Mrs Merkel , that it is my understanding that they have elections in Germany , and I would therefore regard her words as an electoral platform .
For my part , I have been blessed with Mrs Merkel 's solidarity and friendship , and I should like to pay tribute , once again , to her actions when she had the Presidency .
The six-month Presidencies are part of a continuum , and I have benefited greatly from the efforts of my predecessors , particularly Mrs Merkel .
Mr Watson , I have the greatest of respect both for you and for your ideas , but even if you can read the small print , apparently without glasses , it seems that you have failed to do so today , because what does the text say ?
It refers explicitly to the conclusions of the European Councils of March 2007 and March 2008 .
And what do those two Council decisions say ?
They say that the climate change package will be adopted by codecision with the European Parliament .
There is a continuum in the texts , Mr Watson .
What , then , was I trying to do ?
Maybe it was a mistake .
I wanted to put an end to European Councils publishing 50-page communiqués that nobody reads , and I therefore proposed an eight-page communiqué .
If you want to stick to a shorter communiqué , it is better not to follow the usual practice of summarising the conclusions of previous Councils in order to disguise the lack of new decisions by the current Council .
I therefore think that codecision was covered by the references to those two previous Councils .
You want me to confirm that , and I am quite happy to do so , but I can go still further , Mr Watson .
With regard to the energy and climate change package , I know , I reiterate and I believe that we will need a great deal of commitment from the European Parliament to push it through .
There was just one thing I wanted to do in October , and that was to try to preserve the consensus within the European Council , because , as you will admit , if I had come to the European Parliament with a European Council decision that basically said that , in any event , we should not reach an agreement before December , you would , quite rightly , have told me ' you have broken with what the Councils decided in 2007 and 2008 ' .
Far from having called the energy and climate change package into question , I have fought in its favour , and far from having challenged codecision , I am insisting on it .
Moreover , both I and President Barroso said as much to our colleagues in the European Council .
Mr Cohn-Bendit , you really are on top form .
You have said ' yes ' to me five times and ' no ' just twice - I am used to a less favourable score .
To be honest , your support regarding the Presidency 's determination and some of its actions is beneficial .
I would also say to you , Mr Cohn-Bendit , that I think that a Commission Presidency , and Council Presidency , that are as committed as they are to defending the energy and climate change package deserve the support of the Greens .
We do not agree on everything , but surely you , the Greens , are not going to fight a Commission Presidency and a Council Presidency that are absolutely committed to adopting the energy and climate change package .
Surely we can at least walk part of the way together .
You are an elected representative , I am an elected representative , and there is no shame in admitting that , if I need you , you also need me ; that is probably more painful for you than for me , but that is the way it is .
You also called on me to undertake some self-criticism .
You are quite right , I certainly need to do so , and I am not the only one .
( Laughter and applause )
Finally , regarding the institutional putsch , I would make the same response as to Mr Watson .
Mr Cohn-Bendit will not hold it against me .
On the other hand , can this crisis , and the defence of the environment , be an opportunity for growth ?
I think you are absolutely right - you call it ' green growth ' and I call it ' sustainable growth ' , but it is undeniable .
I would also say to you that the environmental bonus on cars has proven this .
France is one of the only places where the automobile sector is not shrinking .
Why ?
Because the environmental bonus has helped it to sell more clean cars than dirty ones .
Perhaps the Greens find the phrase ' clean car ' shocking , but to us it is extraordinarily important .
The Grenelle Environment , which I hope will be voted for unanimously in France , including by the Socialists , shows that France is strongly committed to this path .
I really do think that it would be a mistake of historic proportions if Europe missed the boat on the energy and climate change package .
Mrs Muscardini , thank you for your support .
You mentioned the immigration pact , and I am glad you did so , because nobody talks about trains that arrive on time , but it really is an amazing novelty for Europe that all 27 of us have managed to reach agreement on a pact .
Of course , there are still some ambiguities , and of course we should have liked to go further , but still .
Who could have predicted that all of you here would have the wisdom , with the States , to agree to a European immigration pact a few months before a European election ?
Believe me , it is the only way to prevent the extremists in each of our countries from dominating a subject that deserves intelligence , humanity and firmness .
I am therefore grateful to you , Mrs Muscardini , for raising this issue .
Mr Wurtz , you said that we do not share the same diagnosis , and that is certainly true .
Your speech , though , was , as always , very measured in its wording , but highly excessive at its heart .
Things do not become less shocking , Mr Wurtz , if you say them softly : it is not so much the words that are important as what lies behind them .
As sure as I am that capitalism needs to be reformed , I would say to you , Mr Wurtz , that capitalism has never caused as much social , democratic or environmental damage as the collectivist system that you have supported for so many years .
Major ecological disasters , Mr Wurtz - you should listen to Mr Cohn-Bendit when he talks about self-criticism - major ecological disasters have been a feature not of the market economy but of the collectivist system .
Social disasters , Mr Wurtz , have been features of a collectivist system , and the collectivist system sustained the Berlin Wall , millions of people have suffered physically from a loss of liberty .
I therefore remain committed to the market economy , to free trade , and to the values of capitalism , but not to the betrayal of capitalism .
( Applause )
We can both look back over the 20th century , and you can be sure that the verdict will not favour the ideas that you have loyally followed for decades .
You tell me to wake up , but , in all friendship , Mr Wurtz , I would be afraid to advise you not to think too hard about what happened during the 20th century , because sincere men like you would then see that they have been supporting systems that are far removed from the ideals of their youth .
Mr Farage , I did not have a mandate - that is undeniable - but , quite frankly , neither did the Russian troops when they entered Georgia .
( Applause )
You are one of those people who , for years , have denounced Europe for a lack of political will .
I had a choice : I could ask for everybody 's opinions and take no action , or act and then check whether the others agreed .
I prefer action .
Finally , Mr Farage , a Europe that looks like you want it to .
True , it is me , which is less good , but , at heart , it is still the Europe that you have been hoping and praying for .
I would add that , democratically , I , along with Bernard Kouchner , ensured that the European Council validated the decisions that we had taken .
One final point : when the Irish - and I am not passing judgment , given how serious the crisis was - took the decision to guarantee all the products of their banks , excluding European banks and branches , it is a good thing that the Commission was there to pick up the pieces .
What happened ?
In the space of 24 hours , the whole of the City found itself with no liquid assets , because , quite naturally , the liquid assets all left the City to go to the banks guaranteed by the Irish State , which had decided , off its own bat , to guarantee 200 % of its GDP .
You can see clearly that we need each other : if we had not coordinated our response , each country would have been launched into a spiral of ' who can guarantee the most ' , and people 's savings would have gone to the country that guaranteed the most , to the detriment of the others .
You are such a staunch defender of the United Kingdom - well , it is Europe that made it possible to restore the City 's equilibrium , not the United Kingdom on its own .
( Applause )
Finally , Mr Gollnisch , you are the only one in the world who thinks that Europe has no use .
There are two possibilities : either the world is wrong and you are right , or it is the other way round .
I am afraid that , once again , it is the other way round .
( Loud applause )
President of the Commission . - ( FR ) Mr President , we have already witnessed some ideological debates , and very interesting they have been .
For my part , I think that now is not the time for me to get involved in this debate , but I think that there will be time for that later .
For the time being , I am focussing more on immediate , urgent responses to the crisis .
In any event , I should like to say this : our analysis of the causes of this crisis clearly shows that there have been regulatory shortcomings , particularly in the United States .
Certain sectors within this market were not regulated , and that is what sparked the crisis .
However , our analysis also shows that the underlying cause of the crisis is undoubtedly linked to certain fundamental imbalances that can be found both in the US economy and in the global economy .
The truth - as many economists have stressed and continue to do so - is that it would be difficult to sustain the sort of public debt levels that we see in the United States , and that it is the countries with the most debt that are the largest consumers , whereas those with larger reserves consume the least .
There are fundamental problems here in terms of imbalance in the public debt , the public deficit .
To put it simply , if the United States had had a stability and growth pact , this financial crisis might not have happened : when the macroeconomic foundations are solid , we have a much greater chance of resisting these problems of gaps , of shortcomings , in regulation .
It is true that there were also regulatory problems .
Not because the financial market is not regulated - quite the contrary , it is probably the most highly regulated sector of the economy , even in the United States .
Not because we do not have regulation in Europe - on the contrary , we have a great deal of regulation in this sector .
It is , however , true that there were shortcomings in the supervision mechanisms , which , we should remember , are essentially national systems .
This is an area in which the European Commission and the European Central Bank does not really have any remit - the supervision mechanisms are essentially national in nature .
It is also true that we need to look into what we can do from a legislative point of view , and in that respect I welcome the efforts of the European Parliament .
It is true that , for many years now , the European Parliament has been tabling excellent reports on some of these issues , and we are ready to work with you .
It is worth remembering , though , that , just as ' no man is an island ' , no institution is an island , and the Commission is working with both Parliament and the Council on these issues .
Let us be quite clear : a few weeks ago - not years , not months , a few weeks ago - it would not have been possible to change some of these rules , because , as you know full well , some of the Member States would have been fundamentally opposed .
That is the truth of the matter .
That is why we need to understand that the conditions are now in place for us to make some changes - consensual changes , I hope - not only for reform in Europe , but also so that Europe can put forward global reforms to the financial system .
The second question relates to the ' climate change package ' , and I should like to thank you , ladies and gentlemen , for your comments and for your support .
On the institutional question , first of all - I think that President Sarkozy has already explained this very clearly , but allow me to say this on behalf of the Commission - we are not conflating respect for well-established decision-making procedures , in particular codecision and the central role played by the European Parliament , with the need for a strong consensus among the Member States on something as important as the climate and energy package .
These two aspects are neither incompatible nor contradictory , but complementary .
I can assure you that , alongside the Presidency , we are working actively and tirelessly to reach an ambitious but balanced compromise with Parliament .
I have to be absolutely straight with you here , and I can tell you that , if it were not for the leadership of President Sarkozy and - I think I can say this - also the contribution of the Commission , we would not have reached a consensus in this European Council to retain the objectives we adopted a year ago .
The truth is that , faced with a financial situation like the one we are in now , governments are - quite naturally , I would say - becoming more defensive , more prudent .
Perhaps they want to fall back to some less ambitious positions .
And that is a challenge that we must take on together , as I really do think that it would be a tragedy if Europe abandoned its ambitions for the fight against climate change .
It would be a tragedy because the main objection that some people have to the package is that we would be making a sacrifice without others doing the same .
In fact , though , if we want the others to come with us , we must not , at this stage , give any indication that we are scaling back our ambitions .
It is precisely at a time like this that we need to stick to the ' three times twenty ' objectives that we set last year , and that is why the message needs to be very strong .
I should like to commend the role of President Sarkozy , and also that of all the members of the European Council ; I should also like to express my appreciation to Chancellor Angela Merkel .
It was under her Presidency a year ago that we adopted these objectives , and I hope that we are not now going to water down our ambitions .
I can say it too , you know - it is interesting , Mr Schulz .
I cannot but endorse what has just been said .
I really do think that we can have political differences and different ideologies , but that - particularly in a situation like the one we are now in - we need to unite , not move apart .
I do not think that any political force in this Chamber can claim a monopoly on European ideas .
Throughout the history of Europe , it has been the contributions of the Christian democrats , the socialists , the liberals , and others on the right , the left and in the centre that have created political Europe .
I quite understand the political debate , and I certainly do not want to play down the importance of the ideological debate , but I nonetheless think that , in a situation like this , it would be worthwhile for everyone who believes in the ideals of Europe and who thinks that Europe needs to play an increasingly major role in the world to establish a platform of consensus .
After all , the world - not just Europeans but the whole world - is looking to Europe to put forward certain solutions .
For my part , you can rest assured that it is in this spirit of consensus - with respect for the different political forces , of course , but , if I may say so , beyond the different party positions - that we , the three institutions , the Commission , Parliament and the Council , will be able to work together to make our Europe stronger .
( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , this morning it has rightly been stated that the European Union has demonstrated its ability to act in two major crises .
This has inspired confidence in the rest of the world and in the role of the European Union and has allowed it to regain the confidence of its citizens .
This is mainly due to the President-in-Office of the Council .
President Sarkozy , this is an achievement that you can justifiably be proud of .
Of course , it is not difficult to imagine that President Sarkozy would have taken an energetic and imaginative approach even if he had not been President of the Council .
However , the fact is that he is President of the Council and therefore his actions have benefited the European Union .
That is how it should be .
Admittedly we should remember that it is a stroke of luck that he is currently the President-in-Office of the Council .
However , the ability of the European Union to handle crises should not be dependent on luck . This means that we need the Treaty of Lisbon .
This is another argument in favour of putting the treaty into force and I am convinced that there is a broad majority for the treaty in this Parliament .
For reasons of restraint we have not yet stated this loudly and clearly , but I believe that it is time to explain that this Parliament is behind the Treaty of Lisbon and it would be a good thing if the Parliament could succeed in putting it into force before the European elections .
This is not within our power , but I think that it is our position .
Mr Schulz has analysed the financial crisis , discovered the causes in the system and , without further ado , has laid the blame firmly at the door of the Conservatives , Liberals and Christian Democrats .
Mr Schulz , what a simple picture of the world you present , doubtless because of the elections .
You are very well aware that the degree of prosperity here in Europe , which is unheard of throughout large parts of the world , the high levels of social security , the unparalleled levels of environmental protection , the related technological advancement and , not least , the level of personal freedom associated with all these achievements are all based on the social market economy and not on socialist ideas .
We need to remind ourselves of this .
The system itself has not failed , but some of the players in the system have failed and they must be called to account .
In order to do this , we need new regulations .
I would like to make one comment on the climate change and energy package .
I would like to state also on behalf of the Group that the objectives of this are undisputed , but that we need to talk about the methods .
During a time when emissions trading , according to the Commission 's calculations , will cost EUR 70 to 90 billion per year , which must be raised by those affected , we cannot seriously believe that this entire structure will not be affected by the financial crisis and the crisis in the real economy .
For this reason we would like to state that we will continue our firm commitment to the objectives .
However , I think it is appropriate to consider and debate the dossier carefully and thoroughly in order to ensure that we do not make any legislative mistakes and , above all , that those affected are involved .
To do this , we need time and we must make sure that we take the necessary time .

( FR ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , we are living in the age of plumbers : there was the Polish plumber to influence the French ' no ' to the Constitutional Treaty , and Joe the plumber to decide between Mr Obama and Mr McCain .
Even our Heads of State or Government have had to turn their hand to plumbing , to plug the incessant burst pipes in an international financial system that is in a state of total collapse .
Our governments have equipped themselves with an IKEA-style kit , a toolbox that should allow each State to cobble together a specific solution for each specific situation .
As every DIY enthusiast knows , though , IKEA 's blueprints are hopelessly crude : the IKEA method , applied to international finance , runs the risk of being inadequate .
The Presidency has done what it could , in other words crisis management , as President Sarkozy has stressed here .
Our governments have managed to plug the series of leaks in an international financial system that is so interconnected that the malfunctions have gone global .
However , plumbing has its limits : we need to address the architecture of international finance .
If we want to redesign the financial world to serve the real economy , there is no need to set up yet another high-level group ; a low-level group responsible for recording the proposals of the Financial Stability Forum would be perfectly adequate .
For example , the Forum recommended back in 2001 that better coverage should be provided for the risks taken by the banks .
The European Parliament has , on several occasions , pointed the finger at the obvious idiocies of international finance , but its voice was not heard .
The European summit claimed to be determined to learn lessons from the crisis and to make all those involved in the financial system act more responsibly , including with regard to pay and other inducements .
There is going to be an international conference to discuss it all .
So , are we going to end up with a new Bretton Woods ?
It seems doubtful .
Voices are already being raised , including within the Presidency , warning against over-regulation .
Commissioner McCreevy is being ever more provocative : he does not want to legislate for leverage ceilings on investment funds .
While the European Council wants to regulate the fantastic bonuses of the golden boys , Mr McCreevy is putting his money on the self-regulation that we have seen at work over recent years .
While even Mr Paulson is calling for better regulation of the markets , Commissioner McCreevy feels that , I quote , ' there is a real risk that well-intentioned desires to address market failures translate into rushed , clumsy and counterproductive regulation ' .
The Charlie McCreevys of this world are already preparing us for the next speculative bubble , which I predict will form around the secondary market of the emissions quota trading system .
In the meantime , Mr Sarkozy , the real economy is entering into recession .
Now is not the time to scale back our ambitions regarding the environment , but neither is it the time to change , unilaterally , the only European industrial sector that is open to international competition .
( FR ) Mr President , at this time of global financial crisis , Europe is taking its first steps as a political player ; and under your Presidency , under the French Presidency , the Heads of State or Government have made the right decisions .
I also think that the European plan is better thought out than the Paulson plan , and I hope that it will be able to limit the damage .
Clearly , we now need to go further .
The reform of the global financial system for which we are all hoping and praying will only be possible - I am absolutely convinced - if Europe is in a position to make its presence felt , and , for that to be the case , we will need to find new resources .
We will need to set up a European financial markets authority and a European banking committee .
We need a European regulator who will , at that point , be able to talk to the US regulators , and we must be able to bring an end to tax havens on our own continent if we want our efforts to defend this idea at global level to be credible .
Equally , if we are to face up to the economic and social crisis , we will need a European response .
We need a joint action plan to help our fellow citizens , so that , tomorrow , we can invest in non-relocatable activities - for example , heavy infrastructure or a plan to bring buildings up to environmental standards .
We will need economic governance of the euro zone - it is certainly time .
More than that , though , we will need , in future , to think , to define , to support and to inspire a model of European development that is ethical , humane , socially responsible , and sustainable in all senses of the word .
( PL ) Mr President , I am glad we have allowed ourselves more time to adopt a more balanced decision on reducing carbon dioxide emissions .
The system proposed by the Commission apportioned the cost of introducing restrictions in a very unequal manner .
It meant that countries whose energy production is based on coal would have to incur costs of the order of billions of euro per year .
These countries tend to be the poorest countries of the Union .
This is something that for example Poles , who would have to pay dearly , simply cannot understand .
It is important to bear in mind that we are hardly setting a good example by being the only ones in the world to introduce such a system , thus weakening the foundations of our own economy .
In addition , the financial crisis must not serve as a pretext for sidelining the situation in Georgia .
We should recall that Russia is maintaining in excess of three times more troops in the disputed areas than were present there on 7 August .
Russia is pursuing a fait accompli policy in relation to the international status of Ossetia , and is failing to implement the peace agreement .
It has therefore abrogated the right to be a partner of the European Union .
On a lighter note and by way of conclusion , the more often you attend sittings of the European Parliament , Mr Sarkozy , the less certain I am as to whether I would rather be listening to you or to your wife .
I have to say , however , that although I sometimes disagree with what you have to say , you certainly liven up the Chamber when you say it .
Congratulations on that achievement .

( FR ) Mr President , I only have one minute , but I wanted to say that , during this financial crisis , you yourself have managed to overturn the institutional dogmas : Brussels , Frankfurt , competition , the Maastricht criteria , the global free trade system , the ban on State aid for businesses and , in particular , for the banks , and so on .
A moment ago , you referred to the issue of sovereign funds , which is extremely important for the future , in order to save our businesses if they become , or rather if they are , because they are , at rock bottom .
However , Mr Sarkozy , as it stands , the Treaty of Lisbon - which the leaders of Europe , and you in particular , are trying to keep on life support - would have prevented you from doing what you have just done .
It bans all restrictions on movements of capital , it bans all interventions and political influence on the Central Bank and , above all , it bans all State aid for all businesses .
The question is simple : what are you going to choose , Mr Sarkozy ?
Are you going to have your hands tied , or a free hand ?
In order to have a free hand , you need not the Treaty of Lisbon , but a treaty that takes account of the lessons that , together , we are now learning .
- ( SK ) I agree with the conclusions of the European Council that the European Union must strive , along with its international partners , to bring about a complete reform of the financial system .
This situation will linger for at least 10 years and it is ordinary people who will pay for all of the errors .
Decisions must be taken quickly on transparency , global regulatory standards relating to trans-border supervision and crisis management .
State aid within the framework of individual countries must not be allowed to distort economic competition , for example through discrimination in favour of branches of those banks which are owned by a central bank in another state of the Union .
There should , however , also be no disproportionate flows of liquidity from branches to their parent banks .
I am in favour of a rapid strengthening of the rules governing the activities of rating agencies and their supervision .
We also need a quick decision on rules governing the safety of deposits , with the aim of providing greater protection for consumers .
( ES ) Mr President , I am going to indicate the points on which I agree and disagree with the Presidency and also say what was lacking , in my opinion , from the Presidency 's speech .
I agree that the origin of the crisis is not limited to the subprime crisis in the United States .
I agree with the principle of what Alan Greenspan is now calling the stage of ' irrational exuberance ' .
I agree that the markets have failed because regulation has failed and that governments have had to come to the rescue .
I agree that this is a global crisis and I therefore agree with the need for a Bretton Woods that some are calling Mark II and others are calling Mark III .
Certainly , President Sarkozy 's reference to the current system reminds me very much of what General de Gaulle did before the first Bretton Woods failed , before the ' rendition ' of Fort Knox when President Nixon decided to unpeg the dollar from gold .
For this reason , we need to establish a European diplomacy , a diplomacy of the euro , where Europe speaks with one voice and has to ' put its house in order ' .
However , ' putting its house in order ' means continuing to develop the financial markets - in this case the retail markets so that they reach the appropriate size - and reflect on the regulatory framework .
As for the European Central Bank , I agree that it has done well .
It has acted quickly , but also erratically .
It has changed the rules on maturities and guarantees three times , whereas the banks need certainty in their financing .
Secondly , monetary policy - the lender of last resort - is still centralised .
However , banking supervision is still decentralised .
Mr President , has the time not come to decide whether we want to develop Article 105 of the Treaty , which gives greater supervisory powers to the European Central Bank ?
I totally agree on the issue of economic governance .
While we are engaged in this ideological dance , we should remember that Marx said that , when economic structures change , the political superstructures must also change .
We did Maastricht but we have not sorted out the institutional architecture .
Before Lisbon , we must determine which formulas will allow us to advance on this issue .
Thirdly , and very importantly , I have one very specific request .
The financial economy must be set against the real economy .
Do not bid farewell to the presidency , Mr President , without first entrusting the Commission with the specific task of establishing a Lisbon + agenda which must come into force on 1 January 2011 and which must involve a revision of the financial frameworks .
I have a final quotation .
On this ideological theme , a Spanish philosopher - Unamuno - once said that he was anticlerical in defence of the Church .
I am against total deregulation of the market .
I believe that , in this regard , the Presidency and I are in agreement .
Mr President , this crisis could have been avoided : it is not an unavoidable law of nature .
It is a long story , and I do not have time to go into it , but for now one thing is certain : please let us learn from our experience and let us do things together .
Let us keep momentum .
President Sarkozy , you are so full of energy , but keep this energy now because , urgent as it was to avoid a meltdown of our banks , it is now just as urgent to regulate better and prevent this recession taking hold .
I appeal to you today , and also to the President of the Commission , to make the following commitments .
First : give us a pre-Christmas gift , President Barroso - concrete proposals on new and better regulations .
I am sure that the President-in-Office of the Council , President Sarkozy , agreed with me when he asked you to commit yourself today to respond to this report from the European Parliament with the following concrete proposal : it is not only about regulating the banks , but also about regulating hedge funds and private equity .
That is the first commitment .
I was so happy , President Sarkozy , when at Camp David you mentioned this simple fact at the outset , because hedge funds and private equity companies are now trying to tell the story that they have nothing to do with the financial crisis .
This is simply not true .
They have been operating with excessive debt and greed for many years , so , please , promise me today that all actors will have to be regulated ; otherwise we are not learning from our experience .
Second : I could mention a lot of details , but I just want to have an answer from Commission President Barroso - please commit yourself to living up to this Parliament 's proposals on regulating the market .
The last point is directed at President Sarkozy .
You and I - and we all - think this is a time of destiny for the European Union .
Do not give ordinary people the impression that the European Union is incapable of avoiding a recession that will hit millions and millions of innocent workers .
That is why I want to repeat what you yourself said : let us do it together .
I have calculations , and I think we should ask the Commission to confirm , President Sarkozy , that if we do things together and invest just 1 % more in infrastructure , in education , in labour market policy , and in investment in private industry each year for the next four years , we will have 10 million more jobs .
I think this is a target worth going for , and I sincerely hope that you will commit yourself , President Sarkozy , to realising this in December or before .
It is now or never .
( FR ) Mr President , Mr Barroso , Mr Sarkozy , I have already twice had the opportunity , in the Committee on Foreign Affairs , to say how much I admire the action you have taken during the crisis between Russia and Georgia , and I say it again today .
I have the same admiration for your action on the financial crisis and the economic consequences it brings for us .
With regard to Russia , however , let me say that I am not entirely reassured to read , in the Council conclusions , that it has apparently been decided that the negotiations on a new pact or strategic alliance with Russia will continue regardless of what transpires , even if the conclusions of the Council and the Commission are taken into consideration .
I do not find that reassuring at all because although , on the one hand , I am convinced , like you , Mr President , of the need to continue to engage with Russia , I also do not think we should give them the impression - I am sure that you will not do so - that nothing has happened , and that everything will be business as usual .
I am sure that you will be keen , and I ask this now on behalf of my group , to say clearly to Russia , when you go to Moscow for the Summit , that it will certainly not be business as usual and that we are going to be extremely vigilant in this regard .
- ( PL ) Mr President , Robert Gwiazdowski , an expert at the Adam Smith Institute , is on record as having written that Monty Kaczyński 's Flying Circus had flown back from Brussels but that it was not at all clear why it had flown there in the first place .
The cost to Polish taxpayers of getting their President to Brussels was around EUR 45 000 .
I should like to put the following question to you , President . Why did you allow a politician who was not a member of the Polish government 's delegation into the debates ?
Nobody really knows what that person was doing there .
Furthermore , Mr Kaczyński has gained considerable support from extremist groupings in Poland .
The groupings concerned could even be described as fanatic .
In addition , so far as I am aware , Mr Kaczyński can only speak Polish .
He is incapable of expressing his ideas in any foreign language .
I would therefore be most interested to know how you managed to converse with him , Mr President .
Could you please explain to the House what exactly Mr Lech Kaczyński was doing at the European Council Summit and what you discussed with him in person ?
( DE ) Mr President , we have been discussing the globalisation trap , le piège de la mondialisation , for more than 12 years and now it has snapped shut .
Mr President-in-Office of the Council , I would like to make you a practical proposal .
I suggest that you establish a university chair in the history of the financial markets .
This would allow for detailed research into how it has come about that we are in the position in which find ourselves at the moment .
In the spirit of what was said by Martin Schulz : ' Never more ' , by which he probably meant ' never again ' , in other words , something like this must never happen again .
' Never more ' would mean : Let 's go this far again .
That must not take place .
This chair would allow us to determine to what extent the blame lies with the Conservatives , driven by exaggerated US neoliberalism , and to what extent with the Social Democrats , who have not pressed firmly enough for social balance .
Take the opportunity to learn from history , so that we can establish a bold European social democracy and not settle for the trivial benefits which the Treaty of Lisbon would allegedly have given us , despite the fact that this is not even correct .
( FR ) Mr President , the conflict between Georgia and Russia and the financial crisis have both been opportunities for the European Union to make its presence felt on the world stage as a fully-fledged first-rate political player .
Thanks to your determination , Mr Sarkozy , Europe has managed to come together to find coordinated , effective and speedy responses .
In the face of crisis , Europe has shown that it really exists and has demonstrated its added value .
With regard to immigration , for example , the ' every man for himself ' principle was no longer in fashion .
The European Council 's adoption of the pact on immigration and asylum , initiated by the French Presidency , represents a considerable step forward .
With respect to the fight against climate change , Europe needs to set itself concrete objectives and show its global partners the way .
You have already spoken on this subject , Mr Sarkozy , but we hope that this agreement will be as balanced as possible , because it needs to take account of the economic situations of our countries , which are currently very unstable .
We also , however , need to examine the issue of the type of growth we will choose for the future .
In order to face up to the challenges before it , the European Union now needs the Treaty of Lisbon more than ever .
We understand the concerns of the Irish , but keeping the status quo is not an option .
Ireland needs to propose a solution during the December European Council : there are many of us calling for that .
In recent weeks , we have looked on with pride at a strong political Europe , united in adversity , presenting a determined front to its partners , and listened to on the international stage .
We hope that this new European mentality will become the rule and will endure .
The Treaty of Lisbon is the best solution available to us to achieve that .
( FR ) Mr President , I do not know which of the Rules of Procedure entitles me to take the floor , but thank you for having given me the opportunity .
President Sarkozy , I was under the impression that you were speaking here in your capacity as President of the European Council , and I responded in my capacity as chairman of a group in the European Parliament .
I did not have the impression that I was speaking to the President of the French Republic , otherwise I can assure you that my speech would have been quite different , as there are no differences between me and my French Socialist colleagues .
Mr President , first of all , it was entirely natural for Mr Schulz to respond .
As I understand it , he was doing so in a personal capacity .
My dear Martin , if I hurt you by comparing you to a French Socialist , I regret it .
( Applause )
In my mind , it was not an insult , but I freely admit that the important thing is what the addressee thinks .
Therefore , Mr Pöttering , I withdraw my remark .
Mr Schulz is also able to speak like a French Socialist .
Mr Nassauer , thank you for your support .
Yes , we need the Treaty of Lisbon and , to speak my mind , I will fight to the very last minute of the French Presidency to convince people of the need for Europe to develop institutions for the 21st century .
A politician is somebody who shoulders his responsibilities .
I supported the Lisbon process and I will fight to ensure that the Lisbon process reaches its conclusion ; and I would reiterate one thing : if we do not have Lisbon , we will have Nice , and if we have Nice , that is an end to new enlargements , which would be deeply regrettable .
Let us hope , then , that everybody will shoulder their responsibilities .
Mr Nassauer , I take your point that much work is needed on the climate change package .
I am well aware of that , but we must not give up on our ambitions , for I am convinced that it is easier to reach a compromise on a big ambition than on a small one .
A really ambitious proposal will be easier to reach a compromise on than a more limited proposal , and it would a mistake if , in trying to please everybody , we ended up with a completely incomprehensible European policy .
We must be aware of this risk .
Mr Goebbels , you talked about plumbing and architecture , and , indeed , I am counting on Luxembourg 's support so that the financial architecture can be fundamentally redesigned both within and outside our continent .
However , Mr Goebbels , this is not a criticism , far less an attack : it is simply a comment .
Mrs De Sarnez put it very well : we cannot fight against certain practices outside our continent , and yet tolerate them within it .
That is all .
Those who think they are being targeted are really assuming a lot ; I myself am not targeting anyone in particular , and I would not dream of doing so .
Mrs De Sarnez , thank you for saying that we have taken the right decisions .
May I say , personally , that I support your proposal for a European regulator : it makes sense .
Why can we not manage it straight away ?
It is because certain smaller countries think that , by defending their own system of regulation , they are defending their national identity .
I am not blaming anybody .
Therefore , Mrs De Sarnez , my view is that , at the end of the day , we will need a European regulator and that , in the meantime , we at least need to establish coordination between European regulators .
That is the route that we are proposing , with the Commission , and I think that it is the only realistic one , because otherwise we will reach an impasse .
You also mentioned the need for European economic governance and a European economic plan .
You are right to do so , but I should like , in connection with your speech , to challenge the claim , not made by you , equating any European economic initiative with an increase in the deficit .
Emphatically , enough is enough .
We have the right to speak freely .
It is possible to be in favour of a European economic policy without favouring an increase in the deficit , and we will not be able to coordinate European policies simply by means of a revival on request .
We - I am not saying ' you ' - must not put words in each other 's mouths like we did , back in the day , with those who dared to have an opinion on monetary policy : it is possible to advocate a different monetary policy without bringing into question the independence of the ECB .
I will say it : it is possible to be in favour of a European structural economic policy without favouring an increase in the deficit .
Let us stop saying that some are right and some are wrong .
Far from it , the European debate must be a real debate , and nobody has a monopoly on the truth .
From time to time , we need to step away - and this may be the only point on which I agree with Mr de Villiers - we sometimes need to step away from the dogmas that have so damaged the idea of Europe , dogmas that have even less legitimacy given that they often do not result from decisions made by democratic , and thus legitimate , bodies .
My own European ideal is strong enough for European democracy to be a true democracy .
Groupthink , dogmas , habits and conservatism have done a great deal of damage , and I will take the opportunity to say more on that in relation to another subject .
Mr Szymański , I should like to say that I understand full well Poland 's problems , particularly the dependence , up to 95 % , of its economy on coal , but I think that Poland needs Europe in order to modernise its mining industry and that we can perfectly well reach agreements with Poland on clean coal .
What is more , in order to modernise its mining industry , Poland needs the whole of Europe .
We need Poland , and Poland needs Europe .
It is on this basis that we , along with Mr Barroso , are going to seek a compromise with our Polish and Hungarian friends and some of those who have concerns about their growth .
Mr de Villiers , I have , as you say , overturned dogmas , because I believe in being pragmatic , but , honestly , do not ascribe to Lisbon , to the treaty , shortcomings that it does not have .
I am in a position to know that the Treaty of Lisbon is not a miracle .
It is not perfect , but , apart from in the Vendée , Mr de Villiers , there is no such thing as perfection , particularly when we are bringing together 27 countries with different governments and different histories .
You need to give up on the ideal treaty - you know full well that it will never exist .
Europeans are pragmatists , sensible people who would prefer an imperfect treaty that makes things better to a perfect treaty that will never exist , because there will never be an agreement on this intangible idea .
That is what Europe is all about : making progress every day , because we wanted to bring an end to war and because we want to create an area of democracy .
I think , Mr de Villiers , that you should turn your mind to a different fight , because this one appears to consist in your creating an imaginary enemy when it is quite clear , in the current crisis , that the people of Europe understand that working together is a strength , not a weakness .
Even somebody as strong and as talented as you will be powerless to face this financial crisis alone .
It would be better to achieve a proper compromise with the whole of Europe than to sit on your own in a corner , knowing that you are right .
On the subject of having a ' free hand ' , Mr de Villiers , my response applies to you , it is the response of a free man , including in French political debate .
And I think that the most important thing for us is to stop waffling , and I think that good compromises can be reached by sincere people who follow through on their ideas and that the problem with European political debate is a lack of ideas , which has affected all of us , all the political groups , as if we were paralysed at the idea of coming up with something new .
When Europe has moved forward , it has been because , at a given point , men and women have cleared new ground ; and the self-criticism for which you were calling is something that we should all undertake .
For a long time , we in Europe have acted as if we were immovable objects .
We followed the founding fathers , but we did not follow their example : we did not clear new paths , or come up with new ideas .
I firmly believe that , at this point , we need to show some imagination , because , in the end , the greatest risk comes from not doing anything , today , and from not being bold when faced with a completely new situation .
Mr Kozlík , transparency is absolutely vital .
On the issue of rating agencies , I think that it is the attitude of the rating agencies that has been the most scandalous part of the crisis .
These agencies rated products ' triple A ' on Friday , and then downgraded them to ' triple B ' on Monday .
We cannot carry on with this monopoly of three rating agencies , most of which are American .
The issue of the rating agencies , of their independence in relation to certain groups , and of the existence of a European rating agency will certainly be one of the crucial issues at the first summit on future regulation .
On the subject of competition , I should like to say to you - to all of you who spoke about competition - that I believe in competition , but I have had enough of people who want to make it an end in itself , when in truth it is simply a means to an end .
Competition is a means to growth ; it is not an end in itself , and I will make every effort to bring this concept back into the new European policy .
I believe in freedom , I believe in free trade , and I believe that we should reject protectionism , but competition must be a means for growth .
Competition as an objective , as an end in itself , is a mistake : I thought so before the crisis , and I still think so after the crisis .
Mr García-Margallo , you are right that we need a new Bretton Woods , because , as Mr Daul and Mr Schulz said just now , there is no point holding an international summit if all we are going to do is apply sticking plasters .

If we are going to change half the system , it is not worth it .
You mentioned accounting standards , but take a look at our banks .
To start with , the dictatorship of the US accounting standards has become intolerable .
Secondly , the amount that the banks can lend depends on their own funds and assets .
If we look at assets using mark-to-market , on the basis of a market that no longer exists , having been completely destabilised , we will impoverish the banks , which will consequently be even less able to do their job .
The question of changing accounting standards , as raised by the President of the Commission , had our full support - it was a matter of urgency .
I should also like , Mr President , to pay tribute to the European Parliament 's responsiveness in being able to vote for this change , because we reached unanimity in the codecision procedure with startling speed , which the European Council welcomed .
Mr Rasmussen , could we have avoided the crisis ?
Before we can decide that , we need to agree on what caused it .
What happened ?
The United States of America , our allies and our friends , have been living beyond their means for the past three decades .
The Federal Reserve Bank pursued a monetary policy that involved keeping interest rates extraordinarily low , which made funds available to anyone who wanted to borrow .
For the last 20 or 30 years , we have been carrying with us the astonishing debts of the world 's greatest power , and it is now up to the whole world to settle those debts .
Under those circumstances , the Americans need to shoulder their responsibilities and accept the consequences with us , but I do not see how we , on our own , could have told them to put a stop to this strategy .
I would add that some of our banks are no longer doing their job : a bank 's job is to lend to individuals and to businesses , to support individuals with the growth of their families and to support businesses with the growth of their projects , and to earn money after a given period .
Our banks have developed in what they call the trading rooms , which are places of speculation , and they considered for years that it was easier to earn money by speculating than by investing .
I would add that the mutualisation of risks has meant that all our banks behave themselves .
There are 8 000 banks in Europe , 44 of which operate internationally .
If we had taken the responsibility of allowing a bank to fail , as occurred in the US with Lehman Brothers , the whole of the system would have collapsed .
I do not know how we could have avoided the crisis , Mr Rasmussen , but I think that , if we had not responded as we did , the crisis would have buried us : that is something I believe quite strongly .
You say that we need proposals before Christmas , but actually we need them before mid-November .
I do indeed intend , with President Barroso , to take initiatives to ensure that we , as Europeans , go to the summit with one voice , attempting one more thing , Mr Rasmussen : we need to agree not on the lowest common denominator , but on the highest , because any consensus entails the risk that , in trying to force an artificial agreement , we may scale back our ambitions .
It is a risk .
I hope that we will remain ambitious , and not scale back our ambitions too much , but still speak with one voice .
I will not go back over hedge funds ; I have already said that they need to be regulated .
No financial institution , be it public or private , should escape regulation .
Mrs Neyts-Uyttebroeck , you asked whether discussions with Russia will continue regardless of events .
Of course not , but put yourself in our place .
Russia stopped its tanks 40 km outside Tbilisi , as we in Europe had asked it to .
Russia withdrew its troops back over the borders from before the crisis of 8 August .
Russia allowed observers to be deployed , most notably European observers , and Russia , albeit with rather bad grace , is going to the Geneva discussions .
If , given all that , we suspend the EU-Russia summit , who will be able to understand Europe 's policy ?
No one .
I would add that , along with President Barroso , we have taken the precaution of not suspending , but postponing the summit .
What is the difference ?
If we had decided to suspend the summit , we would have needed a unanimous decision from the European Council to resume , and in my opinion that would have been politically embarrassing .
The decision to postpone it allows us to resume without giving out gold stars that are not deserved .
I therefore believe that this strategy shows composure , and is calm and lucid .
I do not think we could have done anything else , and I remain convinced that Russia will be a partner with which we can have dialogue , with which we can be frank , but we can only encourage them to develop if we talk to them .
If , on the other hand , we do not talk , Russia will feel that it is surrounded , and our ideas will be less influential .
I am convinced of this but , of course , I may be proven wrong by future events .
It is therefore a question of accepting our responsibilities .
Mr Wojciechowski , it is not up to the President-in-Office of the Council to decide who should represent Poland .
Poland had two seats at the European Council , and it was up to Poland to decide who should be in them .
Imagine a Europe in which the President of the European Council said , ' no , you cannot come in , and you can ' .
What sort of Europe would that be ?
Poland has a president - whom you clearly do not support - and it has a prime minister ; it is up to them to act as statesmen and as Europeans to decide who should represent Poland .
In the end , we managed to get through it , and at the beginning of December I will have the opportunity to go to Poland , where I will tell the Polish President : ' You must keep your promise .
You promised to sign the Treaty of Lisbon , which your parliament ratified , and you must keep this promise . '
That is the credibility of a statesman and a politician .
( Applause )
I believe strongly enough in Poland 's importance in Europe to say so without anyone taking offence .
Mr Martin , we need a bold European democracy .
I am aware of your campaign , your campaign against corruption and for a fully-functioning democracy .
You are absolutely right , but I can tell you that , with President Barroso , we have shown that we can be bold .
Moreover , there are even people in this Chamber who felt that I was moving without a mandate .
If I had to wait until I had a mandate to move , I would certainly move less often .
Mrs Sudre , thank you , too , for your support .
Europe does exist now , and you are quite right that the status quo is not an option .
I think that is something on which we can all agree .
The worst possible outcome would be if , once the storm had passed , we carried on as if nothing had happened .
That would mean the end of the European ideal , and we do not have the right to let this opportunity pass us by .
So , then , some people are surprised : why are we holding a summit so quickly ?
This is why . It is because we said to ourselves that , if we waited too long , particularly if we waited until the new US President were elected , the situation could continue to worsen and we would have no answer .
Or else the situation would improve , and then , by next spring , everybody would have forgotten about it and nothing would change .
We therefore needed to hold the summit , or at any rate the first one , in November , regardless of the timetable in the US .
Ladies and gentlemen , I think I have responded to everyone who spoke .
I am also bound by the Presidency 's timetable and the press conference that I have to give with the President of the Commission and the President of the European Parliament .
I should like to apologise to the other speakers if I have not responded to everybody .
It is not , of course , because I do not want to , but because I have been asked to stick to the arrangements for the day .
I have tried my best , and I will , of course , have the opportunity to return to your Parliament in December , if you wish , to respond at greater length to the questions of everyone who takes the floor .
Mr President-in-Office of the European Council , it is clear both from the speeches and now from the applause that you have the support of the European Parliament .
President of the Commission . - I would just like very briefly to answer the question put to me by Mr Rasmussen .
I must also ask to be excused , as I have to be at the press conference .
The Commission will be represented by Commissioner Almunia .
As I said in my previous remarks , no area of the financial markets will be absent from our review .
I really want to thank you for the contribution that you personally - and many Members of the European Parliament - made in your report .
We will look at all these options .
As President Sarkozy has just said , we want to lead this global effort .
We believe that we can put some of those proposals into effect before Christmas , as you asked , but some are technically very delicate .
We will take a decision and will feed into the international debate on all those matters , but I believe it is also important to have technically sound proposals .
I am sure you have noticed that we have made everything that has been agreed with Ecofin - the financial road map - available to you .
It is not accurate to say that we have not legislated in financial services under this Commission .
Thirty-two legislative measures adopted under codecision or comitology have been adopted in the area of financial services since the beginning of this Commission , of which 19 were under codecision .
There will be several more in the coming weeks and months , starting with the proposal on rating agencies early next month .
Let me give you an example about rating agencies .
Let us be very open about this .
I personally spoke with several governments several times about the need for regulation on rating agencies .
The response was a definite ' no ' .
This is true .
That is why I ask you - some of those who criticise the Commission : maybe you can use some of your influence in your own governments or the parties that are in your governments .
That would be most helpful because , in fact , some months ago when we discussed this - and in this area Commissioner McCreevy was in favour of regulation for the notation agencies - the most ambitious proposal that some governments were considering was a code of conduct .
You may say that is all very well and the Commission has the right to do this .
That is true , but in financial services matters , things are not - as you know - as they are in many other matters .
When we were in a crisis - and the peak of the crisis was in September this year ( but since August of last year we have had this road map ) - we were , in fact , strongly advised by many in our governments not to put forward proposals that could raise the level of alarm or create a kind of alarm reflex .
This is a matter in which I believe the Commission has to be prudent .
In the very sensitive issues concerning financial markets we cannot have empty announcement effects .
We cannot just make proclamations .
It is very important in this matter to maintain coordination between Parliament , Commission and Council .
I would say that in the European Commission we are , by definition , in favour of a European dimension in regulation and in supervision .
I say this very frankly .
If the Commission does not often make proposals that you have rightly put forward , it was not always because we were sleeping or because there was an ideological bias .
It was because analysis of the situation showed that the possibility of achieving them was zero , or close to zero .
Very honestly , this is something I want to tell you .
We will have time to look at all the causes and all the stages of this process , but I think this is important for you to know in the debate .
Quite frankly , two weeks ago some of our governments were still saying that we did not need a European response .
Perhaps you noticed that I published an article in the European press asking - pleading - for a European response , and some of our governments were saying , ' No , we can do it at national level .
We do not need a European dimension ' .
So let us try to act collectively .
Let us look at ourselves critically , as we all need to do , but let us try to avoid a simplistic response to a very complex issue .
We are ready to work constructively with the European Parliament and the Council in order to find good solutions for Europe and , possibly , for the rest of the world .
( Applause )

( FR ) Madam President , I very much regret that Mr Pöttering did not give me the floor when I requested it , because I was simply asking him for the right of reply , and I would have preferred it to be while the President of the Council was here .
I am incensed at the scapegoating of the French Socialists that we heard here .
I have never , never seen a President-in-Office of the Council call into question any political party .
I have never seen a President of the French Republic ridicule his compatriots in an international arena like this , and I therefore find it offensive , and I should have liked to have a formal apology from the French Government .
( The President cut off the speaker )
Madam President , on a point of order .
We have yet again a further example of the ludicrous mismanagement of the affairs of this Chamber .
It is about time that the presidency realised that when votes are to be held they should be held at the time promulgated , and no one is more important than the exercise of our democratic rights during votes .
I ask you , please , to raise , at the presidency , how our affairs are managed , so that that they can be improved and we vote at the right time and speeches are kept to the right length .
( Applause )
Mr Atkins , if you do not mind , we will now continue the debate .
Ladies and gentlemen , I would ask you to adhere scrupulously to your speaking time .
Do not be surprised if I cut you off .

Madam President , it is a pity that the President-in-Office of the Council has gone , because I had a message for him , but I hope Mr Jouyet will take it .
What he said this morning on climate change is extremely important , and he was right to remind Mr Nassauer that now is not the time to abandon our climate change ambitions and to water down the proposals before us .
( Applause )
There has been a huge lobby in this Parliament and in the Council .
It started long before the financial crisis broke this summer : it started last year .
Hardly was the ink dry in Berlin when people started to try and water it down .
President Sarkozy asked for the engagement of Parliament .
He is going to get more than the engagement : he is going to get us in codecision .
I do not know why we are even discussing the importance of codecision : there will be no climate change package without the codecision of this Parliament .
We want agreement by Christmas .
The Socialist Group can give you that commitment .
I am not sure about the other side - perhaps Mr Sarkozy will ask his people .
The Socialist Group wants a commitment by Christmas , but not any agreement .
We want a credible agreement ; we want one that balances environment , jobs and competitiveness .
We do not , however , want one which is the lowest common denominator .
President Sarkozy just reminded us about what happens if you go for the lowest common denominator .
We know that individual countries have problems - and we can talk about them - but we need to have a package that is credible for the international talks , not one based on offsets in other countries because that is not a credible package , and not one which dismantles the emissions trading scheme and destroys the carbon price .
President-in-Office , I hope you will take these messages back to Mr Sarkozy .
Mr Nassauer talked about the cost of the climate change package .
Today we are throwing billions and billions at the financial crisis that our banks are facing .
Of course , there is a cost which the Commission has worked out for the package , but I do not want to go back to our citizens in a few years time and say that , because we failed to act here and now on climate change , billions more will need to be found .
Worse than the money involved , lives will be destroyed all over the planet .
Let us have some political courage from all sides of this House ; let us go forward and make the agreement with the Council and do it before Christmas in time for the international talks .
( Applause )
( LT ) I would like to say just one thing .
The President of the Commission said that the European Union 's response to the crisis was insufficient .
In fact , the response was strong , Member States responded , but European institutions were slow to react .
That was illustrated perfectly today in this hall - when Mr Sarkozy left , all the journalists left .
No one is interested in us .
The reason for this , above all , is our inability to reform the way we work .
There are many splendid people in both the European Commission and the European Parliament , but the bureaucratic system inhibits any initiatives .
We were able to react to the tsunami in Asia , but tomorrow we will discuss a budget , which has been prepared without taking into account the fact that we are experiencing an economic tsunami in Europe .
We could do something , give other priorities in our budget .
We could also set priorities in our parliamentary committees , which would help us to survive this crisis and meet people 's expectations .
The European Commission should be reformed .
I would like to stress that the Commission 's strategic functions should be separated from its technical ones , and then it would work more effectively .
Madam President , to the President-in-Office , but now in absentia , I would say : you spoke eloquently this morning about the challenge to our economic future , which is rightly at the top of our agenda , but no less rightly and no less eloquently you made it clear at the summit , and again today , that your intention is to maintain the timetable and the targets for tackling climate change .
Your words are fundamental and right .
The climate change package , you said , is so important that we cannot simply lose it under the pretext of a financial crisis .
It was very significant that Chancellor Merkel , despite the real concerns her country and others have , made it clear that Germany spoke out in favour of implementing the climate change targets and finding solutions before the December summit .
If that is the challenge you give us , I believe Parliament will respond , effectively and in good time .
But the focus now , I have to say , is with the Council .
To achieve this , we will need reassurances for the countries which have real problems , as Poland does with coal .
We will need to be clear about the criteria for the lighter touch which we know will be provided for a limited list of industries and sectors faced with real leakage challenges .
We must also be very clear that our support for biofuels in transport is dependent on the development of fuels from sustainable sources .
Without that , we could do irreparable damage to our environment and to the habitats of people , wildlife and plant life .
We have set ourselves an enormous challenge , but it is one that we cannot afford to lose .
An environmental disaster would make our current economic problems pale into insignificance .
As President Sarkozy said , the two policies must ride together .
But we must just make sure - and the President must make sure - that Parliament is not left stranded by the Council 's inability to follow his lead .
( FR ) Madam President , I am the first French socialist involved in this debate .
I regret that the President-in-Office of the European Council has left , having seen fit to joke about a major party in his great country .
He has every right to do so , but he also has a duty to stay to hear the response : that is my complaint against him .
Equally , I do not think it a good thing for the President-in-Office of the European Council to try to create divisions in one of Parliament 's major groups .
Mr Schulz responded to him .
When he gibes at French socialism , just consider the target of his gibes .
He forgets that French socialism gave Europe François Mitterrand , he forgets that it gave us Jacques Delors ...
( Applause )
... and he forgets that , in the interests of giving himself credibility in Europe , he has even borrowed two socialists , Bernard Kouchner and Jean-Pierre Jouyet .
( SV ) Madam President , two things are important .
The first one is the financial crisis .
It is important that we speak with one voice from Europe .
The last time we shared the handling of a crisis with the US was when we were to discuss terrorism .
We imported a lot of rules that now seem very foreign to the European way of thinking with regard to personal privacy .
We need to have a European approach to this crisis and we therefore need to have common rules and standards for things like transparency , solidarity and what financial instruments are to be used on the European market .
The Stability Pact would be an excellent tool for this .
The second is the climate change package .
We have voted on the climate change package in the two main committees and , with a large majority , have decided on a line that supports the Commission 's proposal .
We are not about to go into reverse with regard to either the objectives or the timetable .
If the Presidency is serious about emphasising both the objectives and the timetable , we will await notification of when we can sit down and discuss the matter in concrete terms .
As far as Parliament is concerned , we will use our power of codecision and the codecision procedure within the interinstitutional balance .
( Applause )


( DE ) Madam President , I would also have preferred to speak directly to Mr Sarkozy and Mr Barroso , in particular because I wanted to approach the President of the Commission , as we have had little success with some of the Commissioners in recent years .
The citizens expect Europe to concern itself with important matters and not with trivialities .
Mr Schulz , who has just left the Chamber , has lumped all the Conservatives together .
People do not expect to be nannied over minor issues .
Instead they want more freedom from regulation for small and medium-sized businesses and for citizens and more action on major questions .
I would like to emphasise that the European Parliament has already called on the Commission in 2003 to present a proposal on credit rating agencies .
Amazingly the Commission has become aware in the meantime of the term hedge fund , although this undoubtedly is not true of all the Commissioners .
The Commission President is now looking into this area .
Mr Schulz made things very simple for himself by stating that only the Conservatives were to blame .
In fact it was the Council which over many years prevented any progress being made in the area of supervision .
It was the German finance ministers Mr Eichel and Mr Steinbrück .
I would like to remind Parliament that the person who was regularly responsible for slowing things down at a European level - and I would ask the socialists to tell their Chairman this - was Mr Koch-Weser , who now holds a good position at Deutsche Bank .
In future we expect Europe to introduce its moral values and priorities into the regulation of the financial markets .
This means sustainability , not just maximising the risks in order to maximise the returns .
It also means focusing on the fundamentals , as a medium-sized business would do .
This is something which we must introduce in an international context .
It is not enough simply to hold international conferences .
Europe must be united in order to ensure at an international level that something like this does not happen again .
( FR ) Madam President , on looking at the Council conclusions , I am struck by something .
The issue of pay is mentioned , and quite rightly , as it is a major issue that we need to deal with together , and take responsibility for .
However , there is also the issue of tax havens , and , on that subject , I have the impression - though I may have misread it - that , even between the lines , the text is silent .
The President-in-Office of the Council has said that we need to be ambitious and not just follow the lowest common denominator ; I would invite him to follow the same line on the issue of tax havens .
I would also invite President Barroso perhaps to enlarge his task force to handle this crisis by including Commissioner Kovács , if he really wants to deal with these issues .
Finally , I would invite the Commission to call on the Member States to revise their national action plans .
What is the point of us coordinating economic policies on the basis of national programmes that do not even take account of the predictions of recession that we will need to face ?
If it takes economic governance seriously , the Commission needs to require the Member States to review their plans in light of the reality of the economic situation that they will need to face up to .
At last , everybody has had their say and , in the end , we have a certain amount of European cooperation , but it is not enough .
We have an historic opportunity to give the States the tools to influence the reality of economic policies and the Member States ' economic and industrial strategies , so let us make the most of it .
On behalf of the Commission , you need to take the initiative to provide a framework for the way in which the Member States use the nationalisation of the banks to turn them into instruments for the long-term funding of the investment we need ...
( The President cut off the speaker )

( FR ) Madam President , Mr Jouyet , the European Council devoted part of its conclusions to energy security , but this issue has passed under the radar , and has been overlooked in the debates .
It is now more important than ever .
I support the Council 's conclusions , but the devil is in the detail , and it is precisely those details , and specifics , that are lacking .
I should like to raise two of them .
Firstly , there is the key issue of the EU 's relations with the producer and transit countries .
The idea of stepping up our energy diplomacy is fully justified , but what is always missing is the will , on the part of the Member States , to agree on the message we send to third countries and the consistency of our policies at national level in relation to the common interest of the Union .
In short , we lack a common foreign and energy security policy .
The lowest common denominator , namely the coordination of our positions towards our suppliers and transit countries , is a long way from being achieved and applied .
Thus , instead of speaking with one voice , the policy in force is ' every man for himself ' , as illustrated by a series of bilateral agreements that weaken our negotiating position and tarnish the image of our unity towards the outside .
The second problem is the absence of European projects .
There is no mention of oil and gas pipeline projects , which are vital if we are to guarantee our energy security , and the fate of Nabucco now seems uncertain , despite it being referred to as a high-priority project .
We also need to learn the lessons of the Georgian crisis with regard to energy security , by establishing an effective system to protect existing infrastructure in transit countries during periods of war or political instability .
In conclusion , I recall the Council 's watchwords : responsibility and solidarity .
It now remains for us to take more action , otherwise there is a risk that European external policy on energy security will never get off the page .
- ( PL ) Madam President , as I take the floor in the debate on the European Council conclusions , I should like to refer to two issues .
The first of these relates to the financial crisis .
The latter has proved beyond all doubt that the system of regulatory oversight of banks is in need of radical improvement .
The changes should focus on improving asset risk assessment and adjusting precautionary measures to new financial instruments .
Changes leading to the elimination of the procyclical nature of decisions on mortgages are also needed , however .
Mortgages increase as the price of property rises and decrease as it falls .
It is precisely that mechanism that contributes to the emergence of speculative bubbles .
The second issue I wish to mention concerns the climate package .
I welcome the Council 's decision to seek a compromise on the system for the sale of authorisations for CO2 emissions .
There are Member States in which 90 % of energy is sourced from coal .
If these countries were required to purchase 100 % of their authorisations from as early as 2013 , the effect on their economies would be disastrous .
Common sense and the principle of equal treatment require transitional periods to be introduced .
Madam President , in March 2007 under the German presidency , and again in March 2008 under the Slovenian , Europe 's leaders committed themselves to achieving a target of reducing greenhouse gas emissions by at least 20 % by 2020 , an already limited ambition .
Let us be under no illusion : in order to secure a post-2012 international agreement on climate change at Copenhagen , we will have to make a clear and unambiguous statement through our legislation .
The current international financial liquidity crisis and the economic backdrop has allowed many to grow cautious of setting long-term CO2 targets or of committing industry to achieving the necessary greenhouse gas reductions and thus driving Europe 's economy forward towards the low-carbon , sustainable economy which we so desperately need and which , I agree , will spark a third industrial revolution with exciting first-mover advantage for Europe in the whole area of new technologies .
However , the EU 's post-2012 targets should not be seen in the light of the current economic crisis .
I believe our governments will be able to resolve that in the shorter term and we must deliver now so that future generations will not bear the brunt - including the economic brunt - of any delay in terms of the climate and energy package .
We cannot pay the higher price in the future for our inability to act now or history will not be kind to us - or as President Sarkozy said , we will miss our date with history .
The European Parliament has given me , as one of the rapporteurs on the climate package , a strong mandate to lead negotiations with Council in the trialogue , and I take this responsibility seriously .
We must maintain the targets and timetable and , as Mr Sarkozy said , major ambition with some compromise will be the order of the day .
I look forward to a very close cooperation with both the Commission and the Council under the French presidency .
I believe that together we can and will find an effective and workable agreement on the climate and energy package by this December ...
( The President cut off the speaker . )
Madam President , it is interesting to see that financial market supervision has become a Chefsache in the Council .
I appreciate the setting-up of the high-level group with Mr Jacques de Larosière , which we in the EP have been demanding for several years now .
I want to give this clear message : coordination alone is not enough .
We really need institutional solutions .
Voluntary cooperation of national supervisors on the basis of ' comply or explain ' systems like in the Solvency II and the CRD proposals is insufficient , and the Financial Stability Forum , which is pretty unaccountable and which only has representatives from larger countries , with their national interests , is not sufficient .
It does not give a clear voice from Europe .
We need a unified architecture similar to the European system of central banks , which is perfectly placed to be an arbiter internally and a strong voice internationally .
( DE ) Madam President , first of all I would like to congratulate the Council on its agreement on the third way for the Climate Change and Energy package .
This is a sensible solution which will allow us to avoid the compulsory purchase of the energy companies , but nevertheless ensures consistent competition .
The second thing I want to say is that the subject of CO2 is , of course , particularly important in the context of the financial crisis , because with the auction we run the risk once again of bypassing the real economy and creating a new speculative financial instrument which will drive energy-intensive industry out of Europe .
I would therefore ask you once again to consider very carefully whether the free allocation of CO2 certificates with a clear 20 % allowance would not make more sense than taking the money away from businesses which need it to invest in innovation and research in order to achieve the 20 % reduction .
We need to give a boost to investment , particularly for small and medium-sized enterprises .
Therefore I am also calling for the trans-European networks , in particular in the area of energy , to be significantly developed and for strategies to be developed for more effective energy efficiency measures , because this is particularly important for our small businesses , for employment in Europe and for net wages in Europe .
Finally , I would like to call upon Commissioner Kovács to consider how we could get the economy moving again using tax policy and , in particular , using new and shorter opportunities for depreciation and appropriate allowances .
By implementing new tax policies and incentives , it may be possible to stimulate the European economy .

Madam President , it would not be far-fetched to liken the crisis in the financial markets to a hurricane : once the wind abates there is an illusion of calm , but the devastation left behind takes years to clear up , and so it will be with the economic and social consequences of the turmoil we have seen .
We have to strike a balance between continuity and adaptation in the light of changed circumstances .
In terms of energy policy , that means sticking to strategic aims on security of supply , sustainability and competitiveness , while considering whether we need to change the tactics , the means .
Energy is vital to our way of life and standard of living .
It is a long-term industry , where building new capacity takes 5 , 10 or 15 years and obviously cannot be a short-term answer to short-term challenges of the sort we face .
In the same vein , tackling climate change is a long-term matter , and there is no silver bullet or simple solution .
As regards tactics , there are those who have reservations about the level and timing of the targets within the climate-energy package .
There are those who were anxious about carbon leakage or the offshoring of European jobs , well before the financial crisis .
Maybe we have to look at the detail , if not the principle involved , again .
However , my main concern at this time is what we should avoid doing , and that is falling into the trap of overregulation , because overregulation could precipitate something much worse : a re-run of the 1930s slump .
I know well the importance of good regulation for making markets function well and for transparency , but let us not kill off the goose that lays the golden egg .
- ( PL ) Thanks to the efforts of the President and Prime Minister of my country , Poland , common sense prevailed at the Brussels Summit , and an appropriate message on the climate package was delivered .
Pursuant to agreements at the Summit , for which thanks are due to Europe 's leaders , the threat of unduly onerous environmental restrictions that would affect the new Member States in particular has receded .
It has not totally disappeared , however .
The Summit also dealt with the financial crisis .
Curiously , a smaller summit attended by the largest countries in the European Union had been held a few days before .
This smaller summit was reminiscent of the Politburo of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union .
It is not right for the most powerful Member States of the Union to impose their solutions on the other countries .
In addition , the application of double standards is irritating .
I refer to the fact that it is acceptable to finance banks in the Member States , but not acceptable to assist Polish shipyards .
In this respect , the European Union is not unlike George Orwell 's Animal Farm , where all animals are equal but some are more equal than others .
- ( CS ) I consider the discussion on the extent and rate of improvements to environmental , social and other standards , along with the revision of European regulations , to be a key issue for resolving the economic recession which the European economy is now facing .
Mr Schulz has quoted here with ridicule the undertakings of the Commission and the Council , but Parliament too can reduce the over-regulation of the Union .
It is precisely the added negative value which undermines the competitiveness of the EU at a global level .
The automobile , electronics , glass , textile and other industries do not need an injection of funds : they need sensible levels of regulation .
The financial crisis is not the result of a lack of regulation , but the failure of control mechanisms .
That is what failed to protect investments and what threatens employment .
The same thing applies to regulations at a global level .
The crisis and the global economic recession offer an opportunity for developing a more thorough set of regulations for global markets and not just European ones , with the aim of achieving long-term sustainable , environmental and socially acceptable development .
This is the environment which we must create for Europeans at a global level as well .
Otherwise I welcome the agreement of the Council on the energy package .
( EL ) Madam President , what we need here today is a new economic and social agreement , a ' new deal ' .
If the EU fails to achieve this , then market greed will continue to encourage counterproductive investments which mortgage its future and the future of its workers and citizens .
What do we mean by a new deal ?
We need a new system of economic governance , a new role for the European Central Bank , a new perception of the social state , not as the tail of the free market but as the key to development .
We need new European funding , a green development fund , a serious globalisation fund and , of course , a bigger budget for Europe , and we need a new social Maastricht of employment and growth .



Madam President , many European citizens - including some whom I represent - wanted to ask Mr Barroso and Mr Sarkozy whether they thought it was fair that the cost of this financial crisis should be borne by the ordinary European citizen , rather than by those banking executives in the United States or in Europe who made millions out of acting negligently - or even criminally in some cases - and who now enjoy their millions by having them in tax-free havens or in secure savings accounts .
They also wanted to ask Mr Barroso and Mr Sarkozy whether it was fair that , when the American economy catches a cold or has cancer , it should be the Europeans who undergo chemotherapy .
' Yes ' to cooperation with the Americans , but ' no ' to dependence .


( FR ) Madam President , Mr Jouyet , I was in Tbilisi when the president came to negotiate the peace plan , and I should of course like to pay tribute to him for his rapid action to put a stop to this war .
However , the war was partly our own failure : for 14 years , we have been overcautious ; we have looked on in silence as the provocations in the separatist regions escalated .
It is true that this war was a wake-up call for Europe , confronting it with its responsibilities , but the fire is still smouldering in the Caucasus , and we must do everything we can to bring a definitive end to the frozen conflicts , in the interests of the security of the whole of Europe .
I also know , Mr Jouyet , that the countries of Europe are divided with respect to Georgia 's entry into NATO ; myself , I am against it .
I will make you a proposal : I call on the European Union to propose neutrality for these countries in the Caucasus .
Only neutrality will calm tensions with Russia and definitively protect this subregion from new conflicts .
Neutrality will guarantee the security of these new democracies , and will help to ensure our own security .
- ( PL ) One of the main issues raised during the Summit was the global financial crisis , in conjunction with the climate change package .
It was right for the Council to focus on this problem .
What is worrying , however , is that the key decisions were taken earlier , at a meeting of the representatives of a mere four countries .
The position was subsequently consolidated in the so-called Eurogroup , and only then taken to the European Council .
This procedure raises grave concern as to whether the European Council is really being treated seriously , or simply as a forum that rubber-stamps the decisions of a small group of leaders .
Are we to consider that , for all intents and purposes , a three-speed Europe has now emerged ?
In the light of the global crisis , it is also worth reconsidering earlier decisions on limiting carbon dioxide emissions .
Immediate implementation of the former could further intensify the recession , especially in the countries of Central and Eastern Europe such as Poland , with negative consequences for the entire European economy .
A separate package must therefore be adopted for those countries whose main source of energy is coal .
Madam President , I will be brief in view of the responses that have already been made .
I should like to say to Mrs McAvan that we completely agree with her that the package should be ambitious , that we hope that , if possible , with Parliament 's assistance , we will be able to reach agreement by Christmas , and that we agree that it should not be just any agreement .
We thus fully share your philosophy , and we hope that we will achieve a good balance between competitiveness and sustainable development .
Turning to Mrs Starkevičiūtė , what I wanted to say to her is that it is clear that the financial crisis has already had a major impact .
We must , and I would say this to other speakers as well , stay on course , and that is why we are sticking with the energy and climate change package .
On the subject of the EU 's budget , we will debate that together tomorrow , in the context of your first reading .
I believe that the Commission 's proposal focuses on growth and sustainable development and that we must not move away from that , but we will return to that during tomorrow 's debate .
In relation to Mr Bowis 's comments , it is clear that we cannot put our ambitions regarding the energy and climate change package on hold in view of the financial crisis - that has already been emphasised .
We must , though , take account of the variations in national sources of energy and of sectoral balances .

To Messrs Poignant and Savary I would say , first of all , that I recognise the great contribution made by the French socialists to the debates in the European Parliament and their great contribution to the Socialist Group in the European Parliament and , secondly , that I consider myself to be one of those who is most aware of how much Europe owes to Jacques Delors and François Mitterrand .
I also think that the French Socialist Party sometimes needs to trumpet it more loudly , which would avoid certain ambiguities : ' Europe is not a cause for the right or for the left ; it is a European cause ' .
That is the lesson I have learned from Jacques Delors , and I know that Messrs Savary and Poignant share this viewpoint .
Concerning what Mrs Ek said , of course we are sincere with regard to the objectives and the timetable .
We must act to ensure that the package is ready for the international challenges that Europe will need to face .
With regard to the comments from Mr Radwan and others on the financial crisis , clearly we are taking action to protect citizens , to protect savers , and to ensure that those responsible for the crisis in the various institutions have to pay for it .
We have already said that the duty of care principle should apply here .
The money that has been put in must be used to protect citizens and savers ; it is not intended to be given as a gift to the parties who are primarily responsible for the financial crisis , be it in the United States or Europe , because they bet too heavily on speculation .
Mrs Berès is quite right to emphasise , as has been said , the fight against tax havens both within and outside the EU .
This matter was not dealt with properly in the conclusions of the European Council but , as the President-in-Office of the Council said , there will be other European meetings - and ' European ' is the right word .
This is not a two , three or four-speed Europe : these are European meetings in which we can draft , together , international financial regulations - new international financial regulations - that will pave the way for better long-term funding of the economy .
I endorse what has been said on the need for diversity in the reflection group set up by the Commission .
Mr Saryusz-Wolski is quite right , and makes a very important point : we have not sufficiently highlighted the Council 's conclusions , particularly with regard to energy security .
What was done during the last European Council on energy security is an extremely important point .
At the same time , we need to give practical shape to what was said concerning relations with producer and transit countries .
We are quite clear on what messages we need to send to third countries , and we must obviously have that in mind in the context of dialogue with Russia .
We also need to give shape to these conclusions by supporting projects to diversify sources of supply , such as those have been mentioned , in particular Nabucco .
Of course , it was , in this way , a certain type of Europe of energy that came into being during the last European Council .
Regarding Mr Rosati 's comments , as we have said , we must take account of the specific features of the energy situation in Poland , particularly with regard to coal , but it is clear that Poland will also have a responsibility to meet in the context of the preparations for the Poznán summit later in the year .
Finally , I am in complete agreement with what Mrs Doyle said .
We must have a sense of responsibility .
The financial crisis must not make us forget the response we need to make to the environmental crisis , and we must not hide behind the financial crisis .
With regard to what Mrs van den Burg called for , we do indeed need better institutional coordination at supervisor level .
We need to distinguish between supervision and regulation , and , in terms of supervisors , we need better coordination at institutional level .
Like Mr Rübig , I am delighted at the agreement reached on the ' third way ' energy proposal .
It is , in my opinion , a thoroughly satisfactory compromise .
That , I think , is what I can tell you .
Equally , it is important to have tax incentives for energy saving : there I share his point of view .
Turning to what Mr Chichester said , it is true that we need structural solutions both for the financial crisis - that will be the challenge for the upcoming international summits - and for climate change , and we must , above all , have good regulation , not overregulation .
Finally , regarding Mr Czarnecki 's comments , it is clear that , in the face of certain industrial problems , we need to examine the adaptation options in some countries .
This is the case for Poland and its naval dockyards ; we are well aware of the issue .
Concerning what Mrs Isler Béguin said , lastly , we know that dealing with the problems in the Caucasus will be a long drawn-out process , and that Europe must also undertake preventive action .
I agree with her that we must also be more forward-thinking regarding the status of these regions and Russia 's neighbours .
Member of the Commission . - ( FR ) Madam President , I have four points to make in five minutes .
Firstly , Europe has responded , finally united .
We had not begun ' united ' , but we responded in unison in the meetings of the Eurogroup and of the European Council , and we must continue to do so .
That is the message that , I believe , everyone endorses .
A union that moves from coordinating aid packages to coordinating banking systems .
It is absolutely necessary to coordinate such systems at European level so as not to create problems in certain countries .
A union in Europe designed for the global governance of the monetary and financial system .
That is something that has been repeated here several times , indeed many times , at Council level .
Where a number of Member States are concerned , moreover , it is a new message that must not be forgotten next week .
Secondly , I completely agree - and this is something that the President of the Commission and the President-in-Office of the Council said - that , in order to tackle a new phase of better regulation of the financial system at European level , Europe must , for the next few years , play a leadership role at global level where such regulation is concerned .
I completely agree with those of you who have resolutely supported supervision that is institutionalised , and not just coordinated , at European level .
Thirdly , I entirely agree with those of you who have talked of the necessity of adapting the national reform programmes and the Lisbon strategies to the challenges of today 's and tomorrow 's real economy .
Moreover , this is work that is in progress and that the Commission will present , to both you and the Council , in December .
Furthermore , it is necessary , where this new dimension and this adaptation of the Lisbon Strategy are concerned , to take account of the industrial fabric and , in particular , of small and medium-sized enterprises , which are the main victims of the lack of credit brought about by the crisis in the banking system .
Finally , the budget .
It is necessary , of course , to use the budget and the national budgets without creating sustainability problems for the future .
Instead , the margins for manoeuvre in fiscal and budgetary policy should be used , and this within the framework of the Stability and Growth Pact revised in 2005 .
There is a lot of room for flexibility , but there is also the need - and you , with the Council , are the budgetary authority-to begin to conceive of the European budget .
That too , moreover , is the subject for a real debate .
( Applause )
The debate is closed .
In accordance with Rule 103 , paragraph 2 of the Rules of Procedure , I have received six motions for resolution .
The vote will take place tomorrow , Wednesday 22 October 2008 .
Written statements ( Rule 142 )
in writing . - ( RO ) The decisions taken as part of the European Council meeting of 15 and 16 October 2008 are of strategic importance to Europe 's future .
First of all , I welcome the discussions on the ratification of the Treaty of Lisbon .
The European Union ( EU ) needs to implement the institutional reforms stipulated in the Treaty in order to guarantee that the organisation functions in an efficient , coherent manner which is more transparent to Europe 's citizens .
It is therefore a main priority that the process for ratifying the Treaty of Lisbon continue and be completed as soon as possible in all 27 Member States .
Secondly , as rapporteur on regional cooperation in the Black Sea region and a member of the Committee on Foreign Affairs , I would like to emphasise the importance of the foreign policy aspects .
I would like to reiterate the urgency of developing a common European policy on energy , with the aim of promoting energy security and European unity , as well as of diversifying the energy supply through strong support for strategic projects like the Nabucco pipeline .
Last but not least , I welcome the decision to strengthen the EU 's relations with its eastern neighbours , in this case the Republic of Moldova , through signing a new far-reaching cooperation agreement .
Furthermore , the EU needs to continue to be actively involved in Georgia , as well as in resolving all the conflicts in the Black Sea region .
in writing . - ( FR ) I should firstly like to convey to the French Presidency of the European Union exercised by Mr Sarkozy , President of the French Republic , my congratulations on the energy , passion and vision with which he is assuming his mandate .
Whether it is a question of war in the Caucasus , which has been prevented , or the action taken to resolve the financial and economic crisis , the Presidency has shown how much we need a strong and united European Union and a stable presidency to champion our values in a world that moves at a rapid pace and that has become much more complex .
With regard to the financial crisis and the need for the economy to go on functioning properly , I am in favour of Member States using their financial strength to intervene in order to restore confidence .
The Member States use what , in the private sphere , are resources not shown on the balance sheet ; in other words , guarantees .
It is in this context that I would float the idea of looking into setting up a global public instrument for assessing States .
This would be located with the International Monetary Fund ( IMF ) , and its governance would be indisputable and independent .
Such a global public agency for assessing States would be very useful in terms of ensuring that global finance and the world economy were operating properly and that , therefore , due social progress was also being made .
The agreement expressed by the European Council on 15 and 16 October is a start , but it is not enough .
We need to rebalance European Monetary Union , in conjunction with development and social policies .
We need a single Community policy and new institutional and economic governance to restore the basic balance of the economy in the eurozone .
The creation of a joint European fund basically needs to be re-examined as the consequence of direct measures taken to deal with the credit crunch and it needs to be made clear that taxpayers cannot be burdened in the long term .
The philosophy of allowing the credit crunch to regulate itself applied so far at national level harbours dangers of the nationalization of economic and social policies and the emergence of a multiple-track European economy .
This splintering of the institutional profile of the EU should be avoided .
Europe has a unique and historic opportunity and it must put forward its new economic and social development model , as it had started to do through policies on climate change , energy security , social stability and a sustainable economy .
When the economic crisis has run its course , it should find the EU much stronger at political and institutional level , more social and leading the way on policy on climate change .
in writing . - ( RO ) I would like to welcome the conclusions of the European Council meeting of 15 and 16 October 2008 concerning the need to redefine the European Union 's policy on its eastern neighbours , in particular with regard to the Republic of Moldova .
The European Union actually needs to include the Black Sea region and , obviously , the Republic of Moldova on its list of political priorities .
We need to define a clear mandate for negotiating a new agreement on increased cooperation with this country , however with the very clear condition that there will be a need to record evident progress and for the Communist government in Chişinău to scrupulously adhere to democratic standards and the statutory norms of European law , as well as a need to respect the independence of the judicial system and the right of the press to free expression .
Quelling the Communist authorities ' antidemocratic abuses and excesses , amending legislation in order to annul the provisions preventing citizens with dual or multiple citizenship from having access to public office and standing , and modifying the electoral code in line with the standards of the European Union 's Member States and the recommendations from the European Council are the preconditions for signing this agreement
Romania has been and will be the main proponent of the Republic of Moldova 's future integration into Europe and I expect the Moldovan authorities to take specific action in this direction .
in writing . - A new Bretton Woods has to be well prepared .
A rising chorus of leading politicians is in favour of organising a world conference to tackle the structural flaws of current world finance and revamp the international architecture in this field .
It goes without saying that a coming together of old and new economic powers is badly needed for such a historical task .
But a world conference ( a new Bretton Woods ! ) has to be well prepared .
Firstly , one needs to define the analytical underpinnings of the reconstruction of world finance .
Keynes and Dexter White led their experts for a significant period of time , despite it being wartime , in order to produce a workable blueprint .
We have to make sure that such a blueprint is available by the time decisions are made .
The team led by Jacques de Larosiere could help a lot in this respect .
Secondly , there is need for the major economic powers to see eye to eye on key issues .
And here things are more complicated .
I would very much hope the EU would take a leading role in coalescing efforts to revamp the international financial system and to overhaul the regulatory and supervisory frameworks so that finance can genuinely serve the economy .
in writing . - Europe , including Ireland , needs the Lisbon Treaty if we are to develop coherent and effective policies to tackle the global crises of financial system meltdown , Climate Change , and , under-development of much of the world .
Economic nationalism cannot solve these global challenges .
Neither will allowing the financial institutions or transnational corporations a free hand to do as they choose , while expecting the taxpayer to bail them out when crisis hits .
We need a system of global governance which includes transnational regulation of the financial markets . Indeed , including a capacity to tax such institutions in a way which prevents them from playing one country off another .
A system of taxation of currency exchange is necessary to stabilise those markets and could also provide a valuable resource to fill the funding gap in the implementation of the Millennium Development Goals ( MDG ) .
Such a levy system is usually known as a ' Tobin Tax ' .
James Tobin first proposed it following the USA 's destruction of the Bretton Woods system .
It would have a three- fold effect ; 1 , help stabilise the currency markets ; 2 , provide substantial funds to help implement the MDG ; 3 , reclaim part of the democratic space conceded until now to the financial markets .
The single European currency has formed a barrier which has protected the European Union from worse problems during this crisis .
In this context , the euro has indisputably been a European success .
Faced with deregulation and crisis in the markets , a whole series of mutually contradictory national actions has been unleashed .
An agreement has been rushed through which we ultimately welcome , but we cannot forget the Commission 's excessive passivity when a modicum of prudent and forward-looking vision was needed .
In recent years - not months - this Parliament has debated and adopted well-grounded proposals for reform , particularly in the area of market regulation and supervision .
It is based on this credibility that we demand that the Council Presidency and the Commission actively involve this House in the reform solutions , which must meet three objectives .
Firstly , in an integrated Europe , systemic risks cannot continue to be regulated at national level .
Structural action must be taken with clear and stable rules guaranteeing that the system will be robust .
Secondly , in a globalised world , Europe must be an active partner in the creation of a new international framework involving the main partners .
Thirdly , at a time when economic recession is already a certainty , we must , in a coordinated manner , implement an economic recovery package which guarantees growth and employment and allows families and businesses to recover their confidence .
in writing . - ( PT ) The essential element in this debate has once again been omitted : in other words , there must be a break with existing policies which are the main cause of the current crises .
However , it was interesting yesterday to listen to the great defenders of neoliberalism now admitting that something must change , but only in terms of ' recasting capitalism ' , as indicated by President Sarkozy .
This is why one of their priorities is the development of immigration policy , in particular through the return directive , which fails to respect fundamental human rights and which treats illegal immigrants as if they were criminals and not people escaping from hunger in their countries in search of a better future for themselves and their families .
Increasing disregard for social issues continues to be one of the main aspects of their policies .
To tackle the financial crisis , they have mobilised incalculable resources and political will .
However , with regard to the social situation and the crisis due to the fall in purchasing power , increased poverty , unemployment and precarious and poorly paid work , the resources and political will required are still lacking .
In fact , what they are proposing will tend to worsen the social situation and the inequalities in the distribution of wealth .
in writing . - ( PT ) The European Council has confirmed the measures previously adopted which are intended to rescue financial capital , the backbone of the capitalist system , and ensure ' continued structural reform ' .
The ' recasting of capitalism ' simply means more capitalism - with all its unhealthy contradictions - more exploitation of workers , more liberalisation and privatisation of public services and more work income transferred to capital , a policy which the Socialist Government in Portugal is faithfully implementing .
However , there has not been one word about :
the growing difficulties faced by workers and the general population , increasing salaries and social security benefits , reducing the prices of essential goods and services , or effectively curbing rising mortgage costs ;
the promotion of productive investment , employment rights , public services and a strong public business sector - as in banking - through a fair distribution of the wealth created ;
the end of the EU 's current monetary policy and its Stability Pact , the end of ' tax havens ' , and the reinforcement and use of structural funds to ensure effective economic development and improve the living conditions of workers .
In other words , there has been nothing about a break with capitalist policies ...
in writing . - Given the current exceptional market circumstances there is a need for concrete measures in order to ensure sufficient flexibility in the implementation of the Stability Pact .
The unprecedented events have exposed the limits of the European financial integration system when confronted with a crisis of this magnitude .
When the Stability Pact was reformed , no one could have expected such financial turmoil and the flexibility given to the Stability Pact in case of economic slowdown seems to be insufficient in the light of recent events .
We ought to maintain budgetary discipline , but more flexibility should be established to allow for the new members to join the euro zone as soon as possible .
Within the current rules , the financial crisis could indeed prevent new members joining the euro zone as scheduled .
The economic rationality underlying the construction of the European exchange-rate mechanism should be readapted to the current financial circumstances so as to create the conditions for sustainable financial markets in countries acceding to the euro zone .
Speeding up the process by allowing individual paths for adopting the euro in each accession country depending on its economic conditions could be a solution as the financial crisis has emphasized the need for acceding countries to be anchored in the euro zone .
The current crisis appears to be a financial collapse , but energy and food are also involved .
It is the tip of the iceberg based partly on the collapse of fundamental moral principles and partly on human naïvety .
This is evidenced by speculation and unsound investments .
There is no such thing as perpetual motion either in physics or in economics .
What were the individuals whose chicanery led to the collapse of the world 's finances guided by ?
We allowed ourselves to be deluded by people who built fortunes on deceit .
Now the taxpayers are being expected to bail out the banking system .
This is likely to cost more than the entire European Union budget .
The financial shock was felt first in the United States , but its consequences have affected the entire world .
Certain countries like Iceland found themselves on the brink of total disaster .
There is bound to be a ripple effect causing further losses .
Can anything positive emerge out of all this ?
Perhaps it can .
Perhaps we will come to understand that it is not right to build on the sand of delusion , on the basis of false premises , and that a firm basis of reliability and solidarity is needed .
It is not a case of ensuring that the expression ' safe as a bank ' regains its former meaning .
What is at issue is our future and that of our children .
The market economy , or , to put it another way , capitalism , needs to operate on the basis of sound and enduring principles , and honesty is an important one of these .
in writing . - ( FI ) Madam President , first I would like to thank the President-in-Office of the Council for what I see as the proper line of reasoning : the interests of the environment should be given high priority in both good and bad times .

Your answers to Mr Wurtz , Mr Cohn-Bendit and Mr Schultz were likewise pertinent .
I wish to express my concern in particular about the fate of emissions trading .
When you consider what has been done in this House this autumn , Parliament 's position cannot be regarded as the outcome of a democratic process .
It smacks of undue haste , and the committees did not know what they were voting on .
The amendments that have been tabled are a kind of bluff and we have been manipulated and misled .
Our rapporteur and our group coordinator betrayed everyone by not going with decision the group voted on .
Parliament has never seen anything like it before .
The Commission is one guilty party .
It delivered a huge package of legislation too late and then warned against touching it in the name of international harmony with regard to the climate issue .
The result is a poor model for emissions trading , which , if realised , will push up costs and threaten European jobs .
Any auction applied unilaterally is just an extra tax burden .
I cannot see any benefit to the environment if European products , the world 's most cleanly manufactured , should acquire this burden in the name of the fight against climate change .
An auction simply takes pollution away from Europe , dumps it somewhere else , and brings us unemployment .
It is neither a good nor a responsible environmental policy .
We need a more effective climate policy .
Emissions have to be cut according to the commitments we have made .
Our alternative also deserves to be properly considered in Parliament .
Many of the Member States are in favour of it , as are the Confederation of European Industries and the entire European trade union movement .
Another reading would eliminate the democratic deficit that has now been established in the House .
in writing . - ( RO ) The crisis which has occurred between Russia and Georgia , along with the financial crisis , have provided not only theoretical , but also practical , proof of the need to reform European institutions .
European unity , expressed through a single voice , is the only response in situations of this kind .
The implementation of the Treaty of Lisbon is a real necessity .
From December , the Council needs to come up with a solution moving in this direction , no matter the possible consequences .
Financial , energy and political security , as well as the consolidation of the European project 's basic values , can only be guaranteed through a close partnership with our neighbours .
The ' Eastern Partnership ' initiative adds a new political dimension to relations with our neighbours , supplementing and boosting the projects which are already ongoing in the Black Sea region through promoting an institutionalised framework which helps to update the agreements on more liberal visa controls , create a free trade area and establish strategic partnerships with our eastern neighbours .
There is a palpable sense of ' weariness ' with regard to expanding the European Union , but we cannot allow ourselves to keep countries like Moldova and Ukraine outside the European Union for a long time .
The ' Eastern Partnership ' needs to include a clear signal , a roadmap for these countries , which opens up the possibility of joining the EU , providing , of course , they reach the required level in every area .
in writing . - ( FI ) The EU summit discussed how the US economy 's very own China Syndrome , that is to say the meltdown of the core of the financial economy on Wall Street , also poisoned the European markets with its radioactivity .
As a result , the world is moving into a post-USA age .
Its authority collapsed when it its ship named ' Capitalism ' ran aground on the ideology of the hyper-liberals .
Hopefully , the country 's new poverty and its difficulty in obtaining loans will accelerate the demise of America 's military action in the countries it occupies .
Considering the sort of occupying power the United States is , Russia 's exaggerated military operations in South Osettia certainly received a great deal of attention .
We have to be satisfied with the outcome of the summit inasmuch as the extremist countries in the EU and the American fundamentalists did not receive support for their calls to isolate Russia .
in writing . - ( HU ) We must not allow Europe to pay the price of the financial crisis and speculation that originated in the United States .
Ordinary people must not suffer the consequences of the banks ' short-sightedness and the speculators ' greed .
The package adopted by the European Council will hopefully stem the tide of this financial tsunami .
The paramount task of the European Union together with the governments of the Member States must be to do everything possible to alleviate the social and economic effects of the crisis , prevent a long recession and protect investments .
We need to build reserves in order to protect our citizens .
To this end , countries in Europe are compelled to introduce emergency measures , reduce budgetary expenditures , temporarily suspend planned tax reductions and even raise taxes .
This is what is happening from France to Great Britain , from Italy to Latvia .
However , the only way to achieve this effectively is by national consensus ; anyone who goes against it puts the nation 's financial stability in jeopardy .
The fundamentals of market economy need to be reconsidered .
The social control of market processes is indispensable , not in order to thwart competition but to place it under necessary regulatory oversight .
The European Parliament supports the idea of a financial and capital market supervisory authority at European level , previously suggested by the Hungarian Prime Minister Ferenc Gyurcsány .
It is unacceptable that the culprits should get away without being held accountable .
Freezing their multi-million dollar salaries is not a punishment .
Punitive measures must not be eluded , including the confiscation of the property and freezing of the assets of those at fault for provoking an international financial crisis .
1 .
Addressing the challenge of the oil price increase ( vote )
2 .
Agreement on Scientific and Technological Cooperation : EC and New Zealand (
3 .
Cooperation between the International Civil Aviation Organization and the European Community regarding security audits / inspections and related matters (
4 .
Civil liability in respect of the use of motor vehicles ( Codified version ) (
5 .
Simple pressure vessels ( Codified version ) (
6 .
Supplementary protection certificate for medicinal products ( Codified version ) (
7 .
Application of the Protocol on the excessive deficit procedure annexed to the EC Treaty ( codified version ) (
8 .
Certain categories of agreements and concerted practices in the air transport sector ( codified version ) (
9 .
System of the Communities ' own resources (
10 .
European Evidence Warrant for the purpose of obtaining objects , documents and data for use in proceedings in criminal matters (
11 .
Recovery of cod stocks (
12 .
Mobilising the Solidarity Fund of the European Union (
13 .
Draft amending Budget No 7 / 2008 (
14 .
Mobilisation of the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund ( Lithuania and Spain ) (
15 .
Building a Global Climate Change Alliance between the European Union and poor developing countries most vulnerable to climate change (
16 .
Governance and partnership at a national , regional and project basis in the field of regional policy (
17 .
Better lawmaking 2006 pursuant to Article 9 of the Protocol on the application of the principles of subsidiarity and proportionality (
18 .
24th Annual Report from the Commission on monitoring the application of Community law (
19 .
Strategy for the future settlement of the institutional aspects of Regulatory Agencies (
20 .
The indictment and bringing to trial of Joseph Kony at the International Criminal Court (
21 .
Erasmus Mundus programme ( 2009-2013 ) (
22 .
Safety rules and standards for passenger ships ( recast ) (
23 .
Genetically modified micro-organisms ( recast version ) (
24 .
Statistical returns in respect of carriage of goods and passengers by sea ( recast ) (
25 .
Community statistics on trade between Member States (
26 .
Applicable law in matrimonial matters (
- Before the vote
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - Madam President , the oral amendment I want to propose is the following : ' The spouses may agree to designate the law applicable to divorce and legal separation provided that such law is in conformity with the fundamental rights defined in the Treaties and in the Charter of Fundamental Rights of the European Union and the principle of public policy . '
This oral amendment limits the right of the spouses to have the choice of law as provided for in Article 20 .
I believe that it satisfies the policy of the PPE-DE Group , which wanted to limit the choice of law so as to be in conformity , as we say here , with fundamental rights and also with public policy .
So a judge , faced with this application by spouses to apply foreign law , will judge and say that they do not accept that because it is against public policy or fundamental rights .
Madam President , I can accept this amendment because it is self-evident .
Of course , the applicable law must conform with the principles of our treaties and the Charter of Fundamental Rights .
I have no problem with this amendment .
Is there any opposition to the inclusion of this oral amendment ?
I do not see any .
( The oral amendment was accepted )
( IT ) Madam President , obviously I do not disagree that human rights and the fundamental rights of the Union must be respected in the choice of law .
That is not the issue .
The issue is that if the spouses can choose the law - I would point out that the choice of law is an exception in all legal systems - whether this law must be the law of one of the 27 States of the Union or that of any country in the world .
I do not therefore oppose this amendment , but I feel that it cannot preclude the vote on the subsequent amendments of the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats , which establish that only the law of one of the 27 countries of the Union may be chosen .
( FR ) Madam President , it is obvious from this debate that there is still some way to go where this matter is concerned .
These issues obviously ought to have been debated in committee .
That is why , in compliance with our Rules of Procedure , I am pleased to ask you to refer this report back to the committee .
( The request for referral to committee was rejected )
After the vote on Amendment 32
Madam President , the agreement between the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats , the Socialist Group in the European Parliament , the Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance and the Group of the Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe was as follows : if we accept this oral amendment from the PPE-DE , all the other PPE-DE amendments will be withdrawn .
I expect the PPE-DE to withdraw these amendments .
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - ( EL ) Madam President , it is true that the agreement included this term .
Mr Casini was of a different opinion .
I believe that the PPE-DE amendments are covered by the oral amendment which I made and which was approved and there is no need to vote on these amendments , which were tabled precisely in order to support the call for the right to be restricted .
Amendments 32 to 37 inclusive have therefore lapsed .
We shall continue , therefore .
The groups had something to say .
Before the vote on the legislative resolution
( FR ) Madam President , one sometimes has to put one 's spectacles on to see if there is an MEP requesting , in terms of the Rules of Procedure , to speak with the Presidency .
As you know , another group may accept the amendments that one group has rejected .
Regarding what Mr Casini said , we are not happy .
We shall vote on the amendment adopted by the Union for Europe of the Nations Group .
Madam Muscardini , I just said that the amendments had lapsed .
Once they have lapsed , I cannot put them to the vote .
27 .
Management of fishing fleets registered in the outermost regions (
Voting time
The next item is Voting Time .
( For results and other details of the vote : see Minutes )
rapporteur . - ( SV ) Madam President , we are now running late .
We have a lot of reports to debate , and the report that I am responsible for is last on the voting list .
As it is possible that a lot of Members will leave the House , I would like us to postpone the vote on the Andersson report until tomorrow .
I also wish to hear whether the other political groups support it .
( Applause )
That seems reasonable to me .
Are there any objections ?
That is the decision , then .
( The vote on the Andersson report is postponed until 22 October 2008 )
Explanations of vote
Oral explanations of vote
- ( CS ) I welcome the proposal to create a global alliance on climate change between the European Union , the least developed countries and the small , developing island states .
Adapting to climate change can be said to require costs of USD 80 billion because the key of course would be to halt deforestation in the tropical rainforests .
The EUR 60 millionwe have earmarked for this , which is less than 1 % , is nonetheless a significant amount for the most threatened countries , provided it is used effectively .
The alliance offers a chance , provided it operates as a reference point and methodology centre for preventative risk management in respect of the natural disasters which climate change will bring to the poorest countries .
The major weak point is the lack of coordination over the enormous number of activities .
The alliance should not replace humanitarian assistance but help to minimise the extent of the expected catastrophes by providing support through innovative programmes , through strengthening administrative structures at national and local levels and also through educating the inhabitants of threatened island states .
- ( PL ) Madam President , I voted against , as I believe that the whole concept of drastic limitation of carbon dioxide emissions as proposed by the Commission , the European Parliament and the European Council is fundamentally wrong and does not have an appropriate legal basis .
In addition , if this policy were to be implemented in Poland , my country would lose more than all it has hitherto received in the form of direct payments , indirect subsidies and grants , and there would still be more to pay .
What this means is that the policy would be disastrous for the economies of many developing countries .
It would not be a good example for the rest of the planet , which is supposed to implement this principle at global level on the basis of the results achieved in Europe .
If , however , the policy were only implemented in Europe , it would be a totally unnecessary waste of EUR 500 billion .
on behalf of the PSE Group . - Madam President , the report refers to the future of cohesion policy .
It was difficult to find pragmatic answers valid for all 27 Member States and their different governance and partnership systems .
The rapporteur has managed to come up with very concrete proposals .
On governance , I would like to underline two elements .
We need to empower regional and local authorities with a better and more efficient sharing of responsibilities .
It is also of the utmost importance to address the lack of expertise and administrative capacity to deal with funds and projects at regional and local level .
On partnership , the report rightly insists on the centrality of inclusive processes and full ownership .
We need to bring in the largest number of stakeholders possible at all policy and implementation stages , and in order to do this we need minimum compulsory standards .
I am extremely satisfied with the way in which the rapporteur has dealt with all our contributions and concerns and congratulate him once again for his excellent work .
- ( SK ) Coming from a local government background , I consider the principle of partnership to be a key element in the cohesion policy of the EU , as does the rapporteur Jean Marie Beaupuy .
I have therefore voted in favour of the report .
A successful partnership requires a certain investment at the start of the process , although later there will be savings in terms of time , money and effectiveness .
The creation of an Erasmus programme for local elected representatives would contribute towards the exchange of tried and tested approaches in the area of the administration of public affairs within an EU framework .
I call on the responsible institutions , especially the Europe 12 , one of which is my own country Slovakia , to apply the principle of partnership diligently in the 2007 - 2013 programme period and to make use of a historic opportunity to eradicate the inequalities between regions .
Local politicians know their areas very well and are able to find the most effective solutions to the problems of their towns and villages , and I therefore call on the Member States to move towards decentralising the power to implement EU cohesion policy from a central to a regional level .
- ( PL ) Along with the rest of higher education I warmly welcomed the second stage of the Erasmus Mundus programme .
I am sure nobody needs convincing that the integration of clever young people from different parts of the world is the key to building and maintaining peace , not just on our continent but across the entire world .
Students ' horizons are broadened , and they learn to look at things from new viewpoints .
All this happens as a result of direct contacts , classes in a foreign language , and becoming acquainted with different cultures .
Students become more open and tolerant .
It is for these reasons that I am strongly in favour of the new concept contained in the document on the Erasmus Mundus programme .
( NL ) Mr President , I have voted against Mrs De Sarnez 's report , because it is unacceptable to me that the programme should be extended without any fundamental changes being made to the discrimination against European students compared to their non-European counterparts who wish to make use of grants .
A non-European student receives an annual grant of EUR 21 000 , while European students who wish to study outside of the European Union via Erasmus Mundus can only count on EUR 3 100 .
Since a discrepancy of this magnitude cannot be explained or defended objectively , this discrimination cannot , and indeed must not , be sustained any longer .
( HU ) As a rapporteur , or in this case draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety for the report on the contained use of genetically modified micro-organisms , I wish to emphasise again that the European Parliament must be given a greater role in supervising procedures .
Citizens of Europe are afraid of the non-transparent use of GMOs , and oversight by Parliament means openness and transparency .
Distrust can only be eased by full disclosure .
In the case of genetically modified micro-organisms , too , the goal should be to render the involvement of the European Parliament compulsory in health and environmental safety matters .
I am pleased that my proposals for amendments to this effect , backed unanimously by the Committee on the Environment , have now also been adopted by the European Parliament .
( IT ) Madam President , I feel I must explain more clearly why I disagree and consider it unjust that the amendments tabled by the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats in the Gebhardt report should be declared defunct because of the vote taken on an entirely different matter .
It is one thing to say that one can choose the law of any country in the world , provided that it does not breach human rights ; it is quite another to say that one can choose from among the laws of the Member States of the European Union .
The two things are different , and therefore I believe it is unjust that the amendments on the latter issue should be withdrawn .
I do approve , however - and I hope that as the debate on this regulation proceeds my argument will be accepted - of the efforts to create a European legal area , with European harmonisation .
It does not make sense to apply Chinese law or the law of some remote Pacific state , for example , in such a delicate matter as matrimonial relations , when the pressing need is instead to unite the 27 countries of the Union .
- ( CS ) Divorce unfortunately belongs to the dark side of European civilisation and the number of so-called international divorces is rising .
It is always the children who suffer most .
International divorces also give rise to arguments over which country will host the proceedings that will decide on the future of the children .
I have supported the measure , which provides clearer rules for international couples who are seeking to divorce , as it will be possible for both parties , on the basis of an agreement , to choose an appropriate court and thereby the law of a Member State with which they have some connection .
This is important , especially in a situation where couples are living in a country of which neither of them may be citizens .
The legal rules vary considerably between the Member States and so it is a further improvement that the European Parliament has built in to the measure a role for the Commission , to develop a public internet information system covering all of the various details .
It should be mentioned that international divorces now affect one hundred and seventy thousand couples and their children every year .
Madam President , thank you for calling me .
I and the Conservative delegation to Parliament voted against this Gebhardt report .
Before I came to Parliament I practised law in the United Kingdom , including , from time to time , divorce law .
I think this would be a retrograde step to take .
It is a matter for each nation state to determine the law which would be applicable to such matters .
There is no need whatsoever for the European Commission or any other European body to interfere .
All our countries have different traditions , different views of divorce , different faiths , different religions , different backgrounds , and it is right and proper that each individual country should reflect that .
We should not accept the imposition of any superior body telling us what to do .
Thank you for giving me this opportunity and for achieving a memorable moment in my political career when I can truthfully say that I have spoken , apart from to you , Madam President , to a completely and utterly empty Chamber .
Written explanations of vote
I have voted in favour of the report by Mrs Niebler on the proposal for a Council decision on the conclusion on behalf of the European Community of the Agreement on Scientific and Technological Cooperation between the European Community and the Government of New Zealand , which is the only non-European industrialised country with which the European Community has not yet drawn up an agreement on science and technology .
Currently , cooperation between the Community and New Zealand is based on an informal agreement on scientific and technological cooperation between the Commission and the Government of New Zealand , which was signed and entered into force on 17 May 1991 .
However , this agreement does not provide for institutional coordination of cooperation , nor does it contain specific rules on the treatment and protection of intellectual property rights .
Thanks to my recent trip to New Zealand , I have had the opportunity of talking to some of the highest officials of that country , who confirmed their interest in strengthening this collaboration through the framework programme on food , agriculture and biotechnologies , information and communication technologies , health , the environment and the mobility of researchers .
These sectors correspond perfectly to those that the Commission considers to be of greatest interest and promise for the EU , for the purposes of future collaboration that will enable it to take full advantage of the potential for cooperation with this industrialised country .
in writing . - ( SV ) The Swedish Conservatives support the Commission 's proposal to establish a special programme to help poor developing countries to prepare themselves for , and to adapt to , the consequences of climate change .
We are also in favour of the main content of Parliament 's report on the Commission 's proposal and have therefore chosen to vote in favour of the report .
However , we are opposed to the request to increase the budget from the current EUR 60 million to EUR 2 billion in 2010 to fund the Global Climate Change Alliance .
We are also against the proposal to earmark at least 25 % of future revenues from auctioning within the Emissions Trading Scheme to fund this increase in the budget .

in writing . - ( PT ) Regulation ( EC ) No 639 / 2004 provides for a number of derogations from the entry / exit regime established under Article 13 of Regulation ( EC ) No 2371 / 2002 on the conservation and sustainable exploitation of fisheries resources under the common fisheries policy .
However , the belated adoption of the Commission legal instrument enabling the Member States concerned to allocate state aid as well as limited shipyard capacity have made it impossible to meet the deadline relating to the entry into the fleet of fishing vessels benefiting from state aid for renovation up to 31 December 2008 , as specified in Regulation ( EC ) No 639 / 2004 .
In its report , the European Parliament , specifically its Committee on Fisheries , defended the extension of deadlines for state aid for the renewal and registration of vessels , both in relation to the Regulation currently in force and in relation to the proposal presented by the European Commission , according to which the deadline should be extended only by one year , in other words until 31 December 2009 .
The extension of state aid for renewing the fleets of the outermost regions until 31 December 2009 and the possibility of registering vessels until 31 December 2011 represent vital assistance taking into account the aforesaid constraints .
I therefore voted in favour of this report .
in writing . - ( SK ) During the period 19 - 27 July I visited New Zealand as a member of an 11-strong delegation from the European Parliament .
This advanced and affluent country with a European spirit lies more than 27,000 km away from Slovakia .
Our meetings with the students of the European Institute at the university in Auckland and at Canterbury University in Christchurch were very inspiring .
We talked about the Seventh Framework Programme of the European Community in the area of research , technological development and demonstration activities and about the opportunities for cooperation between the EU and New Zealand in the areas of science and research .
It is for this reason , within the framework of the consultation process , that I support the signing of the Science and Technology Cooperation Agreement between the European Community and the government of New Zealand , and I therefore voted in favour of the report of the rapporteur Angelika Niebler .
New Zealand is one of the least polluted countries in the world , a fact of which it is justly proud .
New Zealanders are guided by the slogan ' Green , clean and safe ' .
Hydroelectric power accounts for 2 / 3 of the country 's electricity output .
Massive supplies of hot water are also used to produce electricity .
There is no nuclear power at all .
I firmly believe that mutual cooperation in the fight against climate change , seeking common approaches in the areas of science , research and innovation , will prove beneficial to both sides .
in writing . - ( IT ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I have voted in favour of Mrs Niebler 's report on the conclusion of the Agreement on Scientific and Technological Cooperation between the European Community and the Government of New Zealand .
As we see from the proposal for a Council decision , New Zealand is the only non-European industrialised country with which the Community has not yet drawn up a formal agreement on science and technology .
For this reason , and in view of the increasing complexity of technological innovation and the speed of scientific progress , I feel that it is more appropriate than ever for the Community to formalise the existing cooperation agreement so that collaboration can be strengthened , particularly in sectors that are more important than ever , such as health , biotechnologies and information and communication technologies .
I believe that this will enable the Community to take full advantage of the potential of cooperation with New Zealand on the basis of principles of effective protection of intellectual property and fair division of intellectual property rights .
Mr President , I voted in favour of the report on the opinion concerning the proposal for a Council decision on the conclusion of a Memorandum of Cooperation between the International Civil Aviation Authority and the European Community regarding security audits / inspections and related matters - C6-0320 / 2008 - .
Mr Costa , the rapporteur , has rightly emphasised that , pursuant to the aims of Community policy in the area of civil aviation , the memorandum of cooperation will strengthen relations between the Community and the ICAO .
It is particularly important to bear in mind that implementation of the memorandum negotiated will facilitate better use of the always limited resources in the area of monitoring and of compliance with regulations .
Implementation of the decision should bring considerable benefits to the Member States .
in writing . - ( PT ) The draft Memorandum of Cooperation which is the subject of this report aims to significantly reduce individual audits by the International Civil Aviation Organization ( ICAO ) in Member States .
To that end , ICAO will assess the European Commission aviation security inspection system .
Therefore , in accordance with the aims of the Community civil aviation policy , the Memorandum of Cooperation will strengthen the relationship between the Community and ICAO and allow for better use of the limited resources of Member States in the field of compliance monitoring .
Member States have to date been confronted with two compliance monitoring systems with the same objective and - broadly - the same scope .
Once again , the major objective of this action will be the more rational use of available resources .
Finally , in order to ensure the appropriate handling of EU classified information , ICAO is bound to comply with Community rules and the Commission is authorised to verify in situ which protection measures have been put in place by ICAO .
I therefore voted in favour of the Costa report .
in writing . - ( IT ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I voted in favour of Mr Costa 's report on the conclusion of a Memorandum of Cooperation between the International Civil Aviation Organisation and the European Community regarding security audits / inspections .
In my opinion , being subject to two compliance monitoring systems with the same objective and , to a large extent , the same scope , amounts not only to an inefficient allocation of resources by the competent bodies but also , and more importantly , a burden for Member States in terms of cost and the use of the limited resources at their disposal .
I therefore welcome the proposal for cooperation between the ICAO and the European Commission on this subject .
in writing . - ( FR ) I voted in favour of the legislative resolution approving the proposal for a directive of the European Parliament and of the Council relating to insurance against civil liability in respect of the use of motor vehicles , and the enforcement of the obligation to insure against such liability , and this on the basis of the report by my British fellow Member , Mrs Wallis .
This proposal arises from the wish to consolidate Community law , referred to - inappropriately , in my opinion - as codification .
This is a commendable wish , but I am sorry that , in view of the development and the complexity of the texts , the Commission has not revised its position dating from the 1 April 1987 and consisting of instructing its services to go ahead and codify all legislative acts no later than after their tenth modification while , at the same time , emphasising that this is a minimum rule and that , in the interests of clarity and proper understanding of Community legislation , its services were to make efforts to codify the texts for which they were responsible at still shorter intervals .
In this particular case , we are codifying a variety of directives dating from 1972 , 1983 , 1990 , 2000 and 2005 , together with texts amending these .
I consider that the policy of consolidating Community law should be one of the European Commission 's priorities .
in writing . - ( LT ) We must strive to make Community law simpler and clearer so that it becomes more comprehensible and accessible to all citizens , who would then acquire new opportunities and would be able to take advantage of particular rights which they have been granted .
This goal will be unattainable if many regulations partly and often fundamentally changed several times , remain scattered throughout various acts , so that some of them are found in the original act , and others in later amended acts .
Therefore , in order to find the rules in force at a given moment one has to conduct significant research , comparing various legal acts .
For this reason , as we strive to make Community law clear and transparent , it is important to codify regulations , which have been amended many times .
in writing . - ( FR ) I voted in favour of the legislative resolution approving the proposal for a directive of the European Parliament and of the Council concerning simple pressure vessels , and this on the basis of the report by my British fellow Member , Mrs Wallis .
This proposal arises from the wish to consolidate Community law , referred to - inappropriately , in my opinion - as codification .
This is a commendable wish , but I am sorry that , in view of the development and the complexity of the texts , the Commission has not revised its position dating from the 1 April 1987 and consisting of instructing its services to go ahead and codify all legislative acts no later than after their tenth modification while , at the same time , emphasising that this is a minimum rule and that , in the interests of clarity and proper understanding of Community legislation , the services were to make efforts to codify the texts for which they were responsible at still shorter intervals .
In this particular case , we are codifying a variety of directives dating from 1987 , 1990 and 1993 , together with texts amending them .
I consider that the policy of consolidating Community law should be one of the European Commission 's priorities and that the current situation is not in order , particularly in relation to the Member States and Europeans .
in writing . - ( LT ) Member States must employ all means necessary to ensure that pressure vessels are only placed on the market and provided for use if they are safe for humans , pets or property , and are appropriately installed , maintained and used according to their purpose .
Manufacturers must ensure that vessels comply with the type shown in the EC type-examination certificate and the manufacturing process description , must label vessels with the CE marking and draw up a declaration of conformity .
This Directive applies to simple pressure vessels manufactured in series and does not apply to vessels specifically designed for nuclear use , vessels intended for the propulsion of ships and aircraft and fire extinguishers .
This proposal aims to codify Council Directive 87 / 404 / EEC of 25 June 1987 on the harmonization of the laws of the Member States relating to simple pressure vessels .
The new directive will change various acts whose regulations were incorporated into it .
This proposal does not alter the content of the codified legal acts ; it only joins these acts together , following the necessary amendments for codification .
in writing . - ( FR ) I voted in favour of the legislative resolution approving the proposal for a directive of the European Parliament and of the Council concerning the supplementary protection certificate for medicinal products , and this on the basis of the report by my British fellow Member , Mrs Wallis .
This proposal arises from the wish to consolidate Community law , referred to - inappropriately , in my opinion - as codification .
I am sorry that , in view of the development and the complexity of the texts , the Commission has not revised its position dating from the 1 April 1987 and consisting of instructing its services to go ahead and codify all legislative acts no later than after their tenth modification while , at the same time , emphasising that this was a minimum rule and that , in the interests of clarity and proper understanding of Community legislation , the services were to make efforts to codify the texts for which they were responsible at still shorter intervals .
In this particular case , we are consolidating the Council regulation of 1992 and the four texts that modified it in , respectively , 1994 , 2003 , 2005 and 2006 .
I consider that the policy of consolidating Community law should be one of the European Commission 's priorities and that the current situation is not in order , particularly in relation to the Member States and Europeans .
in writing . - ( FR ) I voted in favour of the legislative resolution approving the proposal for a directive of the European Parliament and of the Council on the application of the Protocol on the excessive deficit procedure annexed to the Treaty establishing the European Community , on the basis of the report by my British fellow Member , Mrs Wallis .
This proposal arises from the will to consolidate Community law , referred to - inappropriately , in my opinion - as codification .
I am sorry that , in view of the development and the complexity of the texts , the Commission has not revised its position dating from 1 April 1987 and consisting of instructing its services to go ahead and codify all legislative acts no later than after their tenth modification while , at the same time , emphasising that this was a minimum rule and that the services were to make efforts to codify the texts for which they were responsible at still shorter intervals .
In this particular case , we are consolidating the Council regulation of 1993 and the three texts that modified it in , respectively , 2000 , 2002 and 2005 .
I consider that the policy of consolidating Community law should be one of the European Commission 's priorities and that the current situation is not in order , particularly in relation to the Member States and Europeans .
in writing . - ( FR ) I voted in favour of the legislative resolution approving , following the consultation procedure , the proposal for a regulation of the Council concerning the application of Article 81 of the Treaty in the air transport sector , and this on the basis of the report by my British fellow Member , Mrs Wallis .
This proposal arises from the wish to consolidate Community law , referred to - inappropriately , in my opinion - as codification .
I am sorry that , in view of the development and the complexity of the texts , the Commission has not revised its position dating from the 1 April 1987 and consisting of instructing its services to go ahead and codify all legislative acts no later than after their tenth modification while , at the same time , emphasising that this was a minimum rule and that the services were to make efforts to codify the texts for which they were responsible at still shorter intervals .
In this particular case , we are consolidating the Council regulation of 1987 and the five texts that modified it in , respectively , 1990 , 1992 , 1994 , 2003 and 2004 .
I consider that the policy of consolidating Community law should be one of the European Commission 's priorities and that the current situation is not in order , particularly in relation to the Member States and Europeans .
in writing . - ( FR ) I voted in favour of the legislative resolution approving , subject to amendments , the proposal for a Council regulation amending the regulation of 2000 applying the decision relating to the system of the Communities ' own resources , and this on the basis of the report by my excellent French colleague , former minister Mr Lamassoure .
Like the vast majority of Members , I think it is good to remember that the Council has asked the Commission to carry out a full and thorough analysis of all aspects of the expenditure and resources of the European Union and to send it a report in 2008 / 2009 .
In accordance with the interinstitutional agreement of the 17 May 2006 relating to budgetary discipline and sound financial management , I support the fact that Parliament is duly involved with all the phases of the analysis .
In this context , everyone should remember that the current financial perspectives for 2007 / 2013 have been approved within the framework of a political compromise designed to review the correction to the British contribution .
in writing . - ( FR ) Mr Lamassoure 's report on the European Union 's system of own resources is clearly designed to be ideological in nature .
There is a refusal to get involved , and I quote , ' in the details of ... a [ n ] outdated , unjust and untransparent system ' , whose main fault , in the rapporteur 's eyes , lies in the fact that it is not the European Parliament that decides on the matter .
That is just as well , moreover , as , judging from what has been said in this Assembly , it would not have been long before European taxpayers would have been subject to an additional tax deducted directly by Brussels .
Free consent to taxation ( by citizens or their representatives ) is a fundamental principle of the constitutional state , just as the ability to levy tax is a prerogative of the State .
Therein lies the problem , furthermore .
The European Union is not a State and cannot in any circumstances take it upon itself to levy tax .
By ignoring the rejection by the French , Dutch and Irish of the European Constitution , it consistently demonstrates , moreover , that it cares little for the free consent of the individual nations .
Unfortunately , it prefers lies , manipulation or even force .
in writing . - ( IT ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I have voted in favour of Mr Lamassoure 's report on the proposal for a Council regulation on amendments to the system of the Communities ' own resources .
I agree with the grounds on which it is based and I share the view expressed by the rapporteur when he acknowledged that the Commission 's latest decision , claiming to update the implementing regulation on own resources in line with the Council decision of 7 June 2007 , would , in its current wording , further complicate the procedure , providing for continual exceptions and special conditions for certain Member States .
I would therefore argue that a general review of the operation of the system of own resources , which needs to take place , should take account of the active involvement of the European Parliament in proposing appropriate measures aimed at achieving greater transparency .
in writing . - ( FR ) On the basis of the report by my Belgian fellow Member , Mr Deprez , I voted in favour of the legislative resolution modifying the proposal for a Council framework decision on the European Evidence Warrant for the purpose of obtaining objects , documents and data for use in proceedings in criminal matters .
Like a large number of my fellow Members , I welcome the proposal for a Council framework decision that provides for applying the principle of mutual recognition to a European Warrant for the purpose of obtaining objects , documents and data for use in proceedings in criminal matters .
This European Warrant , hereafter referred to as the European Evidence Warrant , will facilitate faster and more efficient legal cooperation in criminal matters and will replace the current system of mutual legal aid in this area , and this in accordance with the conclusions of the European Council .
in writing . - ( PT ) In addition to the fact that we have serious reservations about the analysis of certain aspects in the EP report , we disagree with the harmonisation of laws and the adoption of common procedures , particularly with regard to the European Evidence Warrant , an initiative which falls within the creation of a European criminal law enforcement area .
The European Commission has gained a reputation for presenting innumerable proposals on the supranationalisation of justice at EU level , thereby jeopardising core aspects of Member State sovereignty and their duty to protect their citizens ' rights .
In the current consultation process , the EP defends the cross-border collection of evidence , in the same way as the European Arrest Warrant operates .
A majority of the EP wants to delete the ' territoriality clause ' agreed by the Council ( which would allow a Member State to refuse a European Evidence Warrant under certain conditions ) , thereby attacking Member State sovereignty .
In essence , the EP , which is ' always more Catholic than the Pope ' , wants to implement a proposed Treaty which has already been rejected three times , particularly in the area of justice and home affairs , thereby creating this ' European criminal law enforcement area ' and , as the rapporteur says , ' not [ leaving ] the door open to the exercising of national rights of veto ' .
in writing . - ( IT ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I voted in favour of the report of the Chairman of the Committee on Civil Liberties , Justice and Home Affairs , Mr Deprez , on the Council framework decision on the European Evidence Warrant .
I agree with the objective of the report and the position it takes .
Facilitating the collection of cross-border evidence is without doubt an important step towards realising the principle of mutual recognition of judicial decisions .
This principle forms the basis of judicial cooperation , the ultimate aim of which is to provide faster , effective judicial assistance for all Member States .
I would like to point out that in order to guarantee a coherent European legal area and to ensure that judicial cooperation on criminal matters produces the desired effects , the legislative framework should be implemented by all Member States and the instruments should simplify assistance among the various national judicial authorities , without forgetting , of course , the protection of personal data .
in writing . - ( PL ) Ensuring the safety of citizens of the Member States and swift and efficient operation of the judicial system should be a priority for the Community .
This is significant in the context of the dramatic development of organised crime , especially cross-border crime .
Special attention should be paid to all legal instruments that can facilitate criminal proceedings and help to condemn perpetrators of crimes .
The European Evidence Warrant provides for automatic recognition of court decisions handed down in another Member State .
This is quite problematic , as it entails far-reaching amendments to criminal proceedings in the Member States .
Implementation of the European Evidence Warrant is fraught with difficulty , due to the variety of criminal procedures and the extensive differences between the law on warrants .
In my view , instead of interfering in such sensitive areas as criminal procedure in a particular country , the Commission and the European Parliament should focus on achieving the best possible level of cooperation between the police forces of the Member States .
This could be achieved through bodies such as Eurojust and the European Police College .
The fisheries policy pursued by the EU is not , and has never been , based on well thought-out , joint decisions .
Fish stocks in Europe have declined dramatically in recent years , and very little is being done to change this situation .
The fisheries policy that the EU should advocate must be permeated by long-term and far-sighted thinking .
However , Mr Busk 's report does in many ways represent a positive change .
The explanatory statement claims , among other things , that the recovery of cod is a matter of utmost importance and that the best method would be to completely prohibit cod fishing , even if this measure is subsequently rejected .
Unfortunately , the amendments to the report do not reflect the concern that Mr Busk expressed in the explanatory statement .
The proposed amendments are far too feeble to have any real significance .
It is very unfortunate that the way is being opened for a review of the already inadequate regulation of fishing effort once cod stocks ' have substantially improved ' .
It is reasonable to suggest that the focus should instead be on safeguarding recovery to a greater extent than is happening at present .
Only then can we begin to talk about a possible review .
The report therefore sends out completely the wrong signals , to the effect that the problem will soon be solved and we should then start to review the system .
The opposite is in fact the case .
I therefore voted against the report .
in writing . - I did not support the Busk report .
We all know that is important to see a recovery of cod stocks .
It is clear that cod can be a collateral catch when fishing for other species .
Yet the proposal here to reduce the overall fishing intensity in the area from Cornwall to the Severn estuary is drastic and dramatic .
As the MEP for the region in question , I am not yet - I could be with more evidence - convinced of the need to go so far , so fast .
in writing . - ( PT ) The aim of this report is to ' polish up ' the European strategy for preserving cod stocks .
Since November 2000 , when the International Council for the Exploration of the Sea ( ICES ) drew attention to the serious risk of collapse in cod stocks in the North Sea and off western Scotland , and at the Council meeting in December 2000 , Fisheries Ministers and the Commission have expressed concern at the critical state of stocks .
Given the different situations in the various fisheries , this European Parliament report aims to ensure greater flexibility of action , taking into account the different fishery and stock conditions in the various areas in which the recovery plans for this species will apply .
Guaranteeing greater involvement of the relevant Regional Advisory Councils ( RACs ) and Member States in the effective management of cod stocks is one of the priorities of this report .
Express reference to the RACs and Member States in the legislation will give a clear indication that the EU institutions are serious about involving these stakeholders in future development of fisheries management systems .
I voted in favour of this report .
in writing . - ( SV ) The status of cod is extremely serious and requires immediate and forceful action .
However , the Commission 's proposals are inadequate and have shortcomings in many areas .
It is also interesting that Parliament has quite suddenly decided that the issue should be dealt with at national level .
It is clearly the case that they are seeking to weaken the Commission 's proposal to benefit the industry .
They are quite simply trying to put a square peg in a round hole .
We have voted against the report for the reasons given above .
in writing . - ( PL ) I voted in favour of the report on the proposal for a Council regulation amending Regulation ( EC ) No 423 / 2004 as regards the recovery of cod stocks and amending Regulation ( EEC ) No 2847 / 93 .

According to the Scientific , Technical and Economic Committee for Fisheries , cod stocks in the North Sea are in a critical state .
Too many fish are being caught , and in particular , too many juvenile fish .
This reduces the possibilities for the species to recover .
The rapporteur , Mr Busk , has emphasised the need for monitoring and control of compliance with the rules .
He also inclines towards the Commission 's view on the need to review catches , to simplify the management system and to reduce discards .
We cannot ban fishing because of the social and economic consequences , but immediate action is needed to implement the cod stocks recovery plan .
in writing . - I welcome this effort to address the problems related to the 2004 Cod Recovery Plan which has clearly proven to be ineffective .
Despite various measures , cod stocks have shown little sign of recovery .
The most important point made in this proposal relates to reducing discards .
In the current climate of food shortages and extremely challenging times for fishermen , this can only be described as a totally illogical and wasteful practice .
The quota for Total Allowable Catches is so low and fishermen are forced to throw back large quantities of fish into the sea , despite the fact that this practice contributes nothing to the effort to replenish stocks .
Of course , we must continue to take measures which protect our cod stocks .
However , we should also bear in mind the bigger picture .
Climate change and the impact of global warming may have more to do depleted stocks than fishermen simply trying to make a living out of this industry .
in writing . - ( FR ) On the basis of the report by my Finnish fellow member , Mr Virrankoski , I voted in favour of a resolution designed to approve , without amendment , the Draft amending Budget No 7 / 2008 of the EU , relating to the use of the European Union 's Solidarity Fund to the tune of EUR 12.8 million by way of commitment and payment appropriations .
This sum is earmarked for helping the populations of the French overseas departments of Guadeloupe and Martinique , which suffered considerable damage following ' Hurricane Dean ' in August 2007 .
This draft amending budget is entirely neutral from a budgetary point of view because it provides for a corresponding reduction in payment appropriations on line 13.04.02 relating to the Cohesion Fund .
It is important to note that this draft budget is the first to be solely devoted to the EU 's Solidarity Fund , as requested by the European Parliament .
in writing . - ( FR ) On the basis of the report by my esteemed German colleague , Mr Böge , I voted in favour of the resolution approving without amendment the proposal for a decision of the European Parliament and of the Council on the mobilisation of the EU Solidarity Fund ( EUSF ) with a view to aiding France , whose overseas departments of Martinique and Guadeloupe were affected in 2007 by ' Hurricane Dean ' .
The sum of EUR 12.8 million by way of commitment and payment appropriations will thus be mobilised under the Solidarity Fund for France , and this via a 2008 amending budget adopted in parallel .
This sum represents 2.5 % of an amount of direct damage estimated at EUR 511.2 million .
in writing . - ( LT ) The Solidarity Fund and other specific measures do not amount to a large sum of money compared to the European Union 's budget , they ultimately serve to aid disaster zones and people there following natural disasters .
I support the decision to allocate aid from the Solidarity Fund to France for Martinique and Guadeloupe , which were hit by Hurricane Dean in August 2007 .
In cases like these we have to show solidarity .
in writing . - ( SV ) France has submitted an application to mobilise the Fund as a consequence of ' Hurricane Dean ' , which affected Martinique and Guadeloupe in August 2007 .
The Commission has therefore proposed that a total of EUR 12 780 000 from the Fund be mobilised to support France .
The June List welcomes both national and international solidarity and relief actions when a country is affected by disasters .
However , it is our opinion , firstly , that previous experience has indicated that the EU is not able to manage emergency aid effectively with Community funds .
Secondly , we are talking about a contribution of fractions of a percentage of France 's GNP .
It is unreasonable to think that the EU should intervene and jointly finance projects that a rich Member State should be able to cope with themselves .
We have therefore chosen to vote against the report as a whole .
in writing . - ( PT ) The Commission proposes to mobilise the European Solidarity Fund in favour of France .
The Interinstitutional Agreement allows the mobilisation of this Fund within the annual ceiling of EUR 1 billion .
During 2008 a global amount of EUR 260 411 197 has been mobilised in favour of the United Kingdom ( EUR 162 387 985 ) , Greece ( EUR 89 769 009 ) and Slovenia ( EUR 8 254 203 ) .
France applied for assistance from the Fund following hurricane Dean which affected Martinique and Guadeloupe in August 2007 .
The Commission proposes to mobilise the EU Solidarity Fund for a total amount of EUR 12 780 000 , to be allocated from appropriations not used in the Cohesion Fund .
However , as in previous cases , there is at least one obvious question that must be asked : how can it be that it is only now , more than one year after the disaster affected the populations , that EU funding is being made available ?
There can be no doubt that something is not right ...
It should be noted that we presented proposals aimed at speeding up the procedures for mobilising this Fund and ensuring that regional disasters were still eligible .
These proposals also aimed to acknowledge the specific nature of natural disasters in the Mediterranean region , such as drought and fire , within this Fund .
in writing . - Amendment 134
We would strongly oppose coercive abortion , forced sterilisation and infanticide , and concur that these are human rights abuses .
We have abstained on the amendment , as EU funds have never been used in this way and the amendment fails to clarify the importance of the international development work of credible organisations in supporting women in fertility management , and specifically reproductive education , reproductive healthcare services and family planning , and campaigning for women 's right to healthcare .
Amendments 130 , 131 , 132 , 133
While we are voting in favour of these amendments because of the importance of the issue , we feel it would be more appropriate to create a separate budget line on children 's rights , which would include the issues dealt with in these amendments .
in writing . - ( DE ) The effects of natural disasters are varied and generally devastating .
Alongside the human suffering that they cause , it is above all the economic effects which set the development of these countries back by many years , as in the current case .
Essential infrastructure is destroyed and can only be rebuilt with great difficulty using the countries ' own funds .
The establishment of the Solidarity Fund that has been advocated should speed up reconstruction work of this kind by providing selective financial support , which will also require careful monitoring in each location .
It is true that the affected regions need rapid assistance , but reliable monitoring of the investments in these projects is also important .
In my opinion , more attention should be given to this area , which is why I am abstaining from the vote on this report .
in writing . - ( IT ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I have voted in favour of Mr Böge 's report on the proposal for a decision of the European Parliament and of the Council on the mobilisation of the EU Solidarity Fund , requested by France , to provide for the emergency situation caused by Hurricane Dean in Martinique and Guadeloupe in August 2007 .
I agree with the rapporteur and share the opinion of the Committee on Regional Development that , in this case , the use of the fund is entirely in line with the provisions of the Interinstitutional Agreement of 17 May 2006 .
in writing . - ( FR ) Our Parliament has just approved aid of EUR 12.78 million , proposed by the European Commission in favour of Martinique and Guadeloupe and intended to cover a portion of last summer 's emergency expenditure in the wake of ' Hurricane Dean ' .

This financial aid will be welcome , especially since Martinique and Guadeloupe still continue to feel the effects of the damage caused by Hurricane Dean , in particular in the field of housing and the banana and sugar cane industries .
The Solidarity Fund , which is being used in this case in application of an exception to the general regulations , is particularly important for the outermost regions , given the multiplicity of regular threats to their populations at a time when the Caribbean Islands were again struck last week by Hurricane Omar .
Since this fund was created in 2002 , I have been very committed to ensuring that overseas departments can benefit from this type of support .
The experience acquired by the French Government in presenting its requests , together with the understanding shown by the Commission , the European Parliament and the Council reassure us concerning Europe 's capacity to side with overseas populations confronted by major crises .

in writing . - ( FR ) On the basis of the report by Mr Böge , I voted in favour of the resolution approving the proposal for a decision of the European Parliament and of the Council on the mobilisation , within the framework of the European Union 's general budget for 2008 , of the sum of EUR 10.8 million by way of commitment and payment appropriations under the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund with a view to aiding the automobile sector in Spain and the textiles sector in Lithuania .
In the case of Spain ( to which it is proposed to appropriate EUR 10.5 million ) , the request relates to 1 589 redundancies , 1 521 of which took place in Delphi Automotive Systems España , in Puerto Real , a province of Cádiz , Andalusia .
This is a motor parts manufacturer belonging to the company Delphi Automotive Systems Holding Inc . , whose head office is in Troy , Michigan in the United States .
In the case of Lithuania ( to which it is proposed to appropriate EUR 0.3 million ) , the request concerns 1 089 job losses caused by Alytaus Tekstilė , a textile company , going into liquidation over a reference period of four months .
in writing . - ( PT ) Spain has submitted an application in respect of 1 589 redundancies , 1 521 of which have occurred at Delphi Automotive Systems España and 68 among its suppliers .
It has requested a contribution of EUR 10 471 778 to cover part of the cost of assistance measures which amount to nearly EUR 20.94 million .
Lithuania has submitted an application in respect of 1 089 redundancies due to the closure of Alytaus Tekstile , a textile manufacturer .
It has requested EUR 298 994 out of a total cost of nearly EUR 0.06 million .

As we have said before , this Fund cannot be used as a temporary ' cushion ' for unacceptable socioeconomic costs resulting from the relocation of undertakings and their redundancies or for the failure to alter policies which are the cause of worker exploitation , insecurity and unemployment .
It is essential to prevent and penalise business relocations and put an end to the policy of liberalising world trade , as instigated by the EU .
State aid must be granted subject to long-term commitments on employment and regional development .
Aid must not be granted where it may be used to encourage relocations .
We must reinforce the role of workers ' representatives on company boards and in the taking of structural management decisions .
in writing . - ( IT ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I have voted in favour of Mr Böge 's report on the mobilisation of the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund in response to requests made by Spain and Lithuania in February and May 2008 .
I believe that it is appropriate for the Fund to be mobilised , since those countries have incurred vast expense in the form of assistance for workers . Given that the Fund exists precisely in order to provide additional support for workers who find themselves threatened by the new competitive conditions and by commercial practices in today 's world of business , I think that in this case the request for mobilisation of the fund can be approved without question .
in writing . - ( RO ) I voted for the draft resolution which prevents the introduction of passenger screening as a means of tightening civil aviation security .
Passenger security is vitally important , but the measures being taken should not result in the violation of citizens ' fundamental rights .
The introduction of body scanning , in the form it has been currently proposed , does not guarantee respect for the right to privacy .
I believe that studies need to be carried out in order to determine the effect of introducing this measure on human health , as well as an impact assessment in order to determine the convenience of these measures .
I also think that the procedures which should be adopted for handling the scanned images are extremely important .
In view of this , the European Data Protection Supervisor should formulate and issue a point of view so that any measures targeted at passenger security are implemented in compliance with the regulations governing personal data .
We await with interest additional data from the European Commission relating to the measures we have in mind for improving civil aviation security .
I was in favour of adopting this resolution today because the fundamental rights of the European Union 's citizens need to be protected .
Globalisation has positive implications for economic growth and employment .
It can also have negative consequences for the most sensitive and least qualified workers in certain sectors .
These negative consequences can affect all Member States , regardless of whether they are large or small , long-standing Members or new entrants .
The European Union 's structural funds support planned changes and their management in the framework of such actions as lifelong learning on a long-term basis .
In contrast , the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund provides one-off personalised support for a limited time .
Its aim is to support workers who have been made redundant as a result of market changes .
The European Union should pay particular attention to this Fund .
in writing . - ( FR ) I voted in favour of the resolution following the Commission communication on building a Global Climate Change Alliance between the European Union and poor developing countries most vulnerable to climate change , and this on the basis of the own-initiative report by my Swedish colleague , Mr Wijkman .
It is now established that the least developed countries ( LDCs ) and the small island developing states ( SIDSs ) will be hit soonest and hardest by the impact of climate change .
These countries have the fewest resources for preparing themselves for these upheavals and for changing their way of life .
Climate change is therefore in danger of further delaying achievement of the millennium development objectives ( MDOs ) in a large number of these countries , and I welcome the Global Climate Change Alliance ( GCCA ) that the European Commission proposes should be set up between the EU and poor developing countries most vulnerable to climate change , in particular the LDCs and the SIDSs and ACP ( African , Caribbean and Pacific ) countries .
In common with the vast majority of my fellow Members , I consider the budget of EUR 60 million appropriated to this initiative to be not nearly sufficient .

I have voted in favour of Mr Wijkman 's report on building a Global Climate Change Alliance between the European Union , the Least Developed Countries ( LDCs ) and Small Island Developing States ( SIDS ) ; I believe that we cannot postpone taking tougher action outside of the EU in respect of the joint challenges of climate change and the reduction of poverty .
Such action would represent a step towards implementing the EU Action Plan on Climate Change and Development ( 2004 ) , based on our better understanding of the fact that climate change must transform the way we approach development assistance .
As a member of the Committee on Development I am particularly sensitive to this decision , which has the potential to be combined with the international negotiations on climate change in Poznań in 2008 and Copenhagen in 2009 .
We must overcome the mistrust between industrialised and developing countries , which has posed one of the major barriers to a climate change agreement for the period following 2012 .
in writing . - ( LT ) Developing countries have contributed least to climate change , but stand to suffer the most from its consequences and will be least able to deal with them .
The industrialised nations are historically responsible for climate change and have a moral duty to contribute to the efforts of the developing countries to adapt to the consequences of climate change .
The review of the 2007 EU Action Plan on climate change and development shows that not enough is being done to integrate climate change into EU Development Policy and work is particularly slow .
I support the Commission 's initiative to establish the Global Climate Change Alliance .
However , the EUR 60 million allocated to the Global Climate Change Alliance is wholly insufficient and therefore it is important for the Commission to set out long-term funding and allocate at least EUR 2 billion until 2010 , and EUR 5 billion until 2020 .
At present , developing countries desperately lack the funds to adapt to climate change .
By helping the developing countries , we will also help ourselves .
Yes , we have an obligation to help developing countries and , in particular , the least developed countries ( LDCs ) and the small island developing states ( SIDSs ) to limit the impact of global warming , as these countries will be the first victims of global warming , without being responsible for it .
At present , Africa is the ' forgotten continent ' of climate negotiation .
This ambition must , however , be reflected in a financial commitment commensurate with what is at stake .
Therein lies the problem .
The budget of EUR 60 million provided for by the European Commission is not enough .
The long-term funding objective should be one of at least EUR 2 billion between now and 2010 and of EUR 5 billion to EUR 10 billion between now and 2020 .

To fund this increase , the Commission and the Member States must use at least 25 % of the revenue from the Community 's emissions trading scheme .
We are also requesting measures relating to financial aid , technical assistance and technology transfer in order to facilitate the use of low greenhouse gas emissions technologies .
Finally , new methods of funding need to be unblocked .
If , once again , it is development credits and the European Development Fund that are mobilised , the alliance concerned will be no more than a sham .
in writing . - ( EL ) The EU is exaggerating the current dangers from climate change caused by the irresponsible exploitation of natural resources by big business , not in order to push forward substantial measures to deal with it , but to frighten people , to improve its position in the competition with other imperialists and to find a solution in terms of the over-accumulation of capital by securing even bigger profits for the monopolies .
The EP report on building a climate change alliance between the EU and developing countries is open interventionism in the internal affairs of these countries with regard to the organisation of their economy , society and administrative mechanisms , and offers scant financial reward to the plutocracy of these countries or threatens military intervention under its preventive policy to address security threats and climate-related conflicts , thereby endorsing the Solana report on these topics .
It proposes a more active role for businesses through public-private partnerships , especially in sectors such as water , public health and energy supply , and the introduction of green taxes and it welcomes the emissions trading scheme which benefits businesses and is paid for by workers and the environment and the adaptation of developing countries to capitalist restructuring of trade , agriculture and security .
The people will reject the imperialist plans of the EU and demand a better and healthy environment .
in writing . - ( SV ) The report deals with the Commission 's proposal to build a Global Climate Change Alliance .
Unfortunately , the basic intentions of the report have been peppered with statements that the June List is unable to support , including the call to link the European Union 's environmental commitment with a Common Foreign and Security Policy and detailed proposals of how the EU should initiate environmental investments in third countries .
Based on some of the statements contained in the report , the Global Climate Change Alliance could also be viewed as an attempt by the EU to extend its powers in connection with forestry and marine issues .
This method of using issues to build the EU State is something we are most strongly opposed to .
The June List is very much in favour of EU cooperation encompassing cross-border environmental problems .
However , fighting poverty and initiating efforts to tackle environmental problems at a global level should be carried out within the framework of the UN .
After careful consideration , the June List has therefore chosen to vote against the report .
in writing . - ( PT ) Climate change on the planet is due not only to its natural development , but also to a policy followed by the industrialised countries of intensifying the exploitation of natural resources .
This has increased climate change to a level which is now causing humanity serious problems .
Responsible action to tackle the consequences of the serious squandering of natural resources demands a break with the capitalist policies at its root .
However , the approach favoured , with the EU at the helm , is one of joint responsibility of all countries .
This involves trying to impose limits on ' developing ' countries with regard to their sovereign use of their own natural resources , obviously in line with the ambitions held by major transnationals to exploit these resources .
In addition to other aspects , the text adopted by the EP not only contains contradictions but also completely ignores these central issues .
Instead it advocates a ' preventive security policy or in response to climate-related security threats or conflicts ' , using ' climate change ' to secure and militarise international relations .
The report , based on the consumer-pays principle , also advocates creating ' green ' taxes ( as opposed to a tax system based on income ) , which open the door to the privatisation of public services and the private exploitation of such fundamental resources as water .
in writing . - ( PT ) Climate change is a fact which becomes interesting to discuss when it comes to finding answers .
In this we must be guided by a refusal of dogma and thoughtlessness .
As opposed to a fatalistic approach which identifies world population growth , increased consumption and , inevitably , improved living conditions for millions of human beings with a potential environmental disaster , we should use our modern scientific ability and the enormous progress from which we are all benefiting to find appropriate answers which avoid the risk of causing unwanted side effects ( as so often happens with decisions that are rushed through due to the desire to act quickly but without a proper understanding of the situation to which these must respond ) .
However , whatever approach is taken - or approaches , given that there must be multiple answers - we must acknowledge that some countries are less able to react .
These countries are at stages of development which mean that they do not have the necessary resources and which put them in an extremely vulnerable situation .
Thinking about these countries and their populations , with a view to mitigating the negative impact of climate change and helping them to adapt , must be a core element of our policy .
in writing . - ( IT ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I voted in favour of Mr Wijkman 's report on building a Global Climate Change Alliance .
The subject of climate change has been on the agenda for many years : much has been done , but it is not yet enough .
The aim is to step up action on climate change outside of the EU .
We therefore need to promote political dialogue between the EU and developing countries in order to encourage the incorporation of factors connected with climate change into plans for reducing poverty at local and national level .
I support this initiative ; before it gains ground , of course , it will have various challenges to face , such as the lack of coordination at world level , the scarcity of funding , and so on .
I also agree with the rapporteur 's remarks on investing in the development of innovative public-private partnership ( PPP ) models , in which Europe has great faith .
They represent the future for the EU at national , regional and local level .
in writing . - ( NL ) It has been obvious for a while that global warming is hitting the least developed countries ( LDCs ) the hardest , while it is precisely these countries that have contributed the least to it .
Their vulnerability will drag them further into the abyss of poverty , and I welcome the fact that Mr Wijkman underlines this emphatically .
The idea is to set up an alliance to face up to climate change , but the Commission is not putting enough funds aside for this .
The cost of climate change could well be as high as EUR 80 billion .
The budget which the Commission has allowed for this , though , is EUR 60 million , which is just not enough for the LDCs to prepare for climate change .
It is now up to the Alliance to find , or free up , more funds .
This means that the individual Member States of the Union must face up to their responsibility .
They must set aside larger sums than they are doing at the moment .
The European Parliament also proposes using at least 25 % of the EU 's revenue from the emission trade system for the Alliance .
It looks as if the Union , in the light of climate change , is starting to think differently about development cooperation , which is to be welcomed .
This is why I will be supporting the report .
in writing . - ( RO ) I voted for the report ' Building a Global Climate Change Alliance between the European Union and poor developing countries ' as these countries are the most vulnerable to climate change .
The 2007 review of the EU Action Plan on Climate Change and Development mentioned above shows that the progress on mainstreaming climate change into the European Union 's development policies has been insufficient and far too slow .
Even though the EU has set itself the target of becoming a leader in the fight against climate change , the EU budget does not reflect the priority given to these policies .
The Clean Development Mechanism ( CDM ) has so far been poorly suited to meeting the needs of the poorest countries in terms of investments in clean technology .
The report calls on the EU to place climate change at the core of its development cooperation policy and invites the Commission to provide detailed information on existing financial mechanisms for climate change and development at national and international levels .
The Commission should urgently propose the measures required to scale up EU financial support for climate change and development , ensuring the best possible coordination and complementarity with existing initiatives .
in writing . - ( PL ) The protection of the natural environment should undoubtedly be a priority for each Member State and for the Community as a whole .
As regards the initiative to establish a Global Climate Change Alliance , however , the best that can be said about is that it is pointless .
Spending taxpayers ' money on yet another expensive political body will most certainly not help to improve the state of the natural environment .
It will merely provide additional lucrative posts to be filled by Brussels bureaucrats .
Developing countries produce far less pollution , and their carbon dioxide emissions are insignificant in comparison to those of the economic giants .
I should like to point out that for many years now the United States of America has been near the top of the list of countries producing toxic substances .
It has still not ratified the Kyoto Protocol .
I am convinced that establishing an alliance involving the EU and developing countries will not contribute in the least to reducing the level of pollution .
On the other hand , action such as conversations with the political leaders of the aforementioned countries , for example , could be crucial .
That is because they are the ones doing most to degrade the natural environment .
in writing . - ( FR ) I voted in favour of the resolution on governance and partnership at national and regional levels and a basis for projects in the sphere of regional policy , put forward on the basis of the own-initiative report by my French fellow Member , Jean Marie Beaupuy .
I fully agree with the idea that , out of a concern for simplification and efficiency , the feasibility be investigated of merging the various Community funds in the future cohesion policy for the period subsequent to 2013 .
in writing . - ( RO ) I would like to welcome the initiative on compiling a report on the subject of good local and regional governance , as well as the importance of the notion of partnership between the four or more levels of power : local , regional , national and European .
Any encounter with representatives of the local authorities elected directly by the people highlights , on most occasions , differences in the way European policies are handled between these levels of authority .
Without establishing a policy of real partnership between all these bodies of authority , uninfluenced by political partisanship which has no connection with subsidiarity , the efforts made by both the European Parliament and the other European institutions will not achieve the desired concrete results and effectiveness .
We are sufficiently familiar with the conflicts and poorly understood rivalry between the representatives of the different political parties in power at different levels of administration , which results , on most occasions , in European citizens being deprived of the benefits of the European projects being decided on in this EP forum .
This is why I voted in favour of the report , in the expectation that regional policies will be given the importance they deserve .
in writing . - ( FR ) Mr Beaupuy 's report is particularly instructive .
It speaks about the governance of structural policy , and we learn that , over and above a rebalancing of the levels of development of all regions in the European Union , the true aim of the regional policy conducted by Brussels is to radically change the territorial organisation of the Member States and thus their administrative and political structures .
In fact , this is not really a surprise .
Everything is being done in Europe today to bypass or destroy nation States : from the top , by granting its competencies to the European super-state ; and from the bottom , by promoting , contrary to the traditions of some Member States and against the natural boundaries or boundaries of identity of provinces - at the cost of billions of euros - the ' region ' as the privileged level of infra-national organisation or the constitution of transborder infra-national spaces .
The ' integrated approach ' to European legislation praised by the reporter , which consists of taking this level into account in all European policies with a territorial , economic and social impact , contributes to this development .
Over and above electoral manipulations , it is certainly within this frame of analysis that the administrative reform proposed by Mr Sarkozy must be analysed .
in writing . - ( SV ) The report advocates increased cooperation between national administrations .
However , it is important to remember that it is as a result of institutional competition that the best forms of governance are tested and distinguished from those forms that are less suitable .
Europe 's diversity of forms of administration and the exchange of experience between these administrations is probably a good example .
The report is full of well-meaning statements , but essentially lacks concrete proposals for how the administration of the structural policies is to be improved with a view to rectifying the huge shortcomings that exist with regard to the control of the economic aspects of the structural policies .
It is worth remembering that the EU 's structural policies represent the European Union 's largest single item of expenditure for the period from 2007 to 2013 and that the European Court of Auditors in its report for the 2006 financial year states that at least 12 % of the money paid out for structural policies should not have been paid out .
The report also contains references to the Treaty of Lisbon .
This treaty has , however , been rejected in the democratic processes .
To invoke the Treaty of Lisbon is therefore an expression of unacceptable arrogance .
The future of the treaty is , at the time of writing , so uncertain that invoking its contents should be avoided .
For the reasons given above , the June List has chosen to vote against the report in its entirety .
in writing . - ( PT ) Obviously there is no question about our support for the essential participation of local and regional authorities or other public authorities , social and economic organisations and the general public in the definition of objectives and programmes and in the implementation and control of the use of Community structural funds within each Member State , given that we have always argued for this .
However , we cannot allow other objectives to be pursued under cover of this legitimate aspiration , such as , for example , the merger within the ' future cohesion policy for the period after 2013 ' of the various Community funds ( European Regional Development Fund , European Social Fund , Cohesion Fund and European Agricultural Fund for Rural Development ) .
This proposal could jeopardise what should be the central objective of the Community budget , in other words its function to redistribute wealth among the ' cohesion ' countries and the ' wealthy ' countries , particularly since it would eliminate funds which are only intended for the former ( in addition to jeopardising Community funding of ' common policies ' such as agriculture and fisheries ) .
We cannot agree , either , with the proposal 's encouragement of ' public-private partnerships ' , which are an instrument used to privatise public services that are essential and strategic for the people and the socioeconomic development of each Member State .
in writing . - ( RO ) Mr Beaupuy 's report identifies good governance at the level of two complementary systems : the institutional system , which provides for the allocation of powers and budgets between the State and regional and local authorities ; and the partnership system , which brings together the various public and private bodies concerned by the same issue in a given territory .
Partnership can bring added value to the implementation of cohesion policy through enhanced legitimacy , sustained coordination , guaranteed transparency and better absorption of funds .
The involvement of partners may help to develop an institutional facility at sector and territorial level .
We must not ignore the fact that partners have the necessary abilities and resources which may boost the programme 's effectiveness by making the process for selecting projects more efficient .
In order to legitimise the decision-making process and counterbalance any political influence as part of the public consultations during the preparatory phase of the operational programmes , it is extremely important for local and regional authorities as well as civil society to be involved .
This facilitates the use of extensive expertise and helps to improve the programme 's development , monitoring and evaluation .
We must realise that the new Member States are not prepared yet for the partnership principle and , therefore , this could be reinforced gradually as a result of supranational and subnational pressure .
Based on the arguments already expressed through the amendments which we have tabled and which have been accepted and incorporated by Mr Beaupuy in the final text , I have expressed my support for this report .
in writing . - ( IT ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I voted in favour of Mr Beaupuy 's report on governance and partnership at national and regional levels and a basis for projects in the sphere of regional policy .
It is clear that the success of any regional development does not depend only on the results that are achieved , but also on the way in which these results are obtained , that is to say , the governance .
We therefore need to develop mechanisms that improve systems of governance without being hindered by different policies .
I share the rapporteur 's enthusiasm for the partnership principle : new methods of governance should not replace public institutions , rather they should go hand in hand .
I also approve of the plan to reorganise the way governance relates to Community funds , the different territorial dimensions and , of course , the European Union .
Project management skills borrowed from the world of business can be excellent tools for realising new forms of governance to drive forward the particular development of the European system .
in writing . - ( DA ) The Danish Members of the Socialist Group in the European Parliament have voted in favour of the own-initiative report on better regulation , but wish to emphasise that removal of administrative burdens can be a very political process .
We support the objective of removing the unnecessary administrative burdens .
Certain administrative burdens may , however , be socially very necessary , even if they may be felt to impede companies ' growth and innovation .
We think that a balanced approach to reducing administrative burdens is necessary .
in writing . - ( PT ) If we have to discuss the need for ' better lawmaking ' before debating the content of European legislation , then we should be considering how much of this legislation is actually needed .
It is true that the creation of a common market and the establishment of uniformity between countries with different histories and traditions , which can frequently be seen in the details of their legislation , creates a need for harmony which requires perhaps more proactive lawmaking .
However , saying this is not the same as acknowledging that , above all , we must legislate and that this must be done at European level .
Although I am convinced that the EU is frequently the correct arena in which to act , it should also be noted that the principle of subsidiarity is fundamental and is often pushed aside in the name of false efficiency and an unnecessary result .
If we want the EU to be capable of responding to the needs for which a European decision-making level is justified , we should consistently and wisely avoid flooding Europe with legislative projects and powers that can be effectively established at national level .
This concern , which frequently appears in the Treaties , is unfortunately less apparent in Brussels , with inevitable consequences not least in terms of bureaucratic temptation .
in writing . - ( IT ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I voted in favour of Mr Medina Ortega 's report on the protocol on the application of the principles of subsidiarity and proportionality .
The European Union should aim towards standards of clarity and efficacy within the regulatory framework .
Since improving legislative procedures can help us to achieve these goals , and given that the principles of subsidiarity and proportionality are two of the cornerstones on which the Community is built , especially where it does not have exclusive legislative competence in a particular area , I commend the Committee on Legal Affairs for its tireless work in ensuring that Community legislation is based on quality , through simplifying the acquis communautaire , and not on quantity .
Furthermore , I too have my doubts about self-regulation and co-regulation procedures ; the current financial crisis on the markets can in part be attributed to them .
Regulation remains the simplest way to pursue the objectives of the Union and to bring legal certainty to businesses and to citizens .
in writing . - ( FR ) The Commission has just published its 24th annual report on its control of application of Community law by the Member States .
The quite legitimate question that can be asked is : are there any differences or progress in relation to the previous report ?
It would seem not .
As always , the poor students of Europe are the Member States .
What solution is proposed by the rapporteur ?
More firmness with regard to the Member States , more submissions to the Court of Justice if necessary and more firmness in executing the decisions pronounced by the Court .
In a word : more powers of coercion and repression for European institutions in relation to the Member States .
The Community legal order , already set up with treaties that take precedence over national rights , now wants to be more and more oppressive and destructive of the said rights of the Member States .
We are resolutely hostile to this , since the enfeoffment of national rights and legal specificities will surely lead to enfeoffment of the Member States themselves in a Europeist and federalist project .
in writing . - ( IT ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I have voted in favour of Mrs Geringer de Oedenberg 's report on monitoring the application of Community law .
Figures are objective ; they can be interpreted but cannot be disputed : the notable increase in infringement cases and failure to abide by rulings of the Court of Justice , or to transpose directives within the timeframe set , indicate that there is a need for greater monitoring of individual Member States by the Commission .
In addition , I am convinced that there should be greater cooperation between the European Parliament and national parliaments , in order to promote and indeed to add force to the application of Community law at national , regional and local levels .
I also approve of the inclusion in the text of the issue of the management of the Structural Funds : Member States need to be reminded that if they wish to benefit from the Funds within the 2007-2013 financial framework then they must adapt their legislation to comply with European law , above all with regard to environmental protection , in such a way as appropriately to foster economic and social development at regional level .
During today 's sitting of Parliament I voted in favour of the annual report of the Committee on Legal Affairs on monitoring the application of Community law in 2006 .
The document drafted by the rapporteur , Mrs Geringer de Oedenberg , contains references to failure to comply with the timetable for transposition of directives , unsatisfactory cooperation between the judicial systems of the Member States and the European Court of Justice , and also criticism of the methods of dealing with complaints .
One very worrying phenomenon is the unwillingness of the national courts to implement the principle of primacy of Community law and to take advantage of the preliminary ruling procedure .
The report also points to the increased number of infringements arising from failure by the Member States to comply with the rulings of the Court of Justice and failure to comply with the timetable for the transposition of directives .
In the light of the above , there is an urgent need to enhance cooperation between the European Parliament and national parliaments , and to increase monitoring of application of Community law at national and regional level .
Such action will bring the European Union closer to the citizens and strengthen its democratic legitimacy .
in writing . - ( FR ) I voted in favour of the resolution on a strategy on future implementation of the institutional aspects of the regulatory agencies , and I did so on the basis of the report drawn up at the initiative of my excellent colleague and friend , the former Greek Minister , Mr Papastamkos .
It is regrettable that the efforts deployed by Parliament and the Commission with a view to establishing legally constraining oversight of the European regulatory agencies have produced no significant result .
I share the opinion of the vast majority of my colleagues who deplore the absence of a general strategy for setting up agencies in the European Union .
It has become urgent and necessary for the Council and the Commission to work together with Parliament in order to establish a clear , common and coherent framework concerning the place given to the agencies in the future within the scope of European governance , its being necessary to set up parliamentary control over the constitution and operation of the regulatory agencies .
in writing . - ( LT ) Recently there has been a noticeable growth in the number of regulatory agencies both at European and at national level .
There are similarities and differences between these two levels .
The variety of these agencies in terms of structure and function at a European and national level raises questions regarding regulation , good management and the closeness of institutions in the sense of centralisation and decentralisation .
Europe 's regulatory agencies are mostly decentralised or independent services , therefore it is necessary to demand particular transparency and democratic control when we discuss their founding and activities , as without regulatory and executive institutions which have exclusive rights , the growth in numbers in the most important areas of social activity may damage the name of institutions representing the European Union , alienate them and greatly increase bureaucracy .
The application of parliamentary control to the structure and activities of regulatory agencies should conform with the classic principle of democracy , which demands an increase in the political responsibility of all institutions with executive powers .
in writing . - ( FR ) The European Union includes 29 agencies , veritable European micro-institutions whose cost comes to more than EUR 1 billion and whose usefulness is subject to caution .
The rapporteur is thus right to demand more transparency and more responsibility in managing these numerous agencies , true political control over their activity , evaluation of those that already exist , a moratorium on the creation of new agencies and a ' cost-advantage ' analysis before any decision is taken .
However , the true problem is the very existence of these agencies , additional layers of European bureaucracy , some of which have a regulatory power and others executive functions that interfere with the work of the national authorities when they do not complicate it .
The true problem is their proliferation and the fact that they are spreading throughout Europe , their seats being handed out like vote-catching presents .
The true problem is that 40 % of them are founded by virtue of Article 308 of the Treaty , that famous article that makes it possible to increase the competencies of Brussels when they are not expressly provided for by the laws and regulations .
Since this report resolves nothing , we are unable to approve it .
However , since it is , even so , an attempt to put a bit of order into this jumble , we cannot reject it .
For this reason , we shall abstain .
in writing . - ( SV ) It is interesting that , in point 5 of the report 's proposal , the absence of a general strategy for the creation of EU agencies is now being noted .
New agencies are being created on a case-by-case basis , leading to a non-transparent patchwork of regulatory agencies , executive agencies and other Community bodies .
It is even more interesting to note that the majority in the European Parliament has always promoted the creation of new agencies and is only now realising that the overall picture has been lost .
The June List supports the main ideas of the report , but we are critical of how the European Parliament is now trying to take in new territory with the regulatory agencies having to submit annual reports to Parliament and the directors of the agencies possibly being invited to appear before the competent parliamentary committee before they are appointed .
We are sceptical about these proposals .
Firstly , it is appropriate for the Commission to be responsible for the governance of these agencies , and secondly , party political wrangling may influence the appointment of the agency directors , who as such should merely be officials .
in writing . - ( IT ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I have voted in favour of the report presented by Mr Papastamkos on a strategy for the future settlement of the institutional aspects of Regulatory Agencies .
I welcome the Commission 's plan to set up an interinstitutional working group to be responsible for defining the functions of regulatory agencies , and the respective competences of each European Union body in relation to the aforesaid agencies .
This proposal should be the starting rather than the finishing line though , since the objectives go far beyond the creation of an interinstitutional group .
Indeed , the proposal for a common approach , insofar as possible , to the structure and functioning of these agencies is aimed at cutting red tape so that these bodies can carry out their legislative role in a proper and effective manner .
This will make it possible to monitor them and to meet the auditing requirements , at least in part , as well as to foster the responsibility called for by a role of such importance .
in writing . - ( SV ) Joseph Kony and the Lord 's Resistance Army are guilty of committing appalling crimes over the last 20 years , which is why the International Criminal Court now wishes to put him on trial .
The conflict in the Great Lakes Region , Uganda and Sudan is still going on and is constantly claiming new civilian victims .
It is the clear responsibility of the international community to put a stop to this terrible tragedy .
The June List generally has a negative view of foreign policy resolutions .
However , this one relates to an organisation and its leader that are being accused by the International Criminal Court of crimes against humanity .
We have therefore chosen to support this resolution .
in writing . - ( IT ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to inform the House that I have voted in favour of the motion for a resolution on the indictment and bringing to trial of Joseph Kony at the International Criminal Court .
It is wholly unacceptable that it has been more than three years that attempts have been made to arrest an international criminal like Kony , the perpetrator and instigator of crimes including murder , genocide , rape , looting and incitement to rape .
All these attempts have failed due to the continued reluctance of the Ugandan Government to cooperate in capturing this criminal , for whom the ICC has issued an international arrest warrant .
I would point out that Uganda has signed the Rome Statute , according to which every member commits itself to put an end to impunity for the most serious crimes of major concern for the international community , and to contribute to the prevention of such crimes .
I would also like to express my concern over the total absence of a clear commitment aimed at preventing the diversion to the LRA , the army led by Kony , of international aid ( above all from the Government of Sudan ) , which it can use to fund itself easily .
in writing . - ( FR ) I voted in favour of the legislative resolution changing the proposal for a decision of the European Parliament and of the Council establishing an action programme for the enhancement of quality in higher education and the promotion of intercultural understanding through co-operation with third countries ( Erasmus Mundus ) ( 2009-2013 ) , and this on the basis of the report by Mrs de Sarnez .
I back the compromise amendments aimed at academic excellence , equity linked to geographic coverage , informing the public about this programme and the necessity of lifting all legal and administrative obstacles to exchange programmes between European countries and third countries ( problem of visas ) .
I also maintain that it is necessary to take steps within the scope of the programme to ensure that students , doctoral candidates and post-doctoral and university researchers coming from the least developed third countries ( ACP = African , the Caribbean and Pacific countries , in particular ) return to their country of origin once their stay has expired in order to avoid the ' brain drain ' phenomenon .
Bravo , finally , on the requirement to learn at least two European languages and to fight against discrimination and promote respect for gender equality .
in writing . - ( DA ) The Danish Members of the Socialist Group in the European Parliament have voted against the report on the Erasmus Mundus II programme .
That is not because we are opposed to the programme , but because the wording on funding is in danger of bringing about a situation in which Danish students have to pay for using the programme .
In general , we support the objective of the Erasmus Mundus programmes .
The Danish Members of the Socialist Group in the European Parliament have voted in favour of the own-initiative report on better regulation , but wish to emphasise that removal of administrative burdens can be a very political process .
We support the objective of removing the unnecessary administrative burdens .
Certain administrative burdens may , however , be socially very necessary , even if they may be felt to impede companies ' growth and innovation .
We think that a balanced approach to reducing administrative burdens is necessary .
in writing . - ( EL ) As part of the anti-grassroots policy of the Lisbon Strategy , the EU is using the Erasmus Mundus programme ( 2009-2013 ) for the bourgeois modernisation of universities in the Member States , in accordance with the demands of capital , so as to cause a ' brain drain ' from third countries and step up the exploitation of workers , thereby increasing the profitability of European monopolies .
It reinforces private economic criteria for evaluating universities and research centres and places state and private institutes of education on an equal footing .
It creates education ' consortia ' on the basis of the ' objective of excellence ' and imposes tuition fees on students , thereby essentially excluding children from working class families from higher education and post-graduate studies .
The demagogic declarations by the EU about preventing a brain drain from less developed countries cannot conceal the real objective , which is none other than the woeful exploitation of manpower from those countries and drastic restrictions on the rights of young people to a high standard of free state education for every child from working class families .
For these reasons , the parliamentary group of the Greek Communist Party voted against this legislative initiative .
in writing . - ( PT ) I voted in favour of the De Sarnez report on the Erasmus Mundus programme ( 2009-2013 ) as I consider that this new programme is fundamental for promoting the European Union as a centre of excellence for learning at world level .
Through cooperation between the various EU educational establishments , Erasmus Mundus II will improve the response to the growing demand for student mobility and will promote the quality of higher education in the EU and dialogue between different cultures .
I would also highlight the important innovations proposed in the report , such as the extension of the doctoral programme , the inclusion of scholarships and the promotion of the active participation of undertakings and research centres .
in writing . - ( PT ) This is an important programme which aims to support third-country students who want to come and study in the European Union , although its limited funding may create difficulties for those required to pay university fees who are unable to do so .
As a result , although we voted in favour of the report , we regret that the proposals tabled by our group were rejected , as these aimed to help solve this problem .
However , we are pleased to say that proposals were adopted aimed at improving the mobility of these students and drawing attention to the fact that the programme must not be used to attract people with special skills from third countries to the European Union , to the prejudice of their countries of origin .
We insisted on the need for the European Commission , when evaluating the programme , to take account of the potential consequences of the ' brain drain ' and the socioeconomic situation of those concerned .
We must ensure that masters ' students , doctoral candidates , researchers and academics from less-developed third countries can return to their places of origin once their period of study has ended , thus avoiding any ' brain drain ' .
in writing . - Madam President , I voted in favour of this report , and I hope that the extension of the Erasmus Mundus Programme to 2013 will continue to provide an important bridge between different cultures .
The benefits of this educational programme are evident - not only will the EU benefit from attracting intelligent , high-flying students from third countries , which will improve EU research and innovation , but our own students will also gain improved language skills and increase their employability , both at home and abroad .
Above all , I think this programme is particularly pertinent , given that this is the Year of Intercultural Dialogue .
Building links with third countries through education fosters understanding and communication between different cultures , languages and faiths .
This is precisely the kind of programme that the European Parliament should be supporting , and I welcome it wholeheartedly .
in writing . - ( SV ) We have chosen to vote against this report from the Committee on Culture and Education .
We are not voting against the idea of the Erasmus Mundus programme as such , but as a result of some of the detailed proposals put forward by the Committee and some of those put forward by the Commission .
We do not support a special Erasmus Mundus visa as per the brief descriptions contained in the proposal .
Each Member State has the right to issue visas , and we hope that they have a generous attitude when it comes to issuing visas to students involved in the Erasmus Mundus programme .
We are of the opinion that it is not possible to regulate this sort of visa at EU level .
We also reject the idea of the EU providing financial support to an alumni association of students graduating from various Erasmus Mundus programmes .
Student associations should develop out of the needs and personal efforts of individuals .
They cannot be created from above by EU institutions .
The Erasmus Mundus programme involves cooperation and mobility in the higher education sector , aimed at promoting the European Union as a centre of excellence in learning around the world .
It broadens the opportunities available to date in the framework of the Erasmus programme , opening up cooperation in the field of education to countries that are not Members of the Union .
Education plays a vital role in young people 's lives .
International experience is increasingly valued by the students themselves and by future employers .
A knowledge of languages , cultures , the specific nature of each country and the ability to operate in an international environment are just some of the many benefits of participating in the programme .
The promotion of mobility is another prominent feature of the programme 's aims .
The latter are particularly important in the era of globalisation , as contacts with third countries gain significance .
We should welcome the fact that European students and students from third countries will continue to have the opportunity of acquiring such experience .
I am glad that the programme voted through also contains proposals for resolving visa issues .
The latter complicate travel arrangements unnecessarily .
The proposed facilitation should also affect the scope of information available .
Students should be able to obtain all the information they require to make it easier for them to prepare for their stay well in advance .
In this connection , support from European Commission representations in third countries could be particularly helpful .
in writing . - ( LT ) Today we voted on the new generation of the Erasmus Mundus programme ( 2009-2013 ) .
The current Erasmus Mundus programme was implemented in 2004 and more than 4000 citizens of the European Union and third countries have successfully used this programme .
Erasmus Mundus has proved to be a reliable measure in the field of higher education , particularly in the area of masters courses .
The goal of the new programme is to encourage higher education in Europe , to help offer more and better career opportunities to young people , and to implement more structured international cooperation between higher education institutions , ensuring greater mobility for students from the European Union and third countries .
Over the next 5 years , universities in Europe and third countries will be allocated more than EUR 950 million to join the programme and offer grants .
An extra programme for postgraduate studies will be added , and students will be allocated more financial support .
During the vote I supported the amendments by the committee responsible , which give the document clearer regulation , safeguard student choice and rights and enable stronger cooperation between universities .
in writing . - ( FR ) The objective of encouraging economic immigration on a huge scale , already set out on 11 January 2005 by the European Commission in its ' Green Paper on an EU approach to managing economic migration ' is more topical than ever , given this report .
No fewer than EUR 950 million have been appropriated to the Erasmus Mundus II programme for the period 2009-2013 .
This programme is intended to attract foreign students and teachers to the geographical area of the European Union .
That is some EUR 654 million more than the amount appropriated to the first version of the programme .
Under the pretext - laudable in itself - of encouraging students from third countries to come to study in Europe by offering them high-level master 's degrees or doctorates , what in reality are being opened up are the floodgates for a new channel of legal immigration .
Easier access to Europe will , in fact , be given to foreigners from third countries by means , in particular , of simplified procedures for obtaining visas and scholarships and modified tuition fees .
Far from favouring its own nationals and encouraging the European research and excellence it needs , the European Union is again favouring those from outside the EU and exhibiting its penchant for immigration on a huge scale .
in writing . - ( DE ) The Erasmus Mundus II programme is similar to the Erasmus exchange programme for European students , but is aimed primarily at exchanges with third countries .
Its purpose is to attract qualified foreign students to Europe .
I am fundamentally in favour of an intercultural exchange , particularly at a scientific level .
However , I have doubts about the effectiveness and , above all , the usefulness of this programme for the Member States .
At a time when in some Member States places at universities for the resident population are restricted in many subject areas , we should be cautious about higher qualifications .
The move to the Bologna model throughout the entire university system in Europe has made it difficult enough for students with a master 's degree to find a PhD place .
Increasing the competition for resident students seems to me to be counter-productive .
It will also be difficult to control breaches of immigration regulations in relation to the programme .
For this reason I have voted against the report .
The Erasmus Mundus programme has already played an important role in the contemporary education of young people and adults .
The experience gained indicates that the challenges should be tackled with a degree of caution , however .
Unduly radical changes such as new conditions for tuition fees could unbalance this educational system , which has proved itself in the market .
Such changes might also infringe certain principles concerning the autonomy of academic institutions .
It is therefore necessary to consider whether it would be best to leave decisions with the Erasmus Mundus consortium or to lay down the conditions for management from above .
I believe that , where established practice exists and there is the opportunity for local bodies to take decisions , that should be respected and nothing new imposed by decree .
This is particularly important given that we live in very different regions .
Some are said to be better developed , others to be less so , and they all have varying traditions and diverse economic conditions .
I should like to take this opportunity of pointing out that Parliament has the unjustified practice of referring to documents which are not yet binding , such as the European Constitution that was rejected in a referendum , the Treaty of Lisbon and the related Charter of Fundamental Rights .
Legislation cannot be founded on what is not on the statute book .
in writing . - ( IT ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I have voted in favour of Mrs De Sarnez 's report on the Erasmus Mundus programme ( 2009-2013 ) .
Young people are our future , and I say that not simply because it is a fitting expression : the Erasmus Mundus programme is built on an ethos of excellence and the promotion of intercultural integration , through cooperation with third countries , in order that new generations can work towards a better world .
Specifically , the new Erasmus Mundus programme lays emphasis on the possibility of attending masters ' and doctoral courses , the creation of partnerships with educational establishments in third countries and the pursuit of particular communication and information activities .
I applaud this initiative , and I would also like to draw attention to Mrs De Sarnez 's proposal that the learning of at least two foreign languages should be made a priority : languages are in fact the primary vehicle of cultural integration .
in writing . - ( NL ) Erasmus Mundus II broadly matches its predecessor , although major adjustments have been made .
Important changes include a more balanced and guaranteed geographical representation in the Erasmus Mundus programmes which consortia of universities from at least three European countries can offer , along with extra attention for vulnerable populations .
The admission criteria for the training courses must be quality-based , and , at the same time , gender equality must be respected and access for disadvantaged groups improved .
When grants are awarded to European students and students from third countries , the institutions that offer the courses must respect the principle of equal opportunities and non-discrimination .
At the same time , Erasmus Mundus II should contribute to the sustainable development of higher education in Europe and in third countries , whereby the Commission should make every effort to prevent brain drain .
The Greens will ensure that these adjustments are actually implemented .
The assessment of Erasmus Mundus should also demonstrate that access to the Erasmus Mundus courses has improved for vulnerable groups .
The Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance in the European Parliament has endorsed this report subject to those conditions
I voted in favour of the report on the proposal for a directive of the European Parliament and of the Council on safety rules and standards for passenger ships ( recast ) - C6-0442 / 2007 - .
Along with Mr Szájer , I am inclined to recognise the principles and guidelines provided by the Conference of Presidents .
They are fully compliant with the law .
I also fully endorse the suggestion that the decision by the Conference of Presidents requires technical adjustments .
in writing . - ( FR ) I voted in favour of the proposal for a directive of the European Parliament and of the Council on genetically modified micro-organisms ( recast ) , and this on the basis of the report by Mr Szajer .
I regret that , given the development and complexity of the laws and regulations , the Commission has not changed its position dating back to 1st April 1987 , which consists of instructing its services to proceed with the codification of legislative documents no later than after their tenth modification , while at the same time stressing that this was a minimum rule and that the services were to codify the laws and regulations for which they were responsible at even shorter intervals .
In this particular case , we are proceeding with revision of the directive of 1990 and of the laws and regulations that were changed four times , in 1994 , 1998 , 2001 and 2003 .
Initially intended for codification , Directive 90 / 219 / EEC is , in the end , recast in order to introduce the changes necessary for adapting to the procedure on regulations with control introduced in 2006 .
I consider that the policy of consolidating Community policy should be a priority of the European Commission and that the current situation is not in order , particularly with regard to the Member States and citizens .
in writing . - ( RO ) Even if the progress made and efficiency achieved in agricultural , crop and animal production are inconceivable without the major discoveries made in the field of genetics , we need to devise the optimum biosecurity measures for using genetically modified micro-organisms in contained conditions as we need to respect the precautionary principle so that we can protect human health and the environment .
It is definitely the case that nowadays mankind would have been worse off and more strife-torn without the discoveries made by Mendel , followed by those of Morgan , Crick and Watson .
However , it is clear that the procedures for obtaining , testing , using and commercialising genetically modified organisms ( GMO ) , whether plants , animals or micro-organisms , must be subject in every country to a special scheme of regulation , authorisation and administration , which will set out a legal and institutional framework , intended to eliminate or reduce the risks of producing any negative effects .
in writing . - ( IT ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I have voted in favour of Mr Ryan 's report on Community statistics relating to the trading of goods between Member States .
The aim of Community legislation is to reduce unnecessary and excessive bureaucracy , and therefore the issue of statistics relating to the trading of goods between Member States cannot remain untouched .
Eurostat has formed a working group to investigate how intra-Community reporting of this trading can be simplified and modernised .
Furthermore , a study is underway into a single system for the development and cataloguing of commercial flows of goods within the common market .
I agree with this initiative , but I hope , together with Mr Ryan , that the Commission will improve this proposal by specifying in sufficient detail what measures should be taken in order to introduce a single-flow mechanism of this kind .
Pilot projects could be used for this , so that the value and feasibility of the scheme might be examined in full .
in writing . - ( GA ) Ninety per cent of businesses in Ireland are small and medium-sized enterprises , as is the case throughout the European Union .
In Ireland - as I am more familiar with the situation there - around 250 000 enterprises are small and medium-sized enterprises employing more than 800 000 people .
Most of those enterprises ( circa 90 % ) employ fewer than ten people , with only one person employed in half the cases .
Time , therefore , is a very valuable resource , but those enterprises find themselves spending a great deal of time simply filling out forms .
It will come as no surprise that I support this report ( being my own report ) on which compromise was reached through cooperation between the Council and my colleagues in the ECON committee .
However , I wished to make this explanation of vote to emphasise its importance .
The provisions of the report will relieve over 200 000 small and medium-sized enterprises of the task of filling out forms relating to the trading of goods , thus saving time and benefiting business and enterprise in general .
in writing . - ( PL ) Intrastat is a single common system for European countries .
It aims to reduce unnecessary bureaucracy and regulation .
It is a flexible system and therefore allows for account to be taken of specific needs and solutions pertaining to individual Member States of the European Union .
Another important point is that both the Intrastat system and the international trade statistical system are based on the recommendations for an international trade in goods statistical system developed by the UN 's Statistical Division .
This makes it possible to obtain complete and fully comparable information on the international trade in goods .
Ongoing collection of statistical data on important economic issues is very necessary .
The Member States should make every effort to modernise and improve this system .
in writing . - Malta is the only state in the EU where divorce is not possible .
In Europe there are only three states where divorce is not achievable : the Vatican , Andorra and Malta .
Malta , however , allowed the registration of a divorce obtained elsewhere provided the person was either a national or domiciled in the country where the divorce was given .
By virtue of Brussels II ( Council Regulation ( EC ) No 2201 / 2003 ) , a person can now obtain a divorce if he is a national of any Member State and has been habitually living there for six months .
Any other person can file for divorce if that person has been habitually resident in the Member State for a continuous period of one year immediately preceding filing for divorce .
It is commendable that a new article in cases where states do not have divorce laws , as in the case of Malta , has been taken into consideration .
In Malta we have already recognised divorce through the system of registration in cases where the appropriate regulations apply ; it is not a question of adopting the principle of divorce as this is already in force in certain circumstances .
The issue is whether divorce should form a specific part of our legal system even when these special circumstances do not apply .
in writing . - ( FR ) I voted in favour of the legislative resolution approving , subject to amendments , the proposal for a Council regulation amending the regulation of 2003 as regards jurisdiction and introducing rules concerning applicable law in matrimonial matters , and this on the basis of the report by Mrs Gebhardt .
Faced with the increased mobility of citizens within the European Union resulting in an increase in the number of ' international ' couples , that is , couples in which the spouses are of different nationalities or reside in different Member States or in a Member State of which at least one of the two is not a national , and due to the high divorce rate in the European Union , it has become indispensable to legislate on the applicable law and competence in matrimonial affairs , which concern an ever increasing number of citizens each year .
It is necessary to go on pointing out that the treaties provide for progressively setting up a common area of freedom , security and justice along with measures aimed at furthering the compatibility of applicable rules in the Member States in the area of conflicts between laws and competence .
in writing . - ( SV ) Mrs Gebhardt 's report clarifies the competence of national courts in connection with matrimonial cases within the EU as well as which law is to be considered appropriate .
The aim is to militate against the risk of one of the spouses trying to rush in first with petitioning for divorce in order for the case to be governed by the law of a particular country that would protect the interests of the spouse in question .
This aim in itself is naturally commendable .
However , in my opinion the disadvantages of the regulation outweigh the advantages .
Sweden has one of the world 's most liberal matrimony laws , and this is something we should be proud of .
The danger associated with the original proposal is that it would mean that in a number of cases Swedish courts could be forced to pass a judgment according to Maltese , Irish , German or Iranian law when one party files for divorce .
In the long term , this would restrict the Swedish unconditional right for one person to file for divorce and also to have it granted - an area I could never compromise on .
Therefore , my first thought was to vote against the report .
However , during the vote an oral amendment was approved , which in essence related to the legal principle of public order .
I am still of the opinion that the Swedish model should be preserved , but in order to encourage improvement , I have chosen instead to abstain .
in writing . - ( PT ) I voted in favour of the Gebhardt report concerning applicable law in matrimonial matters .
Bearing in mind the increased mobility of citizens in the EU and the diversity of applicable legislation in the various Member States in the event of divorce , I support the possibility for spouses of different nationalities or resident in different Member States to choose the law applicable to their divorce .
However , I feel it is vital to ensure that each spouse is informed so that both are fully aware of the legal and social consequences resulting from choosing the applicable law .
in writing . - ( FR ) The new legislation we are being proposed concerns divorce for ' international couples ' , that is , couples in which the spouses are of a different nationality or who live in different Member States .
At issue here is fixing the rules relative to the competent jurisdiction and applicable law in order to offset the legal insecurity that prevails in this area .
At present , the applicable law is determined according to national laws regarding conflict of law , themselves being highly disparate among the various Member States , as well as being complex .
The majority of Member States determine the applicable law in accordance with criteria of reattachment or of residence ( lex loci ) .
Other Member States systematically apply their national law ( lex fori ) which , obviously , can lead to applying a law with which the spouses have only tenuous links and to a result that is not in keeping with legal certainty .
This new regulation proposes that we harmonise these rules of conflict of laws .
We are in favour of this , as it should introduce more predictability into what remains a dramatic situation and do so in the interests , in particular , of the security to which children , who are too often the victims of the separation of their parents , are entitled .
in writing . - ( SV ) We in the June List are greatly disappointed to observe the eagerness of the rapporteur to pursue an issue that has very recently been rejected by the Council .
The fact is that , despite its shortcomings , the current Brussels IIa Regulation is a much better piece of legislation than that proposed by the rapporteur .
To take away the freedom of spouses to choose a court and jurisdiction is an indication of the Commission 's and , more especially , the rapporteur 's , arrogant attitude towards current practice in all the Member States .
We are not only rejecting this ill-thought out report , but are calling on all Members to stand up for freedom of choice for spouses going through a divorce .
Complicated EU rules are the last thing these people need during difficult times .
in writing . - Ireland has opted out of the adoption and application of this regulation as we were not in favour of extending jurisdiction to Irish courts to grant a divorce to an EU national based on a substantially different law of the state from where he / she came .
If Ireland were to implement this measure , this would allow EU nationals resident in Ireland to obtain a divorce in our courts on substantially different and less onerous grounds than that provided for in our Constitution as allowed by the referendum on divorce in 1995 , i.e. 4 years separation of the parties .
It would also mean that the present Constitutional requirement on Irish courts in divorce proceedings to allow divorce only where proper provision is made for the parties involved and for dependent children would not apply in such cases .
While there are positive aspects to this report I have abstained because of Ireland 's opt-out .
in writing . - ( FI ) Madam President , I voted against the report on marriage by Mr Gebhardt , as I think it is important that Finnish laws should apply in Finnish courts in future in cases where the application of a law of a foreign country would conflict greatly with the basic premises of Finnish law .
I am also very concerned about the proposed evaluations of guilt in divorce cases .
In Finland we gave up investigating unfaithfulness or other such matters in divorce cases about 20 years ago .
It would be one gigantic leap backwards and a whiff of the old times if this were reintroduced .
in writing . - ( LT ) The enlarged European Union is seeing a rise in the number of international families , that is , spouses of different nationalities .
Unfortunately , in the EU a high number of marriages between different nationalities are ending in divorce , and often the divorce process is complicated and takes a long time .
This is because until now people had limited opportunities to choose the court , which would consider their divorce case .
Once they had decided to separate , spouses could only approach a court in their country of residence .
Consequently , they were also unable to choose the laws of other Community Members and apply them to their divorce .
For example , in order to divorce her husband , a Lithuanian woman , who had married a German and had a family in Germany , had to approach a court in their place of residence .
Their divorce case had to be tried under German law .
Once the regulation has been adopted , from 1 March 2009 these restrictions will no longer be in force .
Families going through divorce proceedings will be able to either choose the court according to their place of residence or choose the law applied by the country of which they are a citizen .
At the time of voting I supported the amendments , which determined that the law applied in divorce cases must not conflict with the main principles of the Charter of Fundamental Rights of the European Union .
This is particularly important as we strive to avoid sex discrimination when trying and making decisions in divorce cases .
in writing . - ( FI ) I voted in favour of Mrs Gebhardt 's report , because I think the Commission 's proposal to standardise the rules on conflicts of law in divorces between international couples is an important one .
Divorce is a human tragedy for the parties and their children .
That is why the parties involved need to be as clear as possible on the procedure to be applied and the material content of the law .
The situation now , where under the Brussels IIa Regulation spouses are able to choose amongst a number of different competent courts and the jurisdiction is determined with reference to the rules on conflicts of law in the Member State where the forum is located , does not establish the necessary legal certainty .
Forum shopping and the ' dash to court ' , for one party to obtain a favourable result , are serious side-effects of this .
I think that the right of marriage partners to choose by mutual agreement the competent court and jurisdiction would also help them discover the content in both cases .
For this very reason , it is crucial that access to information on content and procedures should be made easier , as stated in Amendment 2 .
Amendment 1 , which safeguards the interests of children in choosing the law , is also vitally important .
I support Amendment 37 , tabled by my group , in which the law of the Member State where the couple were joined in marriage must also be the one chosen .
This is logical and would make it even easier to discover the content of the law to be applied .
in writing . - ( FR ) In Europe there are , generally speaking , too many divorces , particularly in my country .
A growing number of divorces affects mixed couples , that is , couples in which the spouses are of a different nationality .
As the free movement of persons is a given fact of European integration , it is essential that a clear legal framework be set up .
Being aware that the national rules in the area of divorce are extremely disparate , I fully appreciate the danger that might result from a ' tourism ' of divorce , were one able to choose the most advantageous jurisdiction for one of the spouses and the most constraining jurisdiction for the other .
I would have voted in favour of this report because the proposed regulation would have offset the shortcomings , making it possible for two spouses living in different Member States to choose by mutual consent , and with full knowledge of the facts , the competent jurisdiction in their divorce proceedings , which should have been one of the two Member States of residence in the European Union .
Unfortunately , during the vote , an oral amendment that had been adopted caused such confusion that it was necessary to refer the whole report back to the committee .
Since the report was not referred back to the committee , I no longer took part in the final vote .
The subject is too delicate to be voted on in a state of confusion .
in writing . - I did not vote on this report as Ireland chose not to exercise its option to take part in the adoption and application of the proposed regulation and has not played an active role in negotiations at Council level .
Ireland was not in favour of extending jurisdiction to Irish courts to grant a divorce to an EU national based on a substantially different law of the state where he / she came from .
This , if it had been implemented , would allow EU nationals resident in Ireland to obtain a divorce in Irish courts on substantially different and less onerous grounds than that provided for in our constitution as allowed by the referendum on divorce in 1995 .
Given that Ireland is not part of the process in adopting and applying this regulation , I chose not to vote on this report .
in writing . - ( SK ) I welcome the report from my colleague Evelyne Gebhardt on the choice of jurisdiction , the recognition of judgments and the rules applying to the right to decide on matrimonial matters .
I firmly believe that it is important to create a clear , comprehensive and flexible legal framework in this sensitive area .
In the vote today I voted in favour of the introduction of the right to choose an appropriate court for divorce proceedings .
I supported a proposal under which a so-called international couple will be able to opt for jurisdiction in the place of their usual residence , or in the legal system of the country where they were married .
I fully support the view that it is important to ensure sufficient access to information for both spouses , regardless of their financial situation or level of education .
Both sides should be precisely and fully informed of the consequences of their choice of court and of the right to decide in divorce cases .
This applies especially in the case of international couples , since the laws of the Member States , the divorce procedures and the conditions under which divorces may be handled vary enormously .
in writing . - ( DE ) In matters relating to cross-border marriages it is important that there is a standardised legal situation in Europe .
Legal certainty for citizens in areas such as marriage and divorce , which often involve highly emotional issues , is increasingly important in areas of policy .
In a world which is shrinking at an ever increasing speed , regulations such as those already in place in civil law , in this case the free choice of applicable law and court for the parties , is important for their mobility .
This regulation also establishes ' user-friendly ' access to an area of family law .
Another important factor in this context is that the parties are well-informed about the legal consequences of their decision .
This is why I have voted in favour of the report .
in writing . - ( RO ) I voted for this report thinking about the more than 150 000 European men and women who are involved in cross-border divorce procedures every year .
This also includes many Romanian men or women who have got married abroad .
I voted for this report because I strongly believe that we have a duty to support the removal of all those bureaucratic obstacles and difficulties which make some people say that the Union would be hell for citizens and heaven for lawyers .
I also think that we have a duty to those we represent to eliminate a number of the other problems which cause trouble for Europe 's citizens .
Just two examples of these are the problems linked to medical care given to European citizens in a country other than their country of origin and the equivalence of educational diplomas .
in writing . - ( IT ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I have voted in favour of the work presented by Mrs Gebhardt , on applicable law in matrimonial matters .
It has a worthy aim : to establish a clear and comprehensive legal framework to include laws on jurisdictional competence , and recognition and implementation of decisions on matrimonial matters , in addition to the rules on applicable law .
Indeed , under the current scenario , because of conflicts between national and Community laws , any ' international ' divorce may throw up the most disparate of legal questions .
We must also consider the risk of the ' dash to court ' , which rewards the spouse who attempts to get in first and seize the jurisdiction whose law best serves his or her interests .
This is completely unacceptable , and I therefore welcome this report , aimed at giving the spouses significant responsibilities , above all in terms of enlightened choice , choice of jurisdiction and finally choice of applicable law .
in writing . - ( SV ) As someone in favour of the European Union I usually see the added value of European legislation .
Better solutions are often found for problems when several people have thought about them .
This report is a regrettable exception to this rule .
We have every reason to be proud of legislation that gives people the opportunity to go their separate ways if they so wish and therefore every reason to safeguard the system we currently have in Sweden .
Like the government , I am therefore of the opinion that the Commission 's proposal for harmonisation is heading in the wrong direction when account must be taken , for example , of the practice in Malta .
The Vatican cannot be allowed to put obstacles in the way of an active equality policy at home .
The European Parliament had a different opinion .
It was therefore my intention to vote against the report .
The amendment has also been entered in the Minutes .
I voted against the measure because I consider it to be irresponsible of the EU to interfere in matters which do not lie within its authority .
This includes family law .
The Council of Ministers should think carefully about whether to accept proposals from Parliament or the Commission .
A small number of problem cases should not be exploited in order for the EU to appropriate further powers .
This is not what European integration is all about .
Apart from this , the European Parliament referred in its opinion to the EU Charter of Fundamental Rights .
This constitutes unacceptable manipulation on the part of Parliament , since the EU Charter of Fundamental Rights is not a legally binding document but a political compromise .
The EU Charter of Fundamental Rights declares in Article 9 : " The right to marry and right to found a family shall be guaranteed in accordance with the national laws governing the exercise of these rights . ”
Since family law is resolved at a national level why do we need a parallel set of European divorce regulations ?
This opens up the possibility of manipulation .
It is therefore not entirely clear what direction this regulation is heading in and the Commission is incapable of eliminating the uncertainties .
I propose that the Council of Ministers reject this measure .
An increase in the number of married couples in the EU where the spouses are nationals of different EU or non-EU countries has been noted .
Consequently , the question of the choice of applicable law or competent court for a particular issue is arising ever more frequently .
The European Union needs effective conflict resolution provisions to determine legal competence .
As the number of divorces increases , so too does the number of cases of discrimination when seeking divorce or legal separation .
The best-informed spouse takes the initiative and seizes the jurisdiction where the law best serves his or her interests .
In so doing , this spouse is prejudging the competence of the legal system concerned .
In the case of marriages in which one of the spouses resides in a non-EU country , it may be difficult to find a court 's recognition of a divorce settlement granted in a non-EU country .
The report voted on today aims to ensure access by both spouses to reliable information concerning divorce and separation proceedings and also the main issues in national and Community law .
It has rightly been recognised as vital for the interests of any child concerned to be taken into account in each case when choosing the applicable law .
The fisheries policy pursued by the EU is not , and has never been , based on well thought-out , joint decisions .
Fish stocks in Europe have declined dramatically in recent years , and very little is being done to change this situation .
Instead , the EU is offering aid in return for fishing rights in third world countries and will therefore deplete their seas of fish as well .
The local population along the coastlines will be deprived of its livelihood and will be reduced to living on aid , aid moreover that rarely provides adequate compensation or makes up for the lost income .
The fisheries policy that the EU should instead advocate must be permeated by long-term and far-sighted thinking .
Such a process has no room for aid for improving and modernising fishing fleets , the ultimate aim of which is to increase catch capacity .
However , I would gladly support measures which aim to support vulnerable local populations in poor coastal regions , whose only source of income is fishing and who are suffering tremendously as a result of reduced fish stocks , largely as a direct result of the EU 's misguided fisheries policy .
The proposals in Mr Guerreiro 's report do not , however , include such measures and I have therefore voted against the report .

in writing . - ( PT ) Regulation ( EC ) No 639 / 2004 on the management of fishing fleets registered in the Community outermost regions provides for a number of derogations from the entry / exit regime established under Article 13 of Regulation ( EC ) No 2371 / 2002 on the conservation and sustainable exploitation of fisheries resources under the common fisheries policy .
However , the belated adoption of the Commission legal instrument enabling the Member States concerned to allocate state aid as well as limited shipyard capacity have made it impossible to meet the deadline relating to the entry into the fleet of fishing vessels benefiting from state aid for renovation up to 31 December 2008 , as specified in Regulation ( EC ) No 639 / 2004 .
In its report , the Committee on Fisheries defended the extension of deadlines for state aid for the renewal and registration of vessels , both in relation to the Regulation currently in force and in relation to the proposal presented by the European Commission , according to which the deadline should be extended only by one year , in other words until 31 December 2009 .
The extension of state aid for renewing the fleets of the outermost regions until 31 December 2009 and the possibility of registering vessels until 31 December 2011 represent vital assistance taking into account the aforesaid constraints .
I therefore voted in favour of the Guerreiro report .
in writing . - ( PT ) Support for the renewal and modernisation of the fishing fleets in the outermost regions is extremely important given the strategic nature of the fisheries sector in these regions .
The report voted on today aims to extend by one more year the period of financing of the renewal and modernisation of the fishing fleets of the outermost regions .
It is justifiable to take account of the particular structural , social and economic situation of these regions in respect of the management of their fishing fleets .
To that end , the provisions on management of fleet entry / exit regimes and compulsory withdrawal of capacity and also the rules on access to state aid for the renewal and modernisation of fishing vessels should be adapted to the needs of those regions .
In summary , support for the renewal and modernisation of the outermost regions ' fishing fleets should continue , especially in the case of small-scale fleets , as the fleets of these regions consist for the most part of ageing vessels , in some regions even built more than 30 years ago .
These actions are a sine qua non for improving catch storage conditions and the working and safety conditions of fishermen in these regions .
in writing . - ( IT ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I have voted in favour of the report on the management of fishing fleets registered in the Community outermost regions , presented by Mr Guerreiro .
The Commission has always aligned itself in favour of European integration , whatever area is being discussed , and I share this view ; but in this case we must eliminate any time limits , so that these regions have sufficient time for appropriate renewal and modernisation to better equip them to face competition within the internal market .
It is clear that continued support for this renewal is a sine qua non without which it will be impossible adequately to secure working and safety conditions and the conservation of fish stocks .
For this reason I support this initiative , aimed at completely restructuring the fleets of the outermost regions ( ORs ) in order to confront the new European challenges in the fishing sector .
Corrections to votes and voting intentions : see Minutes
( The session was suspended at 2.15 p.m. and resumed at 3.10 p.m. )

Approval of the minutes of the previous sitting : see Minutes
EU-Russia relations ( debate )
The first item on the agenda is the Council and Commission statements on EU-Russia relations .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , the European Union 's relationship with Russia is one of the most challenging of our times .
On the one hand , we see a complex web of joint activities and interwoven interests .
On the other , we see the backdrop of events in Georgia .
The European Council has asked for a review of EU-Russia relations and this reflection takes place in the context of events which have cast a serious shadow over the EU-Russian relationship .
The violation of Georgia 's territorial integrity with the use of force and Russia 's unilateral recognition of Abkhazia and South Ossetia remain unacceptable , and we cannot share the principles of foreign policy recently articulated in Moscow , including the resurgence of spheres of influence .
Therefore , the ongoing review has to make a rather sober assessment of the EU 's own self-interest in this relationship .
Yet , at the same time , economic and trade relations between the European Union and Russia are strong , and getting stronger .
Russia is already our third-most important trading partner and we see growth rates of up to 20 % a year .
Energy is a major factor , but there is also impressive growth in services .
With its recent high growth rates and emerging middle class , Russia is an important emerging market , right on our doorstep , that offers opportunities for EU business , notwithstanding the effects of the present financial crisis .
The European Union is a major investor in Russia , accounting for 80 % of cumulative foreign investment .
A significant share of Russian foreign reserves is in euro , making Russia one of the largest holders of euro-denominated assets in the world .
For all these reasons , we have a stake in the continuing growth of the Russian economy and in supporting Russia 's quest for modernisation , including the development of a truly independent judiciary able to enforce contracts .
This is in line with the emphasis which President Medvedev has placed on the importance of the rule of law in Russia .
The security of energy supply and demand is a key component of our relationship .
EU Member States are major buyers of Russian energy products and this is unlikely to change in the short to medium term .
The relationship is one of interdependence , not dependence .
Exports to the European Union have made an important contribution to the impressive growth rates Russia has seen over the past five to six years .
Nevertheless , a great deal of work has yet to be done to build up a genuine energy partnership based on the principles enshrined in the Energy Charter Treaty , namely transparency , reciprocity and non-discrimination .
Even more importantly , Russia is a key geopolitical actor , whose constructive involvement in international affairs is a necessary precondition for an effective international community .
We therefore engage on Iran , the Middle East , Afghanistan , the Balkans and elsewhere , as well as in multilateral fora .
We also have a common interest in pursuing the non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction .
In all these areas , cooperation is not always easy but we need to continue .
Greater cooperation in the area of freedom , security and justice is helping to tackle threats posed by challenges such as terrorism and organised crime .
It is through dialogue we have built up that we are able to discuss areas such as human rights .
Consultations are taking place in Paris today .
We will once again remind Russia of its commitments as a member of the Council of Europe and the OSCE , particularly regarding freedom of the press and the events unfolding in Ingushetia , for instance , as well as other human rights issues .
For us , it is clear : Europe upholds values and established norms of international conduct , and we stand by these in all circumstances .
These include respect of territorial integrity and the peaceful resolution of disputes .
The European Council has noted with satisfaction that Russian troops have withdrawn from the zones adjacent to South Ossetia and Abkhazia as an essential step to implementing the six-point plan .
Talks in Geneva were launched last week and this was another important step forward .
There is , of course , a great deal more to do .
Tomorrow I will host a donors ' conference for Georgia to mobilise funding for the reconstruction of damaged infrastructure and the reintegration of internally displaced people , and to accelerate Georgia 's economic recovery from the conflict .
In cooperation with Parliament , I intend to devote up to EUR 500 million for this purpose , and I should like to express my thanks to the chairs of the Committee on Budgets and the Committee on Foreign Affairs , who have written to me expressing their support for this approach .
The review of EU-Russia relations with the European Council , as requested , will present a comprehensive overview of the many strands of the relationship , from our efforts to support Russia 's accession to the WTO , to visa facilitation , customs cooperation , educational exchanges and cooperation in scientific research .
This review should guide us in approaching all our current activities with Russia and those which are currently on hold .
It should be discussed at the next General Affairs Council on 10 November 2008 , at which I hope we will be able to find the right understanding on pursuing negotiations on a new EU-Russia agreement .
I say this because I know of no better way to pursue our own interests and make our concerns heard .
On the other hand , we must not behave as though nothing has happened .
In all that we do , we must ensure and make clear that we have a very clear assessment of our goals and ensure that the EU stands behind these goals as a united force .
It is perhaps fitting that we are holding this debate today on the eve of tomorrow 's international donors ' conference that , as I said , I will preside over with the World Bank and the French and the Czech current and future presidencies .
The European Union will continue to play its role , as we have done throughout this crisis , as a constructive , reliable partner , guided by its values and making a decisive contribution to stability and to peace .
President-in-Office of the Council . - ( FR ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , first of all I would ask you to excuse me , and I thank Mrs Ferrero-Waldner for having spoken before me , since I have just come from the Conference of Committee Chairmen .
Talks went on a little longer than expected owing to this morning 's debate , with the President-in-Office of the Council taking the floor and voting time taking place .
So please accept my apologies .
As Mrs Ferrero-Waldner pointed out , we are effectively at a crossroads in EU-Russia relations , especially after the Georgian conflict .
Following the Extraordinary European Council of 1 September , the Council discussed this on 13 October , as Mrs Ferrero-Waldner said .
At that time it stated that , following deployment by the European Union of an independent civilian observer mission in Georgia , troops had withdrawn from the areas adjacent to South Ossetia and Abkhazia .
This marked an essential additional step in the implementation of the agreements of 12 August and 8 September , concluded with the mediation of the European Union , with regard to the independence , sovereignty and territorial integrity of Georgia - as I have already had the chance to tell your Committee on Foreign Affairs on several occasions .
The European Union will continue to call on the parties to pursue implementation of their commitments in the framework of the discussions provided for in the agreements of 12 August and 8 September of this year .
You will be aware that these talks began in Geneva on 15 October under the auspices of the European Union , the United Nations and the OSCE .
For the preparation and conducting of these negotiations , we have a Special Representative for the crisis in Georgia , Pierre Morel , who has been doing an excellent job .
The first meeting , held on 15 October , enabled the parties concerned to meet directly .
Obviously , it is all going to take a long time .
It is a lengthy process , but , after all , when we remember what the usual peace processes consist of , because we recall the situation in the Balkans , the fact that there has been a meeting enabling all parties to meet directly itself marks an important stage , even though we know that the path will certainly be long , as I said .
The next meeting in the process will be held in Geneva on 18 November .
We are hoping that the parties will commit to finding a pragmatic solution for continuing the discussions , which should allow all the outstanding issues to be dealt with , in particular arrangements for security and stability , including in the upper Kodori Valley and in the Akhalgori region , as well as , of course , the pressing matter of displaced persons .
The Union is determined to maintain its commitment to the process of resolving the conflicts in Georgia and reach a comprehensive settlement based on the principles of international law .
For the moment , more generally , the European Council has asked the Commission and the Council to carry out a full and thorough appraisal of EU-Russia relations with a view to the next Summit scheduled for 14 November .
As the President-in-Office of the Council , President Sarkozy , said this morning , it is essential to talk to Russia , and it is in our interest , as relations with Russia are so important .
Mrs Ferrero-Waldner reminded us that it is an essential partnership : the European Union and Russia are interdependent , and clearly it is also through dialogue that we can ensure that the human rights situation improves in Russia and the region .
It is in our interest to call on Russia to pursue the cooperation which both parties need .
I would remind you that we need Russia in order to face global challenges , such as the fight against terrorism , climate change or the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction .
The European Union has made this choice , and we believe that it is in Russia 's interest to make this choice , and this is why we truly wish to continue this dialogue .
The forthcoming Summit of 14 November will provide the opportunity to examine the various dimensions of the relationship which we must have with Russia , and we must pursue a constructive engagement to determine whether Russia hopes to take full advantage of this dialogue .
However , we should continue this dialogue , as the President-in-Office of the Council indicated this morning , without compromising the fundamental principles which lie at the heart of European integration .
Dialogue with Russia can only be based on respect for the sovereignty of states , the rule of law and common rules .
In this context , Russia 's accession to an organisation such as the World Trade Organisation is in our mutual interest .
Indeed , it would allow numerous contentious issues , which affect a certain number of Member States , to be settled .
I am thinking of the law on timber exports and Siberian overflight taxes .
We also believe , in line with discussions which also took place this morning , that our commitment to closer economic and trade relations with Russia is important .
Here too , we must have a zone with Russia which is more clearly defined at economic and trade level , and we must contribute , if possible , to creating a common economic space for the European Union and Russia .
In this respect , we will naturally continue to impress on Russia the importance of transparency , reciprocity and non-discrimination in the energy field .
This also holds true in a broader sense for the issue of investments insofar as European Union companies operating in Russia are often faced with real problems which currently have no satisfactory solution .
It is also clear that during the Summit we should discuss the impact of the financial crisis with Russia .
This is a new issue , and an important one for the European Union .
It is also important for Russia , for investment policies and for EU-Russia trade policies .
We shall also reiterate , as I already mentioned , our concerns over meeting commitments on human rights , democracy and the rule of law .
At international level , we shall tackle all the cooperation issues regarding our common neighbourhood and , of course , those of current interest following the Georgian conflict .
We shall , however , also tackle international issues of mutual interest , such as the Middle East , Iran and Afghanistan .
In conclusion , I would like to say that it is in our interests to continue dialogue with Russia , indeed to strengthen it .
We believe that this is the only voice which will allow Russia to make progress and ensure that we have a future based on increasingly shared values .
We must learn from what happened in Georgia and strive to build constructive , balanced relations with Russia , and try to construct a long-term strategic partnership with this country .
Far from moving us away from this goal , the Georgian conflict must , on the contrary , strengthen it in the context , once again , of what the European Union 's identity represents with respect to other partners who may not always have the same interests as ours in their relations with Russia .
Mr President , I should like to start my speech by citing a few words that the President-in-Office , Mr Sarkozy , said during the debate this morning .
He said that the European Union could not be complicit in a new Cold War and that it could not irresponsibly feed a rise in tension leading to a crisis between us and Russia .
Russia is in fact being urged to be a positive and constructive partner of the European Union due to its strategic importance , its natural resources , its military and nuclear power , the level of trade that we have with Russia - as recalled by the Commissioner - and also simply because it is the EU 's main energy supplier .
However , we have set ourselves up not only as an economic and commercial Union but also as a Union of values .
We cannot therefore pick and choose these values according to who is most powerful or important .
I believe that values such as freedom , respect for democratic values , human rights and the sovereignty and territorial integrity of states are values that must be taken into account .
We cannot look the other way and pretend that nothing happened this summer , when in fact we witnessed the invasion and subsequent occupation by force of a sovereign state .
We must strengthen our neighbourhood policy and be consistent with the values that we advocate .
There are still many things that must happen : the evaluation being carried out by the European Commissioner and her departments in the Commission , the Geneva talks , and the Donors ' Conference which will be held this week in Brussels , all of which are important in my view .
I want to end by once again citing the President-in-Office of the Council , who said that the European Union must speak with one firm voice .
We will not be able to speak with one firm voice - if fact we will instead show signs of weakness - if , at the next Summit to be held in Nice on 14 November , the European Union starts the negotiations with a view to concluding an agreement or partnership with Russia without that country fully complying with and respecting the agreements that it signed with the European Union on 12 August and 8 September .

on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( NL ) Mr President , like Mr Salafranca , I should like to pick up on what President Sarkozy stated this morning : we have to try to solve the problems with Russia via dialogue rather than confrontation .
We have to try to develop relationships in Europe that are based on partnership , but also on the principle of equality of partners , without , of course , forgetting to sound a critical note where needed .
In this connection , we must look for solutions to the problems surrounding Georgia , and we must work with Russia on a number of crucial issues that have already been mentioned , international issues , like the future of the non-proliferation regime , the problems surrounding Iran and the follow-up to Kyoto .
Our own environmental ambitions cannot prove successful unless we can reach agreement on them with other key partners in the world .
Cooperation must also be sought with Russia with regard to the financial crisis and the role of Russia in the G8 .
The financial crisis demonstrates yet again how much we rely on Russia , but also how much Russia relies on the international economy .
The fact that the world has changed completely , compared to 30 or 40 years ago , is another reason why returning to cold-war tactics is not an option .
Secondly , we would like to applaud the French Presidency 's conduct and the Union 's unanimity in the way it has addressed the conflict surrounding Georgia .
It is of key importance that we should hold fast to this unanimity in the weeks and months to come as well .
This is particularly important in the talks that have got underway in Geneva and that will be continued in November .
Understandably , there was no immediate agreement about a formula to solve the Georgian issue .
This issue might , in fact , be difficult to solve , because there is a fundamental difference of opinion between us and Russia .
In our view , Georgia 's territorial integrity should be maintained , and the fact that South Ossetia and Abkhazia have been recognised as independent countries is unacceptable to us .
The discussions on these matters are set to be tough .
It may , in this regard , be important to remind ourselves of the need to have a wider debate about the safety structures and regulations that are in place , under the name of the Helsinki process , in Europe too .
The Russians have made proposals to change and improve this , but the Council and Commission may have some thoughts on the matter too .
What is important in the framework of this discussion is that Russia be told in no uncertain terms that we do not want come to blows about spheres of influence and that we do not accept them , not even in the regions that border both Russia and the European Union .
I am not in favour of extending NATO in that direction .
What I am in favour of , though , is active EU policy to guarantee the independence of countries like Ukraine , Georgia and Moldova , and I hope that the proposals which the Commission will be moving this autumn surrounding eastern partnership will help strengthen the ties with the said neighbouring countries , so that we can help them to guarantee their own development and their own independence .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - ( FR ) Mr President , Mr Jouyet , Mrs Ferrero-Waldner , firstly if I may , I would like to recommend a good book for your Christmas holidays : the wonderful biography of the Countess of Ségur .
You will know that the real name of the Countess of Ségur was Sophie Rostopchine - yes , Rostopchine - and that her father was the man who put a stop to Emperor Napoleon 's incursion into Russia .
The book provides a marvellous description of how it all happened .
Some of the lessons it teaches us are still valid today .
In any case , this was just an introduction .
First of all , I would like to clarify that this morning , when I took the floor , I by no means wished to suggest that the EU-Moscow Summit should not take place .
Of course not .
It has to take place .
Since I only had one and a half minutes perhaps I did not make myself understood .
What I meant to say is that I had deduced from the Council conclusions that it had already been decided to pursue , to reopen partnership negotiations , association treaty negotiations , and that whatever happens , it matters little how the Summit of 14 November , which is likely to be difficult , pans out , as in any event talks would resume , and the evaluation of the Commission and the Council would naturally be taken into account , and quite rightly so .
In fact , I wanted this matter to be clarified a little better .
So , I do not know whether Mr Sarkozy misunderstood me deliberately or not .
In any case , he did not answer me , but I would appreciate an answer , Mr Jouyet , because personally I would be sorry if it had already been decided to reopen negotiations in any event .
I fully support dialogue with Russia .
Clearly , it is a great country .
It is a great country which is very proud , and a great country which does not show much pity and does not , in my view , appreciate others putting themselves in a weak position .
So , to possibly already have decided that , come what may , negotiations will be reopened , even before the Summit has taken place , does not show the greatest diplomatic skill .
Anyway I have run out of time , so above all I hope , Mr Jouyet , that you will give me a clear answer , one way or the other , and I will be most grateful .

on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - ( NL ) Mr President , Mr Jouyet , Mrs Ferrero-Waldner , ladies and gentlemen , a great deal can be said about the conflict between Russia and Georgia , and it is certainly a determining factor in our relationship with Russia today .
What can be said in any event is that both Russia and Georgia have failed .
It is unacceptable for countries to use military means to solve their conflicts .
There is a theory in political science that says that , in principle , democratic countries solve their conflicts in a democratic manner , via dialogue , and not by military means .
As this was not the case here , there is definitely something wrong with the democracy in both Georgia and Russia .
Otherwise , things would not have come to pass as they ultimately did .
Today 's debate focuses on our relationship with Russia .
Russia 's situation remains very critical to say the least in the areas of democracy , respect for human rights , the freedom of press and freedom of association , the situation in Chechnya - which may no longer be headline news , but anyone who closely follows that country knows that the situation in Chechnya is still very critical - and also in terms of the problems involved in the preparations for the Winter Olympics in Sochi .
These are all issues that cause many problems .
There is , in my view , as has already been stated , a mutual interdependence between the European Union and Russia .
That is true .
Each time we talk about mutual interdependence and discuss the said problems , though , we should , to my mind , bring up those other values , the values of a democracy , the typically European values , other ways of solving conflicts , the pursuit of more democracy and the use of soft-power instruments .
The Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance are all for dialogue , which , in my opinion , is one of the hallmarks of the European Union .
The European Union is an extreme exercise in solving conflicts and conflict prevention in a peaceful manner .
This is why we , provided all the conditions have been met and provided that the Council , the Commission and the European Parliament make a firm stand for the said values , can enter into dialogue with Russia , including with regard to the partnership and cooperation agreements , with peace of mind , determination and with the will to succeed .
on behalf of the UEN Group . - ( PL ) Mr President , the actions of the Russian armed forces in Georgia are a particularly relevant test of Russia 's current intentions .
They also put the European Union 's political power and fundamental principles of operation to the test .
Unfortunately , the leaders of several Member States are behaving as if Russia 's invasion of sovereign democratic Georgia had never taken place .
Ladies and gentlemen , Russia is once again humiliating the European Union by claiming to have withdrawn its forces to their positions prior to the invasion .
How , then , are we to account for the fact that Georgian villages located in the region of South Ossetia and its vicinity are constantly being subjected to brutal ethnic cleansing ?
How are we to account for the fact that the two hundred observers dispatched by the Union are being denied access to the scenes of conflict ?
Such a situation is light years removed from a return to the status quo of 7 August , which is a condition for attending talks with Russia .
One of the purposes of the Russian invasion of Georgia was to terrorise neighbouring countries in the region , so as to torpedo the Nabucco project , which is crucial to the Union 's energy security .
It appears that no thought is currently being given to the gas and oil transport corridor running through Georgia .
That corridor is vital for us and is the only one not under the Kremlin 's control .
I should also like to recall that there are a great many holders of Russian passports living in neighbouring countries to the Union .
I could mention Ukraine , Belarus and the Baltic States by way of example .
We must therefore bear in mind that at any moment the Kremlin could claim that those people are in need of its so-called protection .
That is exactly what happened in South Ossetia .
Once again , I must emphasise that Member States of the Union and their nearest neighbours are under direct threat of Russian aggression .
We are currently confronted with a situation in which Russia , in addition to engaging in energy blackmail , has gone so far as to add the threat of military action against Member States of the Union and their nearest neighbours to its arsenal .
The present situation in Georgia is an obvious example .
There can be no question of a partnership between the Union and Russia in such circumstances .
Attendance at talks during the forthcoming Nice Summit on 14 November would show once again that the European Union 's leaders are totally incapable of coping with Russia .
on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group . - ( FI ) Mr President , Commissioner , the stock markets in the United States of America have crashed , the stock markets in the Member States of the European Union have crashed , and the stock markets in Russia have crashed .
We are all in the same crisis caused by turbocapitalism .
Despite that , some EU countries , taking their lead from the Baltic counties , whose presidents were educated in the United States , and especially Poland , want to isolate Russia from the European Community .
First the brakes were applied to the start of the talks on the Partnership Agreement , and today the reason is Georgia 's and Abhasia 's conflict with Russia .
In many Western countries the media has presented an image of Russia as the attacker .
That is the wrong image .
Shakashvili 's army attacked and so triggered the global conflict .
He should not be rewarded for that .
In these matters the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats in the European Parliament is , unfortunately , a prisoner of its own extremist elements .
Of course , Russia gained a military victory over Shakashvili 's army , an army that was trained by the Americans and Israelis and armed by the Ukrainians .
It was a political overreaction to recognise South Osettia 's amd Abhasia 's independence .
Now Russia is taking the political consequences .
Our group , however , does not believe that isolating Russia should be one of them .
European capitalism needs Russia 's natural resources , and Russia needs Europe 's political experience of democracy , civil freedoms and the rule of law .
These goals will not be realised through political violence but through cooperation and dialogue .
That is probably what the talks going on today in Helsinki between Chiefs of Staff General Mike Mullen and Nikolai Makarov are about .
The EU , furthermore , should not boycott the dialogue .
We wish the positive attempts proposed by the country to hold the Presidency every success .


on behalf of the IND / DEM Group . - ( FR ) Mr President , Mr Jouyet , it is time for contrition - this appears to be the mood today - or at least for rethinking dogmas and instinctive reactions , and moreover , I am grateful to Mr Sarkozy for giving , this morning , an example of this which seemed sincere .
Therefore , let us also rethink our old , very old mistrust when it comes to Russia , or rather mistrust of this country which is , whether we like it or not , one of our partners .
From this point of view , I also recommend - as Mrs Neyts-Uyttebroeck did - reading a biography of the Countess of Ségur , in particular the one by Mrs Strich , published by the excellent Bartillat , and you will see the true importance which should be placed on a word which you said twice , if I heard you correctly : ' interdependence ' .
Yes , clearly we are interdependent , but not just in terms of fighting terrorism or weapons of mass destruction .
We are interdependent from all points of view : with regard to energy , to state the obvious , but also with regard to research , industry and politics , in a multi-faceted manner , of course .
Let us consider what the face of Europe in the 21st century will be like , depending on whether our nations will still be involved with promoting the immense riches of Siberia .
So please , let us stop espousing disputes which are not our own , but those of a third power with an interest in dividing Europe in order to dominate it .
Believe me , in this regard I am considering Europe 's interest , if you will accept that French sovereigntists also are concerned by this matter .
- ( CS ) Ladies and gentlemen , I consider the Council 's decision not to renew talks with Russia on a strategic partnership to be foolish , short-sighted and detrimental to the citizens of the Union .
We should realise that this is a partner Europe depends on for supplies of raw materials .
It is not just a question of gas and oil .
Without titanium from Russia , for example , it would not be possible to produce a single airbus .
What is even worse , the current European Russo phobia is based not on the facts but on the way they have been presented through politics and the media .
We should be aware that the conflict in the Caucasus was started by Georgia with no regard for the outcome , and not by Russia .
Moreover , I know of no concrete reason why the independence of South Ossetia and Abchazia should not be respected , since a number of members of the Union welcomed the independence of Kosovo immediately and with great jubilation .
I am delighted that Václav Klaus , the president of the Czech Republic , the country I represent here , described the situation in realistic terms when he said that it was not a question of Georgia on the side of good and Russia on the side of evil .
Unfortunately he stood alone .
If the Union is serious about being a strategic partner and a global player it must acknowledge Russia on equal terms .
The politics of confrontation will benefit no-one .
( DE ) Mr President , Commissioner , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , one of the previous speakers stated that the principle behind all of this must be ' no force ' .
No force from either side , as enshrined in international law .
We must insist that international law is upheld , including territorial integrity , non-intervention in the internal affairs of another state , no exertion of influence and adherence to the agreements of August and September .
I hope that this will continue to apply in Geneva .
We must continue to ensure that the European Council decisions of 1 September and the resolutions negotiated by the Commission concerning association agreements , free trade agreements and the European Economic Area Plus , or whatever it is called , are observed , so that the individual countries can be strengthened , stabilised and involved without provocation to other countries and the necessary work can be carried out at the donor conference .
At the same time we must give the Eastern European Member States a feeling of security and solidarity within the European Union and NATO .
I believe that this is also important for psychological reasons .
Commissioner , I am grateful for the fact that you have referred to our mutual economic interdependence , which is the best security policy we could have .
However , the more this interdependence is strengthened and the more it becomes part of the spheres of interest of both parties and these become linked together , the more difficult it will be for us to extract ourselves from this dependence using non-peaceful means .
In this case we must lead the way .
We should also support any moves with legal obligations in which Russia is included , together with the WTO and partnership agreements with the corresponding obligations .
When our economic interdependency is underpinned with legal and contractual measures in this way , we will be able to make progress .
However , this must be based on our interests .
Energy security is one point and in this area there are challenges to be faced throughout the world .
Not without reason have the 5 + 1 met once again on the subject of Iran and then moved on to their normal work .
This is also happening on other levels .
I have heard that a committee of the European Parliament has once again visited Moscow .
Iran , the Middle East , climate change , terrorism and many other issues : Russia is an essential part of all of this .
We must be open to discussions .
A security partnership with Russia will only function if it is not at the expense of existing alliances and of keeping the USA out of Europe .
This is a condition of a partnership of this kind .
( FI ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , both sides did wrong and broke international agreements .
Now it is a matter of how quickly we can move on from here and restore stability to the situation .
For that we also need cooperation with Russia .
That is a basic requirement .
In fact many of Russia 's goals are the same as ours in the Treaty of Lisbon .
President Medvedev has said that there is a need for institutional reforms .
That is true .
The second point he makes is reforms in the infrastructure .
A third is investment .
These are things we know about .
Then there is innovation , something we know a lot more about , if we may say so .
These are things we have in common .
They want to have a role in solving the international financial crisis , and they have little capital to do that .
They therefore do not want to be cut off , that is obvious , and we must respond through cooperation , which will enable us to steer Russia in the direction we want .
Russia does not want to speak about ideology , but today the European Union does .
We want it to have democracy ; that is our ideology .
Russia wants practical solutions , and both of these goals are probably worth harmonising and this way we will make progress .
We therefore still need one ' I ' , that is to say integration , following on from Medvedev 's four ' I " s , so we can also influence Russia 's future successfully from our own standpoint and increase stability .
- ( PL ) In discussion of the conflict between Russia and Georgia , we tend to overlook what happened in Abkhazia rather than in Ossetia .
In fact , something very significant happened in Abkhazia .
The Russians do have some grounds for arguing that their action , albeit disproportionate , was in response to an effort to resolve the problem of Ossetia by military means .
Where Abkhazia is concerned , however , nothing of the sort happened .
The mass incursion by Russian troops , the appearance of the fleet along the Georgian coast , and the military conquest of the territory controlled by the Georgian authorities all demonstrate that Russia is prepared to use its fighting forces on the pretext of taking preventive action .
Accordingly , such action must be classed amongst those justified solely by a one-sided assessment of foreign policy resources .
In his statement , President Medvedev returned to the notion of a common area of security stretching from Vancouver to Vladivostok .
I put it to you , ladies and gentlemen , how can one rely on joint action in this common area of security if Russia demonstrates that it is itself a source of threats ?
Regarding the other issues President Medvedev would like to see included in the potential agreement , we should recall that they are all already contained in the agreement currently in force .
This agreement was adopted in 1990 and is entitled the Paris Charter for a New Europe .
Of course , perhaps what is really at issue here is not dialogue but the right of veto in relation to various actions NATO may undertake .
( Applause )

( DE ) Mr President , I should like to refer to what Mr Staes said in his speech about other conflicts that are still going on in the Caucasus .
If we now resume talks with Russia - something we are in favour of - it is , in our opinion , very important that we do not forget that there is also Karabakh , Chechnya , Moldova und Transnistria and that we will also have to cope with a very difficult dispute in Ukraine in the next decade in relation to the Crimea .
The European Union must not make the same mistake it made prior to the war in Georgia by not taking this conflict seriously enough .
In our opinion , all these conflicts must , therefore , be dealt with .
The Caucasus and other neighbouring regions are very important regions .
They all lie within Europe and must therefore be dealt with by Europe , by the European Union , with a much higher priority -and we should do this in cooperation with Russia .
Whether or not we can solve the conflicts there in a satisfactory way , I am not sure at present , but I am actually quite optimistic that this feeling of cold peace that has crept through Europe - and indeed through the whole of the European Union - and that has also caused alarm in Russia , was sufficient warning and that the various sides will now return to negotiations in greater earnest .
From the point of view of the West , it is also very interesting that in the financial crisis Russia is saving whole states in order to manage this crisis itself .
In the age of globalisation , the interwoven nature of our economies is far more extensive than we discussed previously in relation to energy .
If we were to find a better tone and if the West were perhaps not always to insist that its system has been the victorious system since the end of the 1980s , we may arrive at a better position from which to deal with the dispute .
( PL ) Mr President , Russia has perhaps benefited the most from the financial crisis .
Recently , our attention has shifted away noticeably from Russia 's aggression towards Georgia to the problems facing our banks .
This shift was obvious during our debate this morning .
However , we must not forget that Russia currently still has more than 7 000 troops stationed in Ossetia and Abkhazia .
This is more than three times the number of soldiers stationed there on 7 August , and Russia is not , therefore , respecting the peace agreement in the way we would wish her to .
This means that relations between the European Union and Russia are still at an impasse .
It also means that we currently have no reason to resume political dialogue within the framework of joint European and Russian bodies ; there is no basis for reopening negotiations regarding the partnership agreement .
Finally , it is with disappointment that we note the position of certain Member States which suggest that Russian aggression towards Georgia can be ignored , and that the matter is simply a question of time .
This passive policy may turn out to be extremely costly for European Union foreign policy as a whole .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , we have to acknowledge that the Council has managed relations with Russia in a more balanced manner than the resolution adopted by the European Parliament on events in Georgia .
In that resolution , all the accusations were levelled at Russia alone , and even the attack carried out by Georgia on 7 and 8 August was justified .
If , however , we really care about stabilising peace , then we must say a clear ' no ' to any accession by Georgia or Ukraine to NATO .
We know that this would only serve to destabilise the entire region and greatly increase the likelihood of further wars .
Negotiations with Russia should be resumed not only out of economic interest , but also because , until things are discussed , they do not go away , and this is always the best path .
At the same time , we must be completely firm on human rights , freedom of information and political freedoms , which are certainly not the norm in Russia .
The best way to be able to protect rights is not to be held hostage to energy ; but in order to move away from our dependency on Russia we need not only to diversify the sources of our energy supplies but also to invest in alternative clean energies .
I have one final observation to make .
I have heard it said , both by the Commission and the Council , that they have enormous confidence in Russia joining the World Trade Organization .
I would like to remind you that you made the same comments when China was joining the WTO , and we have seen the terrible results China 's accession has had on the European economy and European workers .
Perhaps , then , we should look elsewhere for solutions : perhaps it is actually the entire mechanism of the World Trade Organization that we ought to call into question .
Mr President , the Kremlin has got all it wanted from its bargain with President Sarkozy .
President Sarkozy 's ' peace in our time ' deal gave them what they wanted , and the diplomatic way out .
Since the Second World War , the fundamental principle in international relations was that aggression must not pay , or that political concessions should not be made to aggressors , but Moscow has been victorious and NATO humiliated , with the EU playing both sides .
As an institution , the European Union is simply not on the democratic Western side in the new Cold War .
The EU does not belong to the free world .
It is anti-democratic , undemocratic and imperialistic .
Institutionally , it is inclined to side with other anti-democratic empires , not free nations .
The EU is not governed by law but by ideology .
Unfortunately , European governments - as good Europeans - will choose to follow the EU 's disastrous position towards Russia , rather than their own collective national interest .
( PL ) Together with the United States , the Russian Federation is one of the European Union 's main partners .
Russia is a strategic partner and supplier of raw materials for energy production to the Member States of the European Union , including my own country , Poland .
Cooperation with Russia is simply a fact , and it is in the interest of both sides that this cooperation succeeds .
Georgia 's attack on South Ossetia , and the subsequent escalation of the conflict , have seriously threatened relations between Brussels and Moscow .
However , this does not mean that we should , as some European politicians would wish , turn our backs on Russia or even suspend all relations with her .
Russia has made considerable efforts over the last twenty years to join the circle of democratic European states and , although undoubtedly much still needs to be achieved , there is also not the slightest doubt that the Russian population strongly supports the current and former Presidents of the Russian Federation .
I hope that , in spite of certain obstacles , the European Union and Russia will continue their successful cooperation , as it is in the interests of both parties .
( NL ) Mr President , Mr Jouyet , Mrs Ferrero-Waldner , ladies and gentlemen , there is no denying that relations with Russia have changed recently .
Let me add that isolating Russia is not , in my view , an option .
At the same time , it is difficult to talk about a partnership if the Member States have such a high level of distrust towards Russia .
What I , as chairman of the delegation for relations with Russia , do think , though , is that we should keep the dialogue on track .
This is what the Council and Commission are doing , and this is also what we as Parliament should be doing .
In fact , this has been the topic of a very heated discussion in our Russia Delegation , in connection with the Moscow visit we have planned for the end of this week .
The outcome of this discussion was that we should continue the dialogue , but that we should tell our partners that it is not business as usual .
We must be frank in sharing this and try to engage in constructive consultation .
We expect a great deal more from Russia .
The withdrawal of the troops from the buffer zone was only a first step .
Tension can only ease if the number of troops in Abkhazia and South Ossetia is reduced or if these soldiers are withdrawn altogether .
Although this is not set out word for word in the agreements , it does fit in with the spirit of the agreements , and I should like to hear Mr Jouyet 's opinion on this .
The EU , and particularly the Presidency , has in recent months been incredibly explicit and decisive .
This , in my view , is something that must be sustained .
I am left with three questions .
First of all , with regard to the run-up to the summit : which specific signals and steps do you deem necessary in order to resume negotiations ? Secondly , how will you involve Parliament in this ?
Thirdly , I should like to put to you the following .
Russia is not taking part in the Treaty on cluster bombs that is being signed in Oslo .
It now transpires that the Dutch journalist was killed by a Russian cluster bomb .
How , Mrs Ferrero-Waldner , can we involve Russia in this new Treaty that is being signed in Oslo after all ?
( HU ) Mr President , the French Presidency played an exemplary role in handling the crisis in Georgia .
We know how to handle crises but are not yet able to prevent them .
Allow me to remind the House that there was a Minister of Foreign Affairs in the EU , Mr Steinmeier , the German Foreign Minister , who brought forward a very serious settlement plan which was accepted by all sides except Tbilisi .
This is a historical fact .
This is regrettable , for this could have even forestalled the war .
I am convinced that the Steinmeier plan could still serve as the main basis for a negotiated settlement , although the situation is much more difficult today , given that the Abkhazians and South Ossetians now take an entirely different stance .
Let me add right away that negotiations cannot be conducted without the involvement of the two peoples involved , the Abkhazians and South Ossetians .
Their opinion is certainly also crucial , as regards their relations with Russia .
To be sure , we cannot just carry on from where we were .
Russia remains a strategic partner but while we cannot keep her isolated , our trust has been undermined .
Russia has to learn from these events , as do we , and specifically , we must realize why Russia is much more tolerant of Ukraine and Georgia moving closer to the EU than of their moving closer to NATO .
This is a lesson that both American policy and we must learn if we want to normalise the strategic partnership between Russia and the EU . Thank you for your attention .
( SV ) Mr President , Russia 's attack on Georgia is not an isolated incident .
What we are seeing is a paradigm shift in Russia 's relations with its neighbouring states - a paradigm shift that may have serious consequences if the EU does not act wisely .
In truth we are at a crossroads , as Secretary of State Mr Jouyet has said .
I am concerned because a large number of EU leaders are already talking in favour of a return to business as usual in the EU 's relations with Russia .
They are acting as if the war in Georgia had not happened , but Russian troops , as many as 8 000 men , are still in the occupied areas .
Ethnic cleansing is still going on .
The EU must send a clear message and strongly condemn Russia 's imperialistic policy , whereby it thinks it has the right to protect ' its ' citizens by occupying sovereign states .
Today Georgia , tomorrow Ukraine and Belarus .
I will be repeating this at the meeting with the Russian delegation in Moscow on Friday .
If the EU instigates unconditional agreement negotiations with Russia under the premises that exist today , then we are approving Russia 's action in Georgia and giving Russia authority in blank to continue its imperialistic policy .
The EU has a duty to help the victims , not the attackers .
I would like to congratulate Commissioner Ferrero-Waldner on her proposal of EUR 500 million and I hope that the pledging conference is successful tomorrow .
Mr President , I speak today not only as a representative of my political group and a member of the EU-Russia delegation but also as the only native Russian-speaking Member of this Parliament .
Some politicians forget that Russia is actually Europe 's biggest country by population and Russian speakers are the European Union 's biggest minority group - up to 10 million people .
Unfortunately , many of those who speak of Russia 's resources think simply of raw materials and forget the human dimension .
We must remember that people are the basis for EU-Russia relations .
The European Union 's Russian speakers favour relations between the EU and Russia based on a strategic partnership .
We support not just an EU-Russia common market , as President Sarkozy said today , but also the freer movement of people .
We support human rights - also mentioned by Mr Sarkozy - but we oppose the double standards whereby the European Union 's institutions turn a blind eye to the violations of the rights of Russian speakers in the Baltic States .
. - ( LV ) Are they competitors or partners , cunning players or dependent simpletons ?
I am talking about relations between Western democracy and Russian autocracy .
These are reminiscent of a game of cat and mouse .
Comically , two months after the military action in Georgia Mr Medvedev is proposing a new European security agreement .
Mr Sarkozy is very obliging , and does not see that Russia has increased its military presence in South Ossetia and Abkhazia .
Are there grounds for trusting Russia ?
The Kosovo process and the Georgian conflict might have been more instructive .
What is causing this optimism among Europe 's leaders ?
Russia will successfully exploit Western credulity , it craves revenge against the West wherever that is possible .
The policy on foreigners declared by Russia in Ossetia , Abkhazia and Ukraine is a significant risk ; a struggle is taking place in cyberspace .
Not for nothing did the people of Russia and their mass media , including in the Baltic states , support Russia 's invasion of Georgia .
At this time we ought not to rush into resuming comprehensive talks with Russia .
First of all Russia must implement the Caucasus peace plan .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to get rid of the idea that Russia attacked Georgia .
I think that we ought to adopt the proposal put forward by the Russians , who asked at the time for a tribunal to decide who really bore the responsibility for starting the war .
Having said that , at a time when creative accounting has collapsed I believe that it is essential to think about the real economy that awaits us in the future , which is made up of raw materials , land and labour , and now , for Europe , effectively includes Russia .
I would also like to say that this is not just an economic fact : there is a western Europe based around Catholicism that could join up with an eastern Europe based around Orthodoxy , and this would effectively be a union of Europe 's two lungs - its two spiritual lungs .
It is thus in Europe 's interests to be with Russia and it is in Russia 's interests to be with Europe .

- ( FR ) Minister , after what Mr Sarkozy said this morning about Europe having to speak with a strong voice , I have a few comments to make in Polish .
- ( PL ) Recently , the relationship with Russia was different .
Europe was divided ; it did not speak with one voice .
Commissioner Mandelson said that the issue of the embargo on Polish meat was a bilateral matter .
This is not the kind of Europe I want and there is no place for such a Europe here .
The crisis in Georgia temporarily opened Western Europe 's eyes , especially those of our socialist colleagues , to what Russia can be like .
Namely , it can be attractive , fascinating , but also unpredictable , not necessarily respectful of agreements it has signed , and its attitude towards membership of the WTO can hardly be called enthusiastic .
Russia wants to maintain its own rules , which give it a free hand to make decisions from which it benefits .
It will not be possible to achieve peaceful agreements , which we need , if this fact is not understood .
Russia is our closest neighbour , a country with great potential and cultural heritage , a proud nation ; proud of its country from the Baltic to the Baring Strait .
We need a dialogue with Russia which includes respect for the Russian people , but also involves having a determined , joint position vis-à-vis its leaders , namely Mr Medvedev and Mr Putin , and not living in fear that the Russians might turn off the gas taps at any time .
To a large extent , the Russian people 's standard of living depends on importing goods from the European Union to meet their needs .
This fact should give our leaders strength and a feeling of worth in our negotiations with a strong partner .
Thus , rather than crawling on our knees we should instead sit as partners around the negotiating table at the Kremlin .
Finally , Signora comisaria , the Presidents-in-Office of the Council stress that Russia 's withdrawal from the buffer zone has been a success , and that this action was a positive sign .
Instead , perhaps it should be viewed as a backwards step , one which only appears to make concessions , as Russia has not withdrawn from Ossetia or Abkhazia and has no intention of doing so .
Let us be realistic and try to predict their next move .
( DE ) Mr President , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , Commissioner , there are many differences between the United States and Russia .
Above all , I would like to see as free a presidential election in Russia as I would at least expect in the US today .
However , great powers also have certain similarities , and I hope that many of you may soon get to see the programme broadcast by the channel ARTE on the portrait of Henry Kissinger .
With regard to the intervention in Chile and the continued interventions in Latin America , Kissinger and General Alexander Haig said the following : if the United States is disturbed by something , it will intervene and bring about a regime change .
They declared themselves to be fully justified in taking this action .
We can perhaps say something similar about Russia , although probably in fewer cases than the United States .
Both great powers are also somewhat at odds with international law .
The interventions in Latin America , in particular , were very definitely contrary to international law .
The war in Iraq was clearly against international law , and Russia 's actions in Abkhasia and South Ossetia were also contrary to international law .
In the case of the Kosovo problem , we will have to wait and see whether the International Court of Justice determines the action to have been contrary to international law .
In both cases , Mr Zaleski - and I am saying this because I hold you in high regard - you were absolutely right when you said that this is a fascinating and strong country , but unpredictable .
This applies as much to the US as to Russia , and we must respond to this .
In both cases , however , I think it would be wrong to break off the talks .
After the clear violation of international law in the war with Iraq - and it was indeed a huge violation where thousands of people were killed - we did not say ' now we will break off talks with the US ' .
We did , of course , continue discussions with this country .
I am not comparing the internal structure of the US and Russia , only their behaviour at international level .
President Sarkozy is absolutely right - and I would like to thank him for his pragmatic , clear policy : we must , emphatically , engage in this dialogue .
The second point I would like to make is that we must strengthen the neighbouring countries , particularly as they are our neighbours too .
We must give the Ukraine and Georgia strength so that they can also deal with their difficult neighbour , Russia .
However , we must make sure that our action is rational , and the action taken by Mr Saakaschwili was not rational .
The behaviour of Mr Juschtschenko towards Mrs Timoschenko , for example , is not rational either .
We must ensure that our neighbours take rational action .
If they do that and have our strength behind them , then they will also resist Russia , which is once again trying to play the great power .

- ( FR ) Mr President , Commissioner , Minister , I am very grateful to Mr Swoboda for not wishing to break off dialogue with the United States , but let us return to the matter at hand .
It is clear that both parties , that is , the European Union and Russia , need loyal and effective cooperation , in particular in the area of energy .
Without our technological assistance , Russia would certainly not in reality be able to benefit from its resources .
It is clear too , however , that we need the common and effective energy policy that we are currently lacking , as has already been emphasised during this debate .
Clearly , when it comes to establishing peace in the Caucasus , a common policy is also necessary .
Implementation of the agreements concluded by President Sarkozy and President Medvedev , including with regard to the withdrawal of Russian troops in Abkhazia and Ossetia - the number of which has now tripled in comparison with three months ago - is necessary , precisely in order to provide essential proof of good will and of loyal and credible cooperation .
The responsibility of the Russians with regard to the situation in the Caucasian Republic is obvious .
The Russian military presence over the past 16 years has therefore not served to ease the conflicts ; rather , it has been an instrument of the imperialist policy of that great country , which had been trying to benefit from these conflicts .
It follows that , as some of my fellow Members have already said , the reduction in the number of Russian soldiers in Abkhazia and Ossetia to the level before the conflict in August should clear the way for effective negotiations .
( PL ) Mr President , when President Sarkozy spoke in this house today , he said that Russia has met its obligations regarding the withdrawal of its troops to their position before 7 August , and he called for normal relations with Russia to be resumed .
Such action would be a grave mistake and would , de facto , ensure the government of the Russian Federation a feeling of complete impunity .
I would like to remind you that 8 000 Russian troops are currently stationed in Abkhazia and South Ossetia , including in places where they were present before the start of the conflict .
Brutal ethnic cleansing has taken place in border villages ; Abkhazian soldiers have occupied the Georgian-controlled Kodori Gorge .
Over 200 European Union observers have yet to gain entry to either of the two republics , which have been recognised by Russia as independent states .
It seems to me that this state of affairs is far removed from the situation of 7 August 2008 .
There can be no question of a return to normal relations while the Russians continue to disregard their obligations .
If the European Union decides to take such a step , it will risk becoming a laughing-stock and will demonstrate that , sooner or later , it will legitimise every action taken by Russia , even the most dangerous .
( NL ) Mr President , the EU Member States have , by way of reaction to the unilateral territorial division of Georgia under Russian supervision , not closed ranks .
Once again , we have not seen any evidence of a joint , let alone firm , European response to the Kremlin 's power machinations .
The crucial question therefore remains : what does the Union mean by a strategic partnership with the Russian Federation ?
In other words , is Moscow really an indispensable partner for Brussels , or am I touching a political nerve in Europe by saying this ?
After all , the fact of the matter is that Russia has , to date , sabotaged an effective international answer to the Iranian and North Korean nuclear programmes .
At the same time , Moscow has not exactly shown itself to be an indispensable partner in the bloody fight against Islamic terrorism , for example on the Afghan front , either .
Only in the area of energy do the cold numbers suggest there is probably a strategic , even indispensable , partnership between the European Union and Russia : today , the 27 EU Member States rely on Russian oil and gas exports to a level of about 70 % .
For its own good , though , the EU should run down this considerable dependence as quickly as possible .
After all , Moscow admits that its energy reserves will be exhausted in 10 to 15 years ' time .
Council and Commission , where is your strategy of energy diversification now ?
Surely the new Turkmen discovery of gas should galvanise you into action .
- ( CS ) At an extraordinary summit meeting on 1 September , the European Union committed itself to resume negotiations with Russia over a new partnership agreement once Russian units had withdrawn from Georgian territory to their positions of 7 August .
In order for the Union to keep its word and to show that it is a consistent partner , the single criterion for starting talks should be an assessment as to whether or not the Russian units are behind their positions of 7 August .
Russia has not yet fulfilled this condition .
The resumption of talks must not under any circumstances be interpreted as our consent to Russian policy in the Caucasus and the continuing de facto blockade on talks over the future arrangements for the region .
We must draw a firm line between the resumption of talks and their further continuation .
The agreement on partnership and cooperation is a key document for cementing our relationship with Russia .
The new partnership agreement is necessary both to the Union and , I believe , even more so to Russia itself .
A new agreement which improves the existing text both qualitatively and quantitatively is a precondition and , at the same time , a reflection of the quality of our relations with the Russian Federation .
It is therefore essential to make our position and our values clear during the negotiations .
I believe that , following an objective and unanimous assessment showing that Russia has withdrawn to its positions of 7 August , the European Union should commence negotiations , as promised .
The continuation of negotiations , however , must be conditional on , at the very least , a clear undertaking from Russia that it will not use force against Georgia or any other of its neighbours and that disputes affecting our shared neighbourhood will be resolved with the agreement of the European Union .
The litmus test regarding our continuation of talks with Russia must be the readiness of Russia to find a common approach to solving the problems of the Caucasus , Ukraine and Moldova , rather than proceeding on a unilateral basis with the use of force .
- ( CS ) Together with the rest of the world , Europe is facing a whole range of serious global problems .
These include the spread of nuclear weapons , international terrorism , global warming , unresolved conflicts in the Middle East and Afghanistan , the world financial crisis and many others .
The European Union cannot solve any of these alone .
The cooperation of other players on the international stage is required , among them Russia .
Russia also needs cooperation and dialogue .
Russia needs to sell its mineral raw materials , it needs to buy western technology , expertise , consumer goods and many other things .
Only then will Russia have a chance to modernise and gradually reform both its economy and its society .
Cooperation with Russia will create a common future for the European Union and the Russian Federation .
This , however , presupposes dialogue and that means dialogue at all levels , from energy policy to reciprocal investment activities , not forgetting of course dialogue on human and civil rights and democracy .
The decision of the European Union to continue evaluating EU-Russian relations ahead of the forthcoming summit in Nice is in my view correct .
The Union has given a clear signal that it is willing to resume talks with Russia on a new partnership and cooperation agreement .
The precondition , however , must be that Russia fulfils the agreements of 12 August and 8 September .
- ( HU ) Mr President , the EU is striving for partnership and cooperation with Russia , but we cannot talk about partnership unless it is based on reciprocity , international law and compliance with agreements .
Russia 's actions in Georgia destroyed the most vital psychological basis of a partnership : trust .
This trust can only be restored if the six-point agreement is implemented in all its details and in its entirety .
It is not steps forward or moves in the right direction that are needed but real , total compliance .
Russia has to decide at last whether to consider Europe a partner , a rival or an adversary .
Moscow needs to know that whatever it decides - whether to consider us partners or adversaries - the future and independence of Ukraine , Georgia and other neighbouring countries are not subject to power deals .
Europe can never consent to a new partitioning of the continent , to a new Yalta Agreement .
We really want partnership , but one that is built on reciprocity and mutual respect . Thank you .
- Mr President , the Russia-Georgia war and its aftermath point to the political necessity for the European Union to seriously reassess its relations with Russia , as the Commissioner rightly pointed out today .
In addition , ' business as usual ' should be suspended until Europe gets clear answers from Russia to some very important questions .
It needs to be said that Europe must find a way to speak to Russia with a new , different , stronger voice .
The reason for this is that Russia has reverted to the 19th-century ' spheres of influence ' approach or , simply put , the doctrine of realpolitik .
Russia 's talk of privileged interests in its neighbourhood is testimony to this .
This realpolitik is being fuelled by aggressive nationalism at home and by enemy-labelling in Russia of the countries surrounding it .
In such a light , it is crucial for Europe to understand that it needs to implement its harder instruments of power .
The European reaction to the Russian-Georgian conflict and its aftermath has been mixed .
For some , there is a sense that relations between the EU and Russia are returning to business as usual .
This is happening despite the fact that Moscow has not yet fully complied with its commitments regarding troop withdrawal and , more importantly , recognised the independence of South Ossetia and Abkhazia .
Returning to business as usual before Moscow fully complies with its commitments is close to appeasement .
Europe needs to engage Russia , but must do so in a principled and consistent manner .
The EU 's leverage over Russia is limited .
Nevertheless , Russia would clearly care about a united Western stance .
Russia is very sensitive about issues of its international standing and prestige : for instance , considerations of G7 versus G8 .
Technology-related research programmes , trade agreements and nuclear fuels are also things Moscow is interested in .
Finally , the EU must remain strong and consistent in order to promote its vision of how the partnership with Russia should evolve .

Mr President , Ambassador Jouyet , Madam Commissioner , EU relations with Russia needed a reappraisal even without the events in Georgia .
Energy , security and common neighbourhood issues need a concept of common management which does not yet exist .
In the EU , the preference is still for bilateral , rather than multilateral , action which diminishes the efficacy of our approach .
Moreover , on the basis of different experiences within the Union , there is still no common perception on Russia between the east and the west as a precondition for a common position .
Let me be very clear . We in the east are the least inclined to have a confrontation because we would be the first to lose .
Equally , we are less disposed to allow unacceptable Russian behaviour to be ignored because , again , we would be the first to lose if it were repeated .
Generalisation in either direction is wrong .
On the one hand , relations with Russia should not become totally hostage to what has happened in Georgia .
On the other , what happened in Georgia should not be ignored just to keep our bilateral relations unaffected .
We do not need to interrupt relations with Russia .
After all , we managed to live with even worse in the past .
We need a sincere dialogue based on our strengths - apparently the only thing Russia respects - in which we indicate to Russia what is acceptable and what is not , and Russia finally tells us what it really wants from us .
I hope that we can both live with that .

( DE ) Mr President , there is a tradition in European foreign policy that has been substantially shaped by Hans-Dietrich Genscher , who engaged in talks with the Soviet Union even during the most difficult times of the Cold War , but always on the basis of a sober analysis of Russian interests .
At that time , defence of the status quo was the Soviet Union 's primary objective , while for Russia today the primary objective is to change the status quo to its own advantage .
This is a totally different position in terms of Russia 's interests .
It has an objective interest in frozen conflicts and in criticism of the Charter of Paris through recognition of Abkhasia and South Ossetia .
This is where its interests lie .
It is interested in an unstable Ukraine .
None of this is good .
This is a challenge for us .
However , it is a lot better than the existential threat from the Soviet Union , and even at that time we engaged in talks with the Russians .
Therefore , one thing is clear as far as we are concerned : we do not want Cold War rhetoric , but neither do we want naïvety .
We want a critical dialogue with Moscow .
We are in favour of the long-term goal of a strategic partnership , but not of the naïve assumption that we have already arrived at this goal .
I would like to add that I would have been pleased if we could have had this debate in Brussels and not in Strasbourg .
( ES ) Mr President , Russia is an important global player and a permanent member of the Security Council .
It has an enormous nuclear arsenal , extensive territory and abundant natural resources , including gas and oil .
Its cooperation is essential in order to tackle challenges such as the Middle East peace process or the Iranian nuclear issue and to fight organised crime , terrorism , climate change and nuclear proliferation .
I therefore believe that we must not isolate Russia , but rather try to establish dialogue and cooperation with her .
We could also establish a relationship on another more ambitious level .
The Russian Federation is a European neighbour which , having left behind a long period of political totalitarianism and economic centralism , has in the last decade started along the road of democracy , human rights and an economy of private initiative .
If Russia continues to adhere to these ideals , its relationship with the European Union should be profound and one of true neighbours and partners based on common fundamental values .
The crisis with Georgia was indeed very serious .
For us , as members of the European Union , the basic principles must be non-use of force , respect for the sovereignty and territorial integrity of states and compliance in good faith with international agreements .
Russia 's behaviour in the summer was not in line with these principles .
It also seems to me that the agreements of 12 August and 8 September have not been implemented in a totally satisfactory manner by Russia , which has perhaps taken advantage of ambiguities in those agreements .
The Geneva Conference has also not started very well .
If the Russian authorities want to build with us , the EU , a relationship of true cooperation and trust , their conduct should not remain the same as in recent months .
They must also ensure adherence at home to the principle of respect for human rights and the rule of law which President Medvedev himself proclaimed at the start of his term of office .
Ladies and gentlemen , this is , in my opinion , a crucial moment .
We must be vigilant and try to convince Russia that an intense relationship of mutual trust between true partners and European neighbours requires us to share basic principles and rules .
Mr President , the European Parliament is the only EU institution that is elected directly by the citizens of the EU .
It has also been called the conscience of Europe .
This conscience has been burdened throughout the years with the conflicts provoked by Russia .
Remember the war in Chechnya ; remember Ukraine ; trucks queuing up for weeks on Finnish , Estonian and Latvian borders ; the frozen conflict in Transnistria ; cyber attacks on Estonia ; a ban on Polish meat .
On top of all that now comes Russia 's aggression against Georgia .
I am worried that the EU is displaying only timid reactions , tiptoeing around instead of discussing sanctions .
We are only encouraging Russia to engage in more irresponsible behaviour .
I am convinced that a clear conscience in relation to Russia is not a luxury that the European Union cannot afford .
Mr President , next week they will start constructing a Formula 1 circuit in Moscow .
When you construct a circuit , you have to stick to the engineer 's plan .
There are no two ways about it .
We are supposed to be the engineers of democracy in this House , and maybe we should talk , not really about the EU-Russia relationship but about the EU-Kremlin relationship , because the leaders of the Kremlin will change one day , and we hope that they will change for the better .
Of course we want Russia in and we want the Kremlin in .
Nobody can argue with that , but the question is : on whose terms ?
It cannot be on their terms .
It has to be on universal terms of universal values .
We are supposed to defend the very foundation of the EU .
If you are a member of the scouts , you have to be a law-abiding member of the scouts .
If we condone these current - how should I say - practices of the Kremlin regime , we are in a way denying ourselves the raison d 'être of the EU .
We are also betraying the Russian people , because we have to support democratic forces all over the world .
No double measures .
We have to give hope to those people who are fighting for the fundamental values in life .
That is our duty .
If Russia becomes democratic , we must welcome them to any international structure .
We have to see far ahead , as our forefathers did .
Why should Russia not one day belong to a reformed EU or NATO ?
We will never know .
Mr Monnet and Mr Schuman were very far-sighted people .
That is the way forward .
This discussion is becoming very serious , so may I remind you - when I think of our relationship - of just one Russian anecdote .
A chicken said to a pig , ' Let us have a joint venture .
Let us have a breakfast company .
I will bring eggs and you will bring bacon ' .
( ET ) It is clear that we cannot speak of the restoration or improvement of relations with Russia if there is no mutual trust , and that trust cannot be created without the full implementation of the peace plan .
I see relations with Moscow from two perspectives .
First of all , at Member-State level , where I share the position that it is more sensible to talk about such topics than to sever relations .
At European Union level , however , our message is that the Union should consider the desires and fears of us small countries that have experienced a different history .
In the same way that aggressive Russian foreign policy or human rights violations cannot be the only message , European Union interests that operate above the heads of the weaker , that is , Eastern European countries cannot also be the its only form of behaviour .
I liked what right-wing French President Nicolas Sarkozy said today : he emphasised the need for dialogue instead of counterattack .
He reminded us that it was believed there was no point in going to Moscow , but that doing so nevertheless stopped the Russian forces .
Of course we do not need a new Cold War , but we do need to defend our European principles of sovereignty , territorial integrity and value-based politics and democracy .
I call for the European Union to continue to pursue a sustainable foreign policy with Russia and not to sever relations .
It is the obligation of members of parliament to resolve tensions .
We need diplomacy and also popular diplomacy , a good example of which is the very successful Russian theatre festival that just ended in my country , Estonia .
I would also like to call upon the leaders of Europe , the Presidency of the EU and the heads of European Parliament factions not to forget their neighbours ' fears and horror that Russia continues to create by pursuing its aggressive politics .
It is clear that there is presently very little trust and respect in relations between the European Union and Russia , due to ...
( The President cut off the speaker )
( PL ) Thank you for the opportunity to discuss this issue .
I believe that all of us in this Chamber want the same thing .
We want to cooperate with Russia .
We also want a stable , predictable political situation in Europe .
Russia certainly also needs us - the European Union - as it wants to sell gas and crude oil , but , most of all , because it has its own internal and external problems .
Russia needs our stability , responsibility and strength .
How , therefore , do we in this Chamber differ from one another ?
We differ in the manner in which we wish to proceed in our relations with Russia , in order to achieve the European Union 's goals , not only in economic terms , but also in terms of respecting the principles and the system of values in which we believe .
I would like to give you an example from my own experience .
In 2001 , relations between Russia and Poland were very good indeed , and the Polish Foreign Minister was received in Moscow with honours .
The Russian Prime Minister came to Warsaw and negotiated important issues pertaining to our mutual relations , especially in the field of energy .
He even extended his visit by one day , a move that is rare under normal circumstances .
This in spite of the fact that , just under two years earlier , in 1999 , Poland expelled a dozen or so Russian diplomats , who were involved in a variety of activities , none of which had much to do with diplomacy .
A short crisis then followed , until the Russians finally acknowledged that it is worth talking to us and taking joint action with us , and this was because when we are in the right , we have the strength to stand our ground .
The Russians are a proud people with great traditions .
They appreciate resoluteness and strength in others , more than complicated explanations which say that ' black is not quite black ' .
When were are clearly in the right , a tough , resolute position is the only solution .
( EL ) Mr President , today the European Union faces the challenge of restoring its relations with Russia .
These relations must be founded on respect for human rights and adherence to international law .
International developments are such that a new strategic relationship needs to be forged between the European Union and Russia .
A unified Europe , without the dividing lines of the past , is the ultimate objective .
We must cooperate closely within the framework of the European neighbourhood policy in order to establish stability in the area , given that none of the frozen conflicts in the Caucasus has any serious prospect of resolution without Russia .
We have an interest in seeking common solutions to common problems , to continue partnership negotiations as quickly as possible and to enter into dialogue in a spirit of mutual understanding and mutual respect .
Only thus will there be any hope of finding solutions to even the most difficult problems in a way which serves the mutual interest .
We also need this for the internal policy of stability in Europe as a whole .
The countries of the Caucasus and the United States must be made to understand that broader Euro-Atlantic relations must go hand in glove with the normalisation of relations with Moscow .
If the objective truly is collective security , then everyone 's cooperation and participation is needed .
Otherwise , a return to a cold war mentality will be a one-way street .
( SV ) Mr President , the map of Europe has changed through armed attack and war .
With this action , Russia has shown that it is prepared to use military force to achieve political aims .
Let us not allow this to be pushed aside in the debate that we are having today .
This must , of course , affect our view of Russia , but it will also influence the various requirements that need to be imposed in connection with any future cooperation .
I would caution those who compare this situation to other states of affairs .
Mr Swoboda - please do not compare this situation with Iraq .
Iraq was a dictatorship of the most brutal kind and in conflict with the international community .
We may have different opinions about what happened , but do not compare Iraq with a European democracy and sovereign state .
There is no excuse for what was done to Georgia .
Do not try to excuse what cannot be excused .
Neither Russia nor any other country has any legitimate security interests in any other European country .
This must be the starting point for all European cooperation .
Otherwise the basis for cooperation will be undermined , and the way opened for further violence .
There are a number of areas where we engage in important cooperation that needs to involve Russia .
These include the energy sector , Iran and climate change .
It is my opinion that Europe and the European Union should be open to cooperation , but clearly with the requirements that need to form the basis of this cooperation .
We should welcome cooperation , but should also be clear when it comes to the requirements that need to be imposed .
In this way we can also play a part in helping Russia to develop an acceptance of democracy and a respect for fundamental rules .
This must form the basis of European policy towards Russia .
( EL ) Mr President , Minister , Commissioner , I understand why numerous members take a stand against Russia .
They suffered in the past .
In Greece we had a civil war which lasted a full four years and left many dead .
So we cannot keep on looking back .
We must also acknowledge where Russia is in the right .
Have we forgotten that Putin warned that the recognition of Kosovo would unleash a backlash ?
Have we forgotten that Bush has broken the United States ' promise to Russia that ΝΑΤΟ would not expand eastwards ?
There is only one policy we should follow and that is the policy formulated by President Sarkozy today when he said that it would be irresponsible to allow a crisis to develop in relations between the European Union and Russia .
Mr President , Russia is no longer the Soviet enemy of free , democratic Europe .
Russia is not yet the European Union 's strategic partner .
One must get out of this ambiguity .
Russia is too big to be isolated ; Russia is too important to be ignored .
The European Union must build on these realities .
The geopolitical crises in the South Caucasus and the Western Balkans prove that Russia and the Euro-Atlantic democracies could enhance , at arm 's length , unilateral measures at their leisure , without considering each others ' priorities .
The recent financial and economic global crisis proved that Russia and the European Union are interdependent and need each other .
Therefore , we must convene a new conference on security and cooperation in the wider Europe , from Vancouver to Shanghai this time , to refound the principles and the rules of international relations and international law of the international organisations ...
( The President cut off the speaker )
( PL ) Step by step , Russia is regaining control over its neighbours and successfully achieving its objectives in the field of foreign policy .
It presents the world with faits accomplis , while European politicians merely spout hypocrisy and weakness .
The French President nearly fell over himself to praise Russia , yet Russia did not withdraw its troops from the rebel regions of Georgia , and acknowledged their independence .
The German Chancellor , for her part , made assurances in Tbilisi , that Georgia would join NATO .
A few weeks later she assured President Medvedev that there was no reason to rush things .
Yes , Russia certainly knows how to reward such loyalty .
The German company E.ON has been granted access to Siberian reserves and the energy market , and both countries will jointly build a gas pipeline , an umbilical cord , under the Baltic Sea .
The French President , for his part , has signed multi-billion contracts in Moscow concerning the modernisation of the Russian railway system .
The most shameful example of Europe 's behaviour towards Russia was when President Sarkozy stated that Russia had the right to defend its own citizens .
Are we to believe that the President of the Council did not know that this trick has been used by Russia on several occasions in the past ?
This is a new Yalta .....
( The President cut off the speaker )
Ladies and gentlemen , I must say that , when you speak at the speed of the last speaker , there is no interpretation because , of course , the interpreters cannot keep up with the speeches .
The ' catch-the-eye ' procedure is not intended as a cunning way of speaking when you have not been allocated any time .
We are going to submit the procedure to the Bureau because increasing numbers of Members are using this .
Clearly , when 14 or 15 Members ask for the floor in this way , we simply cannot fit everything in .
In any event , please be aware that , if you speak very quickly , only you and your compatriots will be able to understand as no interpreter can keep up at that speed .
Mr President , I have three questions to the Commissioner .
She has spoken in favour of the resumption of talks , following colleague Hökmark .
What are the EU interests that she will pursue during these talks ?
Will she require Russian troops - 8 000 of which are still on Georgian territory - to withdraw , in particular from the Kodori Gorge , which Abkhazi regulars have illegally occupied , again taking it from Georgian troops ?
Secondly , will Russia consider contributing to the funds required to repair the damage to Georgian citizens and the Georgian infrastructure which their troops caused ?
Finally , is it the case that she has information that , whereas Saakashvili is accused of behaving intemperately , there were in fact 400 Russian tanks ...
( The President cut off the speaker )
- ( SK ) We are starting from a false premise , as if we wanted to treat Russia as an enemy .
As has already been said many times , we share many strategic common interests with Russia .
Globalisation is a fact of life and we should be aware what the real risks are for the future , for peace , for development and for our very existence .
I agree .
Let us condemn the disproportionate reaction in Georgia and anything else of that kind .
But what was to be expected ?
We criticise and we react but let us also work with Russia as an equal and potentially a strategic partner and let us contribute proposed solutions at the summit in November .
We will thereby at least be looking after our own interests .
( DE ) Mr President , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , Commissioner , the previous debate has quite clearly shown that we have very many points of contact with Russia , and many of these points of contact also appear to be points of conflict : the situation in the Caucasus and Georgia and the issue of energy have been discussed many times , and finally also the issue of our common interests in the financial crisis , which has been brought up once again , and rightly so .
My request to the Commission and to the Council would be - and this has been touched on briefly by President Sarkozy - for Europe to stop merely reacting to situations and to try , actively and proactively , to take the initiative and enter into discussions about a range of issues that are important to us .
A constructive dialogue with Russia is called for , but it should not always be determined by actions taken by one side .
Mr President , I think the main problem is not Russia , but the EU 's personality split - the split between values , temptations and the need to conduct business as usual .
The solution is to demonstrate convincingly that the EU is serious about implementing in practice its universal values - it is not about EU values or Russian values - and to ensure that such invasions as happened in Georgia will never take place in Europe again .
Georgia is part of Europe .
How should we do that ?
Not by tiptoeing , as Mr Savi has said , but by taking a clear stand on how to prevent such things happening in future .
My question also concerns the donors ' conference .
Should we ask Russia to cover part of the damages ...
( The President cut off the speaker )
( PL ) Building good relations with the Russian Federation poses an enormous challenge for the European Union .
The Russian Federation is one of our most powerful partners in political , economic and military terms .
Recent events in Georgia have greatly undermined our trust in our Eastern neighbour .
Russian foreign policy has revealed the aspirations of a Kremlin which aims to rebuild a vast , global empire , and does not show sufficient respect for international agreements .
Moscow clearly demonstrated its sphere of influence .
This placed the European Union in a very difficult situation , albeit one where we fortunately spoke with one voice , although this voice was somewhat muted .
Following the events in Georgia , we should think about how a consistent policy towards Russia can be maintained .
The issue of security is a field which currently requires immediate action on our part .
( The President cut off the speaker )


Mr President , I would like to pay a special tribute to Mr Sarkozy , under the French presidency , for ensuring that 90 % of the six-point plan has been complied with in terms of troop withdrawal from Georgia .

I think the Russian leadership under Mr Putin and Medvedev have belatedly realised that their disproportionate aggression in Georgia was a mistake , as they still need good relations with the West or face economic ruin .
Furthermore , only Venezuela , Nicaragua and terrorist Hamas have actually recognised South Ossetia and Abkhazia , which is an embarrassment to their Government , and their closest allies , such as Belarus and Uzbekistan , have resisted such pressures to go along with Russia 's new and recently discovered concept of self-determination , which was never applied to the Chechens .
Russia must understand that 19th-century spheres of influence do not apply to the modern world , and hands off Ukraine , and in particular Crimea ; hands off Moldova , or the South Caucasus republics for the future .
Their territorial integrity must be respected by Moscow in the ...
( The President cut off the speaker )
President-in-Office of the Council . - ( FR ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I must say that it is to be expected , given the nature of the Union , that we should hear a variety of positions in this House .
This debate - and I am delighted to say this - was of a high quality , apart from the remarks by Mr Batten , which I personally found shocking .
That speech apart , however , the others have been perfectly legitimate .
I would also like to thank Mrs Neyts and Mr Couteaux for their recommendations for reading , which will enable us to enrich our perspective on the relations between Napoleon and Russia , and allow Benita and I to become better acquainted with those between Austria and Russia .
With regard , more fundamentally , to the origin and development of the conflict , I will make three remarks in relation to the EU Presidency : the first is that , obviously , the use of force was an error ; the second is that there was a disproportionate reaction by Russia , but , as was emphasised this morning , in order for there to be a reaction , there had to have been some action , even if the reaction remains disproportionate ; and the third is that the European Union would like an independent international enquiry on the origin and development of the conflict .

On the extent of the Russian withdrawal and the stability of the Caucasus , I would also like to say that we must not behave as though nothing happened , either .
We have been told : ' The Presidency is acting as though relations were normal ' .
No , I mean , certain things have happened since August , after all .
Two months ago , we were confronted with an armed conflict ; on 10 October we were able to observe the Russian withdrawal from the adjacent zones .
As I said , this is a vital additional step .
This does not mean that Russia has fulfilled all of its obligations , of this we are fully aware - and I am responding here to the speakers who stressed the problems that are present in the region of Akhalgori - but , at this stage , the most important thing is to embark , now , on a political process .
This is the goal of the talks currently under way in Geneva .
The message of the European Union is that there must no longer be zones of influence on this continent .
The European Union and Russia belong to the same neighbourhood , for the benefit of which we need to cooperate , not to oppose one another .
As regards the resumption of negotiations on the partnership , I would say that the negotiation of the future agreement has been postponed , not suspended , for the legal reasons also referred to during this morning 's debate , and , as the European Council said on 15 October , the continuation of these negotiations will incorporate the assessment that the Commission and the Council have been asked to carry out .
This is entirely logical , as Mrs Neyts has moreover emphasised .
I would point out that we need to distinguish clearly between the resumption of negotiations and the holding of the European Union-Russia Summit of 14 November .
That summit will take place , and , as this debate has shown , it is more important than ever .
The summit in itself is not intended to be an exercise in negotiating the future partnership agreement .
I would also like to return to what several speakers said regarding the notion of interdependence .
It is true that such interdependence must be seen in a broad sense .
It exists in all fields : it exists in the field of energy , obviously , and I would even say that , for certain EU Member States , it is a dependence that we need to solve by diversifying the sources of supply .
Moreover , we are also dependent in the field of international security , and it is for this reason that the European Union must not leave unanswered the proposals of the Russian President , Mr Medvedev , in favour of a new European security framework , even if the European Union 's point of view is not necessarily the same as that of Russia .
I would like in this regard to point out , as a number of you have done , our adherence to the Helsinki Final Act and to the Charter of Paris , documents to which Russia is also a signatory , as Mr Onyszkiewicz rightly emphasised .
In this context , we clearly need , as several of you have stressed , a sober analysis of our relations with Russia .
There is no question of our returning to the Cold War , nor of our compromising our values and our principles .
In order to ensure this , however , it is more necessary than ever for us to establish a dialogue with Russia .
I would like to thank all those who have congratulated the French Presidency of the European Union on its work , and especially Mr Wielowieyski and Mr Tannock .
The French Presidency acted all the more effectively - and I wish to conclude with this - because it was able to rely on the support of all the Member States , of the European Commission and of this House .
Division within the European Union would no doubt be the best way for Russia to weaken the EU .
In light of the very sharp polarisation of the debate between the States that have joined us most recently and the older members of the EU , it should be stressed that , now more than ever , what we need , and this debate has shown it , is unity in our handling of the Georgian crisis , and unity in our dialogue with Russia : unity on the part of the European Union in condemning the use of force by the parties and the violation of territorial integrity ; unity of the European Union in its action , that is , in the deployment of civilian observers on the ground ; and , finally , unity of the European Union in defining its interests , in particular in the area of energy and in the more global area of international security .
It is on the basis of such unity that , when the time comes , negotiations of a future agreement with Russia will resume .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , this was a very interesting debate but a debate that has shown that the reflections are quite different - there are different points of view and different aspects , and in a similar way we see some different aspects prevailing in the debate in the Council .
I absolutely agree with our Council President and our friend that the most important thing is that we speak with one voice , and with a strong voice .
This should be done at the next European Summit meeting with Russia .
What are our interests ?
I think I made this quite clear in my first intervention .
Since we are so interdependent , there are all the important interests on the economic side and the energy side , but there are also interests on the world scene .
These were mentioned - climate change , energy security , the question of how we can get a future agreement in Copenhagen .
What do we do on Iran , on the Middle East ?
There is a clear interest in all the different issues , and this is what I wanted to stress and reiterate .
We will have a very important discussion at the next General Affairs and External Relations Council on 10 November , and I hope that we will find the right understanding on pursuing negotiations for the new EU-Russia agreement , because these have only been postponed .
I think what our President said was very clear .
I say this because I think this is the best possible way forward , but at the same time we also have to be firm .
We have to treat Russia as it is and not Russia as we wish it to be .
That is also clear .
That means human rights dialogue as described today and speaking about all the differences .
This is what we did at the last summits at which I personally was present .
As regards all the questions that have been asked about the 8 000 troops , the European Council has given a clear answer to that and has noted with satisfaction that Russian troops have withdrawn from the zones adjacent to South Ossetia and Abkhazia as an essential additional step in the implementation of the agreements of 12 August and 8 September , as well as the launch of the Geneva international discussions provided for by those agreements .
I think Geneva is the place to continue talks about the political solution .
These started with a difficult moment , but the process is launched and now we want to go forward .
That is my first point .
Secondly , Russia will not be at the donors ' conference , to give you a clear answer , but I think the time will come when the question of damages might have to be brought to the fore , and an international investigation then held .
This has already been discussed in the Council , and the Council was in favour of such an international discussion .
Let me now say a word on human rights .
As I said before , there are a number of developments inside Russia that give us cause for concern , notably the violent deaths of journalists , restrictions on NGOs , the situation in the Northern Caucasus in general and in Ingushetia in particular .
We have also called for full investigations into cases such as the death of Anna Politkovskaya and the recent killing after police arrest of Magomed Yevloyev .
The latest round of human rights consultations , as I said , takes place today and will certainly also provide an opportunity to clearly mention those concerns .
We have also made clear to Russia that it needs to cooperate fully with the Council of Europe and to ratify Protocol 14 on the Court of Human Rights and Protocol 6 on the death penalty .
Concerning WTO accession : we , the European Union , remain a strong supporter of WTO accession because we think this will create a level playing field , which is necessary for our Economic Community , and we believe it is in our interests as a major trading partner for Russia to join a rules-based system .
But it is also important from the perspective of further development of our bilateral relations .
It is most important therefore that we continue to support this issue .
We have to continue to engage openly with the Russian side on this important process , but it is clear that we have to find timely solutions with them and for them .
The question of energy security and clear energy was mentioned .
Let me just say that we also have an energy dialogue and an environmental dialogue and , therefore , the questions of energy efficiency , clear energy etc. have already been tackled at different G8 meetings and at our EU summits , and will certainly be one of the important themes in the run-up to Copenhagen , where we also need Russia 's cooperation .
The Commission has supported joint implementation projects under the Kyoto Protocol and is ready to do more , because we think this is a most important issue .
Concerning the European security architecture , I just wanted to clarify that President Medvedev already mentioned this at the June EU-Russia Summit at Khanty-Mansiysk - not after the Georgia crisis but before .
I was there and know that very well , so I just wanted to mention it for the purpose of clarification .
This is an old Russian idea that has come to the fore again , and I think it interesting that President Sarkozy has proposed to maybe speak about it at an OSCE summit in 2009 .
We are not yet there , but let me say that it is most important that the question of a security partnership be discussed , but always with regard to all existing security relationships .
That is also a clear line that we have to draw .
As a final remark , let me say that it is so important that we advance the question of frozen conflicts - that is clear - and I will propose a Communication on the Eastern Partnership very soon , at the end of November / beginning of December .
We have already discussed this in the Council , and it will also have a very strong security component , but we also have other institutional mechanisms like the Minsk Group that should not , therefore , be excluded .
My last words concern cluster bombs , because this was also mentioned .
Let me say that we also deeply regret that cluster bombs have been used on both sides , thus creating great obstacles for IDPs to return home .
Therefore , we want to engage with the international organisations working in that field in order to clear the affected areas , but also to see that these cluster bombs no longer exist in the future .
The debate is closed .
Written statements ( Rule 142 )
in writing . - Recent events have raised questions about the nature of our relations in both the short and the long term .
We must move on and look ahead .
Negotiations between the EU and Russia on a new strategic partnership agreement should continue .
It is in the interest of both parties to conclude this agreement .
The EU has every interest in promoting a genuine " strategic partnership ” with Moscow .
We have to be pragmatic and realistic and pursue a results-oriented policy .
The EU has to find the best common approach to deal with Russia on issues such as current global economic challenges , energy , economic interdependence , non-proliferation , terrorism and climate change , because these matters are in our fundamental mutual interest .
We cannot afford to marginalise Russia , we have to engage with it in a constructive way .
Now more than ever , dialogue and long-term cooperation are required .
Isolating Russia will not help .
Relations need to be strengthened in many fields of mutual interest , in particular with regard to dealing with the current financial crisis and creating the new global financial architectural structure , where cooperation with Russia , as well with China and India , is absolutely necessary , and ensuring stability and security in the shared neighbourhood of the EU and Russia .
in writing . - ( FI ) The Western world has once again deceived itself in its hopes for Russia .
After the break-up of the Soviet Union it was believed that Russia , now free of its ideological shackles and having rejected communism , would at the same time rid itself of totalitarianism , authoritarianism , and the persecution of dissidents .
It was believed , like so many times before , that Russia might become closer to Europe and its values .
Russia did not become a democratic market economy , however , but a sort of capitalist dictatorship of exploitation , where civil rights have to yield to the law of a mightier force .
In discussions it is sometimes hard to distinguish naïve wishful thinking from calculating pragmatism .
The EU Member States have reacted to the war in Georgia in very many ways .
Now we have to ask if , for example , the selective attitude to Russia that emphasises economic values does not compromise our common values base .
The EU is built upon common values and the idea that all practical problems should be resolved through negotiation , not war .
The institution has to be kept alive , so that the smallest members of the EU and those that intend to join might also stay alive .
These common principles cannot be traded in Member States ' bilateral relations with Russia .
in writing . - ( ET ) Mr President , several Members of Parliament have stated that greed is the cause of the present financial crisis .
In his article that appeared this spring Mr Schöpflin describes this age-old phenomenon as an important factor in EU-Russian relations .
I must note that at the time of the publication of his article I had reached the same position taking into consideration the energy-related relations between several EU Member States in recent years .
In recent weeks - since the first shock of the August events - this same phenomenon is reflected in the Georgian issue .
A certain group of politicians were able to mutually convince themselves , in order to ease their collective conscience , that the main culprit in the conflict was Saakashvili .
Perhaps Saakashvili also organised the deportation of Georgians from Moscow two years ago and the summoning of the Pskov paratrooper division to the area on the eve of the battles ?
I believe that it is more reasonable to see this as the result of the dangerous policy of the restoration of Russian spheres of influence , and we should respond accordingly .
This manifests itself in the economic sector in Russia 's need for European Union investment and technology .
The European Union needs Russia 's raw materials .
In 2001 , EU Member States accounted for 79 % of Russian foreign investment to the tune of nearly USD 30 billion .
In May 2004 , the twenty-five European Union Member States ' share of Russian foreign trade stood at 55 % .
It is not in the interest of the Member States of the European Union to allow our relations with Russia to deteriorate .
The Union needs to diversify its supply of crude oil and natural gas .
Thanks to its political and economic potential , Russia is a serious partner for the European Union .
If the European Union wanted to promote ideas on the international arena which differ from those of the United States , then Russia 's political support could provide the key to their implementation .
For example , the Kyoto Protocol took effect following Russia 's ratification of the document , in exchange for which the European Union agreed to Russia 's membership of the WTO .
Democracy , Human Rights and the new Partnership and Cooperation Agreement EU / Vietnam ( debate )
The next item is the debate on :
the oral question to the Council by Marco Cappato , on behalf of the ALDE Group , on Democracy , human rights and the new EU-Vietnam Partnership and Cooperation Agreement - B6-0473 / 2008 ) , and
the oral question to the Commission by Marco Pannella , on behalf of the ALDE Group , on Democracy , human rights and the new EU-Vietnam Partnership and Cooperation Agreement - B6-0474 / 2008 ) .
author . - ( IT ) Mr President , Commissioner , representatives of the Council , ladies and gentlemen , negotiations are taking place on the new cooperation agreement with Vietnam and I believe it is important for Parliament to be informed about the substance of the negotiations , particularly with regard to respect for human rights and democracy .
We do not claim that by means of cooperation agreements we can , with a click of the fingers , miraculously achieve respect for democracy and human rights in Vietnam or elsewhere .
What our European law requires us to do , however , is to refuse to accept serious , systematic infringements of human rights and democracy .
We know that we do not have huge resources with which to impose this respect ; we know , however , that the renegotiation of cooperation agreements can provide a good opportunity to make at least some progress on the most serious and most systematic infringements .
I hope that in the resolution that will be adopted tomorrow this Parliament can put to the Commission and the Council some especially serious points , which were also brought up at the hearing held by Parliament 's Subcommittee on Human Rights , with figures such as Kok Ksor , Vo Van Ai and members of the non-violent radical party , among others .
Firstly , the situation of the Degar minority , who are Christians in Vietnam 's central highlands : they are still being arrested in their hundreds and there is still no free access to the central highlands of Vietnam for international observers , particularly for the United Nations .
Now that Vietnam is in the United Nations Security Council , this should not be happening any more : the hundreds of political prisoners currently being held must be freed .
There is a huge problem regarding religious freedom , and Vietnam must give a response on this before a new agreement is signed , particularly the failure to recognise the Unified Buddhist Church .
Thich Quang Do , the leader of the church , is still being held under arrest , and the land belonging to the Catholics is still confiscated .
It is time for Vietnam to repeal the laws criminalising dissent and religious activities .
Commissioner , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , our request is therefore a specific one : can we ensure that these problems , at least these serious infringements of human rights , are resolved before a new cooperation agreement is entered into ?
President-in-Office of the Council . - ( FR ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , Mr Cappato , I am pleased to be back here among you today .

We are following the human rights situation in Vietnam very closely , and the Presidency has just recently had the opportunity to express concern once again following the sentences handed down in particular to two journalists who had written reports on corruption cases .
The Council and the Commission maintain regular dialogue with Vietnam on the subject of human rights , in talks held twice a year .
The last meeting , held in Hanoi on 10 June 2008 , allowed us to address , on the one hand , the general human rights situation in Vietnam , and , in particular , freedom of expression , the situation of minorities and the application of the death penalty , as well as a number of individual cases .
In addition to this dialogue , a number of more selective measures are taken with regard to individual cases , where arrests or sentences appear to us to undermine respect for civil liberties and international commitments and , in particular , the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights , which has been ratified by Vietnam .
Moreover , on the occasion of the European Day against the death penalty , on 10 October , we once again explained our very clear position on this subject to the Vietnamese authorities .
They seemed receptive to our message , and brought up the reform of the penal code currently under way , a reform that is expected to reduce the number of crimes subject to the death penalty .
That is the very least they could do .
Ladies and gentlemen , as you can clearly see , the human rights issue is an important element of our relations with Vietnam .
It is a sensitive issue .
Mr Cappato , you mentioned the situation of Christians in Central Vietnam , a matter to which we are particularly attentive , and I thank you for having mentioned it .
I would like to point out that the European Union is the only power to pursue such a global and purposeful policy on this matter , and this at times makes us a target for criticism by our partner .
I wish to be clear about this , however : we will pursue this policy with determination .
I wish to turn now to the future Partnership and Cooperation Agreement , the debate on which is under way .
A new session of talks is currently under way in Hanoi , and will continue until 22 October .
Like any agreement concluded by the European Union with a third country , this agreement must contain a very important clause on human rights .
This clause will constitute an essential element of the future agreement , which may be suspended or even revoked if one of the parties fails to respect it - I want to insist on this point .
At this stage in the negotiations , Vietnam has not challenged the principle of such a clause .
Once again , that is the least it can do .
This is a positive sign by Vietnam and a practical commitment on its part to respect human rights .
The European Union will thus have at its disposal a powerful legal instrument to guarantee respect for human rights as soon as the agreement has been ratified .
Ladies and gentlemen , Mr Cappato , we agree with you that the human rights situation in Vietnam needs to be improved .
We consider that the actions we have been taking for several years now are helping to improve it , but , beyond that , it is in our view the signing of a future Partnership and Cooperation Agreement that will enable us , in this case as in others , to use the human rights clause to provide the best possible framework for addressing this issue with Vietnam .
Naturally , this House will be kept fully informed of the development of the negotiations which , I would remind you , are under way .
Mr President , please forgive me for having disrupted proceedings by listening for a moment to some of your Members .
Commissioner , you are not to blame if Members come and distract you with something irrelevant , in a clear lack of solidarity with the Member who is speaking at the time .
You are therefore forgiven and it is the Members who must take into account that , when one of us is speaking , they should not distract the President-in-Office of the Council or whoever is speaking on behalf of the Commission .
Please continue .

Member of the Commission . - ( FR ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen of the Council , and , of course , ladies and gentlemen of this House , Mr Cappato , the Commission is very pleased with the attention paid by Parliament to the negotiation of a Partnership and Cooperation Agreement with Vietnam , as well as to the human rights situation in that country .
Our debate is most timely , since , on this very day , as our President has mentioned , talks are being held in Hanoi to negotiate this agreement .
I can tell you that the human rights situation is an absolutely crucial concern of the European Union in its relations with Vietnam .
It is true that that country is , in spite of everything , making a certain amount of progress in this area .
I am thinking in particular of the recent efforts to reduce the scope of the death penalty , to establish , for example , a legislative framework setting out the conditions for the exercise of religious freedom , and to better manage the issue of ethnic minorities who had fled to Cambodia and who are now returning to Vietnam .
Nevertheless - and you are right in this regard - it is clear that , in recent months , some worrying trends have unfortunately developed with regard , in particular , to religious freedom and to freedom of expression .
These trends are illustrated more specifically by the harassment of the Catholic community in Hanoi and by the sentencing , last week , of journalists for their investigation into corruption .
As I said to the Vietnamese Deputy Prime Minister , Mr Khiêm , when he was in Brussels very recently , on 17 September , it would be disastrous for the long-term stability of Vietnam and for its international credibility if the current economic and social difficulties in that country led to its instinctively regressing to authoritarianism and repression .
Now more than ever , Vietnam must , on the contrary , establish mechanisms intended to allow peaceful expression of the tensions and social frustrations being felt in that country .
This is a message that President Barroso will also repeat this week when he meets Prime Minister Dung on the fringe of the ASEM Summit in Beijing .
This will be the European Union 's message during the next session of the EU-Vietnam Human Rights Dialogue , which will also take place in Hanoi , in December .
The draft Partnership and Cooperation Agreement proposed by the EU to Vietnam confirms and increases the importance that we attach to human rights in our relations with this country .
Indeed , the current draft agreement , as our President said , includes a vital , suspensive clause on human rights ; consolidates the regular EU-Vietnam dialogue on human rights by conferring a legal status on it ; and makes provision to help Vietnam equip itself with a national action plan on human rights .
It includes a whole series of detailed provisions on compliance with labour law , good governance and the promotion of the rule of law .
It also contains a clause on the International Criminal Court .
This agreement is thus a legal instrument and a lever for political action that I believe we need in order to increase our involvement in the areas of human rights and democratisation .
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - Mr President , I have to say - and rather sadly - that I remain sceptical as to whether the human rights clause within the EU-Vietnam cooperation agreement is really worth the paper it is written on .
The noble intentions contained within it are a reflection , understandably , of our common European values , but I believe it is little more than window-dressing and an understandable concession to the powerful human rights lobby within the Union .
After all , China is now the EU 's second-largest trading partner , yet the Communist dictatorship in Beijing pays no attention to our concern about human rights .
Indeed , I sometimes wonder whether it is even worth raising the issue any more .
The political repression and human rights violations in China tend to distract us from what is going on in neighbouring Vietnam , where things are every bit as brutal .
Pro-democracy dissidents and religious minorities are imprisoned , journalists are intimidated into silence , and the liberties we take for granted here in Europe , such as an uncensored internet , simply do not exist .
That is why I proposed last year , with Mr Cappato and others , that Thich Quang Do should be considered for the Nobel Peace Prize .
This brave Buddhist monk has suffered years of harassment and jail in his quest for religious freedom and human rights .
Vietnam encapsulates the dilemma facing the European Union .
How much should human rights matter in our commercial relationships with third countries when they are formally written into trade agreements and partnership agreements ?
And can stronger economic ties alone be a positive force for political and human rights and democracy reforms ?
These are tough questions which the new Commissioner from Britain for trade , Baroness Ashton , will have to grapple with .
I believe our common values to be non-negotiable .
Therefore , I urge the Commission and Council either to be honest and scrap this pretence by abolishing these human rights and democracy clauses , or genuinely and sincerely to hold third countries to account for their wanton abuse of values that we all hold sacrosanct .
I pay a very special tribute to Mr Cappato and all the fine work he has done in this respect .
on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , we in Europe have a deep understanding of , a lively interest in and a great affinity for the people of Vietnam .
My group still remembers all too well the terrible suffering and devastation caused by the wars and occupations in Vietnam , not only by the United States but also by European countries .
Vietnam is now developing in a particularly dynamic and exciting region in South-East Asia .
The 10 Member States of ASEAN are not all democracies as we in Europe understand the term , but things are changing .
The new ASEAN Charter shows specifically that violations of human rights cannot be ignored , Mr Tannock , and the negotiations leading up to it prove that violations of human rights are very much on the agenda .
Now is a particularly good time because the negotiations have been re-opened ; the cooperation agreement of 1995 is being renegotiated .
It is true that , after China , the European Union is Vietnam 's second-largest trading partner , and it is for precisely that reason that we will be able to make progress .
Partnership agreements are certainly not pointless .
The Socialist Group in the European Parliament calls on the Commission to work to ensure that the freedom of the press , freedoms for minorities and activists for democracy , freedom of religion and , of course , the freedom of UN observers to operate are guaranteed .
Then we will be able to develop an even closer friendship with this beautiful country .
on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group . - ( EL ) Mr President , we understand perfectly that imperialism and its representatives , the European Union and the United States of America and all those who support them , are unlikely to forget Vietnam , because it was a global symbol : its people beat both French and American imperialism and won their independence .
The identical resolutions proposed today are unacceptable and call on Vietnam to comply with the suggestions of the European Union .
What you failed to achieve with weapons you are now trying to achieve with economic blackmail .
That is the point of the clauses which you have adopted about so-called respect for human rights and democracy .
Since you have raised the question of human rights , I ask all of you , including Mr Cappato , to answer us : there are tens of thousands of people in Vietnam suffering from agent orange , an inhumane chemical and biological weapon used by the United States of America .
There are thousands of mutant births , deaths from cancer and entire areas laid waste from the use of this weapon , which was manufactured by the well-known company Monsanto .
Do these people , who are still suffering and dying , not have human rights , including the supreme human right , the right to life ?
Why then do you not support the demand by the Vietnam Government and the victims for compensation and for the consequences of this forbidden biochemical war to be addressed , but you do support presumed human rights for the return of ecclesiastical property which belongs to the people ?
That is why it is hypocritical to cite human rights .
Only the people of Vietnam have the authority to resolve their problems , not the people who , in the final analysis , should have apologised to them for murdering one million people in the war which they unleashed against them .
What is needed is balanced , mutual , beneficial economic cooperation without political and economic blackmail .
Mr President , despite the past protestations from the Vietnamese Government that they guarantee religious freedom , and despite the best efforts of the last speaker to whitewash the regime in Vietnam , the reality is very different , particularly for isolated Christian groups .
While confiscation of church property has been rife , those linked to unregistered evangelical house churches have been particular targets for state persecution .
Just months ago , a young tribal man who refused to repudiate his Christian faith died from injuries inflicted under official interrogation ; hundreds remain in prison for their faith where ill-treatment is rampant .
I salute their courage , I condemn their persecutors , but above all I appeal to this EU not to put improving relations with Vietnam and trade above defending and demanding basic human rights for these human beings of very great faith .
We must not , for the sake of trade or other short-term gain , sanitise the outrageous human rights record of Hanoi .
( DE ) Mr President , Vietnam is a country that is becoming increasingly open to the European Union , but it has one serious stumbling block , and that is human rights and the fundamental freedoms .
In this connection , I should like to turn our attention in particular to religious freedom , just as this resolution , thankfully , also does .
Christians in Vietnam are persecuted , and the Bishop of Augsburg , who is particularly concerned with persecuted Christians , is here today to talk with us on the subject .
Moreover , Buddhists and other religious groups are also hindered and persecuted in the practice of their religion .
We can make it quite clear that it is our duty to work to ensure that Vietnam becomes an equal partner , that it opens up , and that it draws nearer to us .
This must not , however , be at the expense of fundamental human rights , but must be based on a fair partnership founded on fundamental human rights .
Mr President , our resolution today does not simply raise our concerns over freedom of expression , repression of dissent and religious discrimination in Vietnam .
It calls on the European Union to account for what is being achieved through our human rights dialogue and to set clear benchmarks for improvement in moving towards a Partnership and Cooperation Agreement with Vietnam .
We can never accept that when a journalist uncovers evidence of embezzlement of USD 750 000 within the Transport Ministry , in part used to wage bets on English Premiership football matches , that journalist should find himself in jail .
We can never accept the use of the death penalty for 29 different offences , for us not one offence .
Executions , we are told , take place at 4 a.m. , without warning , which means that prisoners never sleep before six o 'clock in the morning for fear that their time has come .
And we can never accept threats and intimidation against the Catholic Church such as that which followed the peaceful mass protests in Hanoi last month .
Amnesty International recorded one woman leaving church to find a gang shouting ' Kill the archbishop ' and ' Kill the priests '
Vietnam has been a party to the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights since 1982 .
The current evidence presents a clear breach of Articles 2 and 18 .
What is more , in July Vietnam took charge of the presidency of the UN Security Council .
We call on European negotiators to make clear to the Vietnamese Government that any aspiration to uphold international law in international institutions has to be matched by respect for it at home .
( PL ) I think that from the list of human rights infringements in Vietnam it is necessary to highlight state violence towards Catholics .
The government in Hanoi unilaterally controls the Catholic Church 's assets , in contravention of prior undertakings .
Catholics who oppose the seizure of buildings in Hanoi belonging to the Apostolic Nuncia are attacked by hit squads .
The number of prisoners of conscience is growing .
Recently , there were further arrests in the grounds of the Redemptorist monastery in Thai Ha .
The Archbishop of Hanoi , Quang Kiêt , is under house arrest and remains under surveillance , living in fear for his life .
Although Vietnam has , relatively speaking , opened up in economic and social terms , it has become a country where Christians are increasingly persecuted .
The new agreement between the European Union and Vietnam must address the issue of religious freedom in that country .
Otherwise , it should not be signed .

( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to say to Mr Pafilis that the war in Vietnam today is the war being carried on by the Vietnam regime against its own people , the Vietnamese people , the Khmer Krom people and the Degard people .
There will be a human rights clause in the new agreement .
That is a good thing , but there is already a clause in the current agreement , and we are not managing to make sure it is abided by .
So our request , which I believe is very important , is that before a new agreement is signed we obtain concessions on fundamental aspects where a systematic violation of human rights is taking place : access to Vietnam 's central highlands , the release of the political prisoners and recognition of the Buddhist Church and the property of the Catholics , because if we do not achieve something before the agreement is signed , it will be impossible to subsequently demand respect for European and international law after the agreement has been signed .

Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , Mr Cappato , I believe , on the one hand , that we should not confuse what it means to have been a victim of imperialism with knowing , today , what it means to respect human rights .
For my part , I would not compare victims of biochemical weapons with those who are victims of attacks on religious freedoms .
All this forms a single , absolutely indivisible , whole .

To respond to Mr Tannock , but also to some extent to Mr Cappato , we should not underestimate the value of the suspensive clause where human rights are concerned .
We have only to consider the difficulty in concluding other agreements that are often negotiated for nearly 20 years with other groups of States - I am thinking of the Gulf States here .
We have only to consider , too , the role played by this clause with regard to certain countries within the framework of the Cotonou Agreement .
This shows that the European Union is taken seriously in its concern to promote human rights in these agreements .
As regards the additional concessions requested by Mr Cappato , it is precisely the negotiations conducted by the Commission that must make it possible to see - and the Commissioner has emphasised this point - whether progress has been made by the Vietnamese authorities in this area .
Such progress will be assessed as a whole .
Once again , I believe that it is through dialogue that we are going to see progress made in these countries ' relations with the European Union , and it is through such agreements and such clauses that the Union is best able to promote the values that you and we , Mr Cappato and others in this Chamber , clearly hold dear .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , I think it is very clear that we all want to address the question of human rights whenever and wherever possible .
As I said , I just did so a few weeks ago , and I did so when I went there two years ago .
I remember then I was also able to obtain the liberation of a few prisoners , so there is indeed a possibility .
What we also do is provide lists to them and say here , here and here , something has to be done .
I think this was therefore an important debate because it has re-focused our ideas on the particular issue of religious communities and , in this specific case , of Christians and Catholics .
We have to focus very clearly on these questions , but at the same time I would also like to say that we know that Vietnam is also now facing a difficult economic and social situation , so , if Vietnam is not careful , investment will not come from foreign countries , particularly European countries .
This is also a very good instrument that we have in addition to mere dialogue .
For instance , we will certainly ask for a gesture of clemency on the part of the Vietnamese authorities in favour of the two journalists who were recently imprisoned and have been judged in Hanoi for having used their freedom of expression .
That is something that we will clearly also mention again .
Finally , I would like to say that Vietnam will next time be subject to a periodical , universal review of its human rights situation in Geneva , and that will be another excellent occasion to very clearly mark the questions and see what has been done so far .
The debate is closed .
I have received four motions for resolution tabled in accordance with Rule 108 ( 5 ) of the Rules of Procedure .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place on Wednesday .
Question Time ( Council )
The next item is Question Time ( B6-0475 / 2008 ) .
The following questions are addressed to the Council .
I am sorry to say that we are short of time , but I intend to suspend the sitting at 19.00 as planned .
Mr Jouyet has been here all afternoon , as has Mrs Ferrero-Waldner .
Subject : Progress on the ' Blue Card '
At this mid-point of the French Presidency , what progress can the Council report on the ' Blue Card ' and the related priorities of skilled migration and circular migration ?

Mr President , I should like to say to Mr Moraes that the proposal for a directive on the conditions for entry and residence of third-country nationals for highly qualified employment - the ' Blue Card ' Directive - was presented by the Commission to the Council in October 2007 , as he is moreover aware .
The aim of this proposal is to encourage highly qualified third-country nationals to settle in the European Union .
In order to make the EU more attractive , this proposal establishes common criteria for their admission , recognises equal treatment with EU nationals in several areas , and offers Blue Card holders opportunities to move about within the Union .
As you know , this proposal is one of the priorities of the French Presidency within the framework of the Pact on Immigration and Asylum .
On 25 September , the Council gave its support to this initiative on the basis of a compromise proposed by the Presidency .
This compromise focused , on the one hand , on the definition of higher professional qualifications and of higher education qualifications , and , on the other , on the relationship with national law ; lastly , it focused on the minimum salary threshold for which a derogation is provided for in case of specific need within a profession .
The Council has given the Permanent Representatives Committee the task of finalising the examination of the text , with a view to arriving at a proposal very quickly , and final adoption will be able to take place after your opinion on this proposal has been adopted .
I believe this will be possible within the context of the November plenary .
Thank you for that comprehensive answer .
The Blue Card could be a great achievement if it is comprehensive , if it is fair and balanced .
In that respect , may I ask the Council how to avoid the issue of brain drain , or cherry-picking of the best workers not just from developing countries but from emerging economies as well ?
Will there be some connection between EU governments , the Commission and the governments - particularly the labour ministries of those countries - to ensure that , while we get the best workers and we compete for the best workers , we do not then drain those emerging and developing economies of some of their best people ; that we monitor this issue and preserve freedom of choice , but that we get the Blue Card right , because it could be a very positive development for this place ?
( DE ) I should just like to return to one specific point .
In the past , we repeatedly had the problem that , whilst on the one hand we were stating , from the European point of view , that we needed skilled immigrants , on the other hand we were still always very restrictive .
Is there a credible comparison between the attractiveness of the US Green Card and comparable systems , and what we want to do in Europe ?
President-in-Office of the Council . - ( FR ) Mr President , I think this is precisely what we are trying to do : to reconcile the fact that Europe always needs immigrants .
We are clearly going to be at a disadvantage demographically and in terms of attractiveness in comparison with other regions of the world and we must therefore maintain an open policy both within the European Union and towards real emerging countries and , within that framework , we must make sure , on the one hand , that we have a legal framework for economic migrants and , on the other hand , that we strike balanced agreements with the countries of origin by combining our uptake capacity and preventing a brain drain as far as they are concerned .
I think that to take account of the new phenomena of economic migration and to give them a framework is one of the most innovative elements of the Pact on Immigration and Asylum accepted by the 27 Member States .
In answer to the honourable Member 's question : yes , we shall try in this area to follow some of what has been done in the United States in an intelligent and efficient manner .
Subject : Effects of hazard-based approach on food prices and pest resistance
Assuming that a hazard-based approach will reduce the number of pesticides on the market , what does the Council consider will be the future outcome on pest resistance and the consequential crop production in the EU , effects on food prices / security and the consequences for the developing world ? ( Some experts believe that the EU will source more food from the developing world , resulting in increased food prices there with a consequential effect on those on the edge of poverty . )
President-in-Office of the Council . - ( FR ) As far as plant protection products are concerned , a ' pesticides ' package has been tabled in the Council , the aim of which is to revise regulations governing the placing on the market of such products and introduce a directive governing their sustainable use .
The objective is to ensure that the use of pesticides is compatible with environmental conservation and with health protection and we must of course take account of the impact of the package on pest resistance .
It was on this basis that the Council agreed a common position on 15 September .
This position makes provision for active ingredients used in pesticides to be approved following an assessment of the dangers and risks which they pose to human and animal health and to the environment .
This challenge is an important one .
Here too we need to protect our citizens , because there are dangerous substances , such as carcinogenic substances , mutagenic substances and substances which are toxic to reproduction or which may disrupt the endocrine system and should not therefore be used .
The Council has also taken account of the impact on agricultural production , because the Council is determined to ensure that the new legislation has no adverse repercussions on costs or on the availability of foodstuffs in Europe or in other regions of the world .
On the contrary , the review of legislation on pesticides and plant health protection should strengthen the free circulation of products , with mutual recognition of product approvals in the same zone and more rational procedures for approving active ingredients at European level , all of which should help to modernise European agriculture and improve the protection of our consumers and citizens .

Can I assure the minister that we all want to look after the citizens ' health and the environment , but does the Council agree with the call for a European Commission impact assessment on the effects of food production and food supply because of this legislation in each Member State ?
The fact that the European Commission has failed to do this to date is totally unacceptable .
Would the Council agree that , without proper up-to-date information , we cannot be expected to make informed choices and decisions ?
Following up the last question , what is it that the Council has to fear about a proper impact assessment so that we might know the real impact of your proposals on food production in Europe ?
This affects both producers and consumers .
Producers and consumers have a lot to lose if pesticides , which presently are vital to crop production , are removed with no available substitute .
What , for example , are potato-growers in northern Europe with their wet climate to do when there is no substitute to deal with potato blight ?
Are we simply to say ' Too bad ' ?
Are we to say to our consumers , ' Let 's import from countries which have no regard for pesticide controls ' ?
Really , is it not time to reconsider and to make a proper impact assessment on these proposals ?
Can I support the last two comments in relation to an impact assessment ?
I would have thought there is much to gain from both the Commission and Council point of view if you have evidence that helps you through an impact assessment .
I know the Irish blight is a long-told story , but it is a very significant problem and I think you need to address it , not just from a producer perspective but bearing in mind that this has implications for food prices , for availability , and also that we are going to import a product that is produced using chemicals that Europe will ban .
Tell me that makes sense , because I do not see it .
President-in-Office of the Council . - ( FR ) My thanks to Mr Aylward , Mr Allister and Mrs McGuinness for their questions .

For us , the objective is to achieve agreement on this delicate subject at second reading before the end of the year , with formal adoption by the European Parliament during the December part-session .
A trilogue has been planned between the Commission , the Council and Parliament in order to marry the different points of view expressed and , within this framework , it seems highly logical to me for impact assessments to be carried out in order to establish the impact of these regulations both on production methods and on consumer protection .
I have no doubt that they will give us a better idea of the impact of these directives .
Subject : Accessing funding under EU Research Technology and Development Programmes
What initiatives is the Council putting in place to ensure that European businesses are fully aware of how to draw down funding under EU Research Technology and Development programmes , which are to be worth over € 55bn to EU businesses between 2007 and 2013 ?

President-in-Office of the Council . - ( FR ) Mr President , may I say in reply to Mr Ó Neachtain that , since the first framework programme for research was adopted , the Council has introduced a set of measures to improve access to information for enterprises .
These measures should allow enterprises to be fully aware of how to draw down funding under European framework programmes for research and development .
There is , for example , the Cordis website , which is a type of electronic tool created to facilitate the proposition of European technological research and development projects .
Enterprises can access all the necessary information on European programmes and on the main national and regional players in the various Member States .
The site has a practical guide to sources of funding for research and innovation .
There is also a network of national contact points which has been set up to improve access to information for enterprises and which is supported within the framework of the seventh research and development programme and the framework programme for competitiveness and innovation .
The aim of this network , therefore , is to facilitate information which is as personalised and as decentralised as possible , by establishing contacts between various institutions , be they national ministries , universities , research centres or firms of private consultants .
Finally , we have published guidelines on the use of funds under the Seventh Framework Programme for research and on the use of the Structural Funds which can be used in the research sector .
These guidelines provide essential information to enterprises and we also know that it is this information and these multiple sources of information that allow our enterprises to compete for the instruments implemented by the European Union .
( GA ) Mr President-in-Office of the Council , I thank you for your comprehensive answer .
However , I should like to ask if the Council can state how applications under the development programme can be dealt with more effectively , and if it has any plans to ensure we receive answers quicker .
How do you think this ought be done ?
( ES ) Mr President , in both the Seventh Framework Programme and the Competitiveness and Innovation Framework Programme , one of our objectives was to encourage the participation of small and medium-sized enterprises .
As two years have passed since the adoption of these programmes , could the Council tell us whether the participation of small and medium-sized enterprises in the Member States is improving in comparison , for example , to previous framework programmes ?
Could the Council please confirm that under FP7 the whole application procedure was to be made much more user friendly , that this has in fact happened , and that it is also transparent so that businesses generally know how to draw down funding and how to respond to calls in relation to monies available under FP7 ?

President-in-Office of the Council . - ( FR ) I will be perfectly frank with Mr Ó Neachtain : given the items which will already be on the agenda for the European Council in December , I do not think that this question will be raised at the European Council , despite the challenge which it represents .
It needs to be raised in the Research and Competitiveness Councils .
My feeling is that a great deal has already been done to improve the information system .
In reply to Mrs Riera , I think that a great deal still needs to be done .
A political agreement on communication will be adopted tomorrow by the Commission , the Council and Parliament in order to publicise European actions more widely .
I think this is an important step , but I think that what is important beyond that - and Mrs Doyle is right to insist on this , as is Mrs Riera - is that we multiply the practical information points .
I believe that this House has a very important supervisory role in ensuring that these practical information points are developed still further from the point of view of who they should be directed at and what procedure should be used .
Subject : Emergency relief following natural disasters
What proposals have been brought forward by the Council Presidency to expand and improve the operation of emergency relief assistance in the EU following natural disasters , flooding , fires , etc ?
President-in-Office of the Council . - ( FR ) To reply to Mr Crowley , Europe has suffered an increasing number of disasters and major crises over recent years .
The forest fires and floods which hit several European countries recently have demonstrated that it is vital that we improve the efficiency and capacity of the European Union 's response to emergences .
This too needs to be done in a spirit of solidarity and protection for our citizens .
We need solidarity and unity and we need to protect citizens inside and outside the European Union .
That is why the Presidency 's priorities included strengthening the European Union 's response capacity to disasters and crises .
Starting from existing Community resources , especially the Community 's civil protection mechanism , we need to proceed through various stages of response to disasters .
Firstly , we need prevention , research and information .
We need to step up work to implement early warning systems .
Secondly , we need to prepare for crises , which means strengthening management and response capacities and coordination between the agencies involved at Community and international level .
Through intervention we hope to increase the capacity to provide European humanitarian aid and civil protection and thus improve the Community civil protection mechanism around a more operational centre .
There are therefore different competent working parties studying these topics within the framework of the Council and the Council will consider this work before the end of the year .
For the honourable Members ' information , the Presidency will be organising a civil protection exercise on 4 and 6 November involving all the directors-general of civil protection in the Member States .
This will allow us to see on the ground what progress is needed in this very important sector .
With regard to the coordination of activities , obviously this is the most important aspect as we saw last year with the forest fires that spread from Greece into Italy and into parts of Slovenia , or with the flooding of the Danube at different times that did not just have an impact in Austria but in other countries alongside .
Is there a proposal to set up a coordination unit that will be permanently operable at some central point to help coordinate these cross-border natural disasters that have an impact right across the Union ?

( DE ) Mr President-in-Office of the Council , the coordination of aid measures is one aspect ; the other is whether it remains apparent to European citizens that it is the European Union that is involved , not just the Member States - that Europe is actually doing something for individual people at local level .
Minister , could I direct you to the entry threshold under the EU Solidarity Fund .
It is set , as I understand it , at something like EUR 3 billion .
It is set at the same level for a large country as for a small region and a large region .
In consequence , you can have a level of devastation from flooding such as we had in Northern Ireland this summer where it is very extensive in that specific region yet , because it falls below the threshold and does not extend to the whole nation , there is no access to the EU Solidarity Fund .
Is that fair ?
Does that not need to be looked at , and do you not also need to look at the foolish hoops which agricultural producers in particular have to jump through in order to try and access this funding ?

President-in-Office of the Council . - ( FR ) Firstly , in reply to Mr Crowley , I do believe that it truly is the Presidency 's ambition to arrive at the point where there is a coordination centre which is as operational as possible .
That is what we are hoping for .
The problem is that we need to strike a balance here between those who want more coordination , as is the case with the Presidency , and the Member States who are more attached to the role of subsidiarity , including in this sector .
Ultimately , to be perfectly clear , the Presidency will work within the framework of the Council towards enhanced coordination and - in reply to Mr Rack - more visible coordination because - as Mr Rack rightly says - we need to safeguard the visibility of the European Union .

In reply to Mr Allister , as far as the European Solidarity Fund is concerned , I am well aware of the attention which we need to pay to Northern Ireland in connection with a number of natural disasters .
I have no information about discrimination against it but I shall of course ensure , with the Council services , that the Solidarity Fund is used as quickly and equitably as possible , depending on the regions , both at European level and at Member State level .
Subject : Food security in an unequal partnership
As the EU pledges to continue to introduce initiatives to ensure security of food supply to the developing world , what is the Council doing about developing world allegations that the EU is exploiting an unequal partnership , firstly through the negotiation of trade deals that are , in the words of the UN Economic Commission for Africa , ' not sufficiently inclusive ' and ' lacking in transparency ' and that allow the EU to benefit from the African countries ' lack of capacity to handle legal complexities and secondly by securing European food supply at the expense of , among others , West African fisheries ?

President-in-Office of the Council . - ( FR ) In reply to Mr Ryan , as you know , the Cotonou Agreement introduced a new partnership between the European Union and the 78 ACP countries on 23 June 2000 .
These new agreements should foster a global approach to relations between the European Union and these countries based on a commercial approach to goods and services , flanking measures , measures to promote regional integration and the fact that these commercial measures must comply with the rules of the World Trade Organisation .
A number of interim agreements were initialled at the end of 2007 which , as the Council underlined in its conclusions in May 2008 , addressed the risk of disruption to trade , which was an important concern .
It is perfectly clear that the process of negotiating full regional economic partnership agreements is one of the Council 's main priorities .
The Council has , moreover , adopted a new series of conclusions on economic partnership agreements - the fourth since 2006 - reiterating that the purpose of these WTO-compatible agreements is to support development .
There is therefore still a consensus of views within the Council on this important question and a shared intention to achieve full regional economic partnership agreements which will bring about sustainable economic development in ACP countries .
The security of food supply is at the heart of the joint discussions , according to the information from the committee in charge of negotiations .
There has been steady progress at regional level and it is still our objective to conclude full regional agreements as quickly as possible .
As far as partnership agreements in the fisheries sector are concerned , I would remind the House that , following the Council 's conclusions in July 2004 , the Community has introduced a new type of bilateral agreement .
What concerns me is that , firstly , fishing opportunities should - and we hope will - be allocated to Community vessels on the basis of transparent scientific opinions and , secondly , that part of the financial contribution by the Community set out in the so-called sectoral support agreements should be used to develop the fisheries sector of the partner coastal state , so as to establish responsible and sustainable fisheries .
Finally , what we must remember is that we need interim agreements , but we must proceed as quickly as possible towards complete economic partnership agreements , which is what all the members of the Council are working on .
What transparency measures can the Council put in place to ensure the maximum effectiveness , not just of trade deals , but also of aid to and for the developing world ?
Considering that you hear one side from the Commission about EPAs and then you hear a lot of criticism from NGOs about EPAs , it is very difficult to find out who is correct on this and who is really benefiting from it .
But certainly there is consistent criticism and lack of transparency in these EPAs .
I would just ask you to comment on that .
In relation to the West African fisheries , could I put it to the presidency that these fisheries agreements , albeit bilateral , need far more monitoring and revisiting by the EU and the Commission to ensure that severe poverty and debt in these third countries do not put unsustainable and irresistible pressure to sign up to these lucrative agreements which often , and generally , result in seriously unsustainable and irresponsible exploitation of the resources ?
I think there is a big question mark about what Europe is doing here .
Could the presidency please comment ?
( ES ) Mr President , I wish to reiterate Mrs Doyle 's question , but I want to put it in a slightly different way .
Administration of the Western Saharan fisheries was transferred to Morocco some twenty years or so ago .
There has been no pressure there .
Fishing in that area by the European Union has been minimal , but there has been a problem with poor administration of the fisheries .
My question is as follows : what measures can we take to help countries that are in charge of fisheries in order to ensure effective monitoring ?
It is not enough to simply not sign fisheries agreements .
If there is no effective monitoring of fisheries , there will always be problems .
Can the European Union do something to help these countries to effectively monitor their fisheries and to avoid depleting their resources , as is currently happening ?
President-in-Office of the Council . - ( FR ) I think that , as far as transparency is concerned , these agreements should be highly transparent .
I personally have no comments to make on any lack of transparency .
What we have to bear in mind is that we are in a transitional phase with these interim agreements .
They are not wholly satisfactory , but we cannot do otherwise in light of the WTO rules .
Secondly , the honourable Member is right : the countries which concluded them are critical of such agreements .
There is always criticism of the efficacy of development aid .
We are working with the Commission to ensure that these aid mechanisms and these support mechanisms are more transparent , that is clear .
Thirdly , what we want is to move towards global agreements which encompass all stakeholders and the representatives of civil society in the partner countries .
Fourthly , as far as fisheries along the coast of West Africa are concerned , I believe that Mrs Doyle is right .
We obviously need to ensure that there will always be sustainable development and , come what may , agreements which remain bilateral must not exert excessive pressure .
As the honourable Member pointed out , we must keep effective measures in place to control fisheries resources .
It is not easy .
Naturally we must take account of the state of economic development and help these countries to become better integrated into international trade zones .
Question No 6 has been ruled inadmissible as it is similar to a question answered at the September II part-session .
Subject : Air safety
In view of the rise in recent months in the number of air travel accidents in different parts of the world , can the Council state whether it believes the existing international rules and procedures for air safety are sufficient or whether it favours presenting new initiatives aimed at ensuring the safety of citizens in air transport both within the EU and outside its airspace ?

President-in-Office of the Council . - ( FR ) Mr President , in reply to Mr Medina Ortega , air travel is still one of the safest means of transport , but it is true - and I understand everyone 's feelings - that some accidents , especially that which occurred in Spain this summer , remind us of the extremely tragic consequences of such accidents .
Improving the safety of airline passengers is still one of the Council 's main priorities .
I would remind the House that there is a regulation , adopted by Parliament and the Council , establishing a black list of airline companies at risk .
This regulation allows aircraft considered unsafe to be prevented from using Community airspace and is an effective means of improving the application of international safety standards in countries in which the Commission considers that the minimum safety rules are not being respected .
This list is regularly updated .
In this fundamental sector of air traffic safety , another important element is the establishment of the European Aviation Safety Agency , whose mission is to promote the highest possible level of safety and environmental protection by civil aviation .
The Community institutions have also addressed cases of aircraft operated within the Community by third country carriers , i.e. carriers outside the Community , and Community rules have been laid down for granting crew licences , for operations and for safety standards .
Obviously , as the honourable Member rightly says , these rules need to be supplemented and reinforced and the Commission will , I hope , table some proposals as quickly as possible .
These proposals will be examined by the Council and this House within the framework of the regulation procedure with which you are familiar .
We also need to work with the International Civil Aviation Organization which is , of course , a key partner in this sector and the French Presidency is determined to push ahead with air travel safety .
It has already started examining new Commission proposals adopted last June with a view to setting up Community safety rules for airports , air traffic control and aviation services .
( ES ) Thank you very much for your lengthy reply , Mr President-in-Office of the Council .
It was very comprehensive .
My supplementary question is simply that some have said that the increase in accidents is linked to airlines ' efforts to compete with each other in offering cheap flights .
Consumers are very happy to pay less to fly , but I do not know whether the Commission has any studies establishing a link between low-cost flights and the increase in the number of air incidents .
My point relates to this whole question of air safety .
There have been a number of incidents reported where passengers , sometimes British , sometimes of other nationalities , have taken on too much alcohol during the flight and been a danger to other passengers and indeed the whole aircraft .
Do you think that there is a case for not allowing passengers on board aeroplanes who have alcohol with them ?
President-in-Office of the Council . - ( FR ) I think that the Commission should examine all sources of danger within the framework of its proposals .
If it appears - to reply to the last question by Mr Evans - that this is a source , as it may well be , then I agree .
We also need to consider the conduct of passengers within this framework , which allows me to reply to Mr Ortega , because it is not on low-cost flights that this sort of incident occurs , because sales are without doubt more limited .

However , in reply to Mr Ortega , I know of no direct link between low-cost flights , if that is your question , and the number of accidents ; what is true is that there is a link between companies seeking to reduce costs , especially in terms of maintenance , security and the lifetime of aircraft , and the number of accidents .
This is where we need to fight and to ensure through existing committees and , more importantly , the CESAR project , that there is better control of the operations of these companies , especially maintenance operations which , as the enquiry will show , are at the origin of these disasters in certain cases , of which you were unfortunately the victims .
I believe that we really should pay particular attention to this phenomenon .
Thank you , even if I am interrupting .
All we would like are assurances - we are slightly off the point , trespassing on the generosity of the Chair - would you please do something about access to Strasbourg , so that we can fly into Strasbourg Airport and get to this place ?
Strasbourg is a beautiful city but we cannot get here , and that is why we all complain about the sessions here .
President-in-Office of the Council . - ( FR ) I am delighted to be able to reply to Mrs Doyle , of whom I am very fond and for whom I have a great deal of affection .
I would like to point out that we are making a serious effort to improve access to Strasbourg and that , as you know , we are subsidising five airline companies .
The French Government , to change hat for a moment , is spending more than 22 million in order to guarantee that these airlines fly into Strasbourg .
We have also tried to improve rail access between Brussels and Strasbourg with the deviation via Roissy and a link between Thalys and the TGV .
We clearly need to do more .
We shall try and continue .
We are currently discussing how to keep improving services to what you referred to - and I share your feelings here - as this beautiful city .
Subject : Electronic passports
With the absence of a visual check by a responsible officer , what assurances can the Council give that the use of electronic passports at some airports will not lessen security or increase the opportunity for impersonation ?

President-in-Office of the Council . - ( FR ) Mr President , in reply to Mr Evans , the Council actually places great importance on reinforcing controls on the external borders of the European Union , something that has again been emphasised this morning .
We do not want to construct a fortress Europe but we have to bear in mind that the Schengen area has been enlarged and that Schengen must function in a totally effective way , and that it is our common responsibility to combat cross-border crime and to ensure that illegality is completely deterred .
The Council has accordingly seen to it that better use is made of new technology in managing our external borders .
The Commission has issued a wholly welcome communication entitled ' Next steps in managing border controls in the European Union ' , which seems to us to be an excellent proposal .
It is also essential that facilitating controls at border checkpoints , and I can reassure Mr Evans on this , does not bring into question the integrity and security of the Schengen area .
Automated verification of travellers ' identity must not lead to a diminution in border security .
As you know , Regulation 2252 / 04 provides guarantees ; this document establishes precise standards for biometric identifiers to be integrated into passports and travel documents issued by Member States .
These provisions allow passports to become more secure and enable us to fight effectively against document falsification , by establishing a more reliable link between the document and its owner .
The guarantees contained in this regulation must be strengthened and we must continue this initiative - that is the whole idea of the pact on immigration and asylum that President Sarkozy described at some length in the sitting this morning .

What matters is that we have the legal framework in place for action ; what also matters , Mr Evans , is that we now have at the same time , through the pact , a common political will to ensure the security that is essential within the context of an enlarged area of freedom .
Like the minister , I have no wish to make Europe into a fortress , and I want sensible security checks and to use new technology .
But I have witnessed the use of these passports , and I wonder if he can tell me where I am going wrong , because what happens is a person in possession of an electronic passport comes up to a machine , places his or her passport on the reader and then walks through if the passport is in order .
I cannot see how that is doing anything other than checking whether that person is in possession of a valid passport .
What it is not doing is checking that the person has one that has been issued in his or her name .
My understanding , therefore , is that there would be nothing to stop me using your passport , Minister - providing you were to lend it to me - to go through a check , because there is nobody there to see whether the picture and the person is the same , or I could be using the passport of a distinguished person like Mr McMillan-Scott .
I wonder if you can give me an assurance as to where the check is actually taking place concerning the ownership and the actual identity of the person .
President-in-Office of the Council . - ( FR ) That is an easy question , for which I am grateful to you , Mr Evans .
No , I believe most seriously that if there is a loophole at the identity check level , and that is something that I must check , then we must really make sure we have proof of identity .
That seems quite clear to me .
We cannot have passport swaps .
I shall therefore keep your observations in mind .
We shall check what you have said , and you can rest assured that , within the context of measures available to the Council and the work on implementing the Pact on Immigration and Asylum , we shall look once more at whether it is advisable to reinforce this point within the framework of the Schengen area . That must be done .
Subject : Volunteering
Could the Council say if the French Presidency would be supportive of asking Eurostat to recommend implementation of the UN Handbook on non-profit institutions in the system of national accounts in light of the fact that this is one area of the statistical system that touches the citizens of Europe in a direct way and therefore validates the involvement of citizens in voluntary activities by giving it explicit visibility in the statistical system for the first time ?
President-in-Office of the Council . - ( FR ) Mr President , in answer to Mrs Harkin , the Commission , as she knows , undertook discussions within the Committee on Monetary , Financial and Balance of Payments Statistics ; that is Eurostat , I suppose .
At the end of these discussions , the committee considered that additional research needed to be carried out at the academic level in order to define harmonised identification criteria for non-profit institutions , so that reliable comparisons could be made in time and space between these institutions .
Accordingly , this question of statistics is important , because it is true that structures within the voluntary sector are very varied , and we must understand these structures better .
However , what matters , and I should like to assure the honourable Member on this point , is that in the Council we are extremely attached to developing the voluntary sector .
It is an issue for citizens to make the European ambition their own , especially for younger people .
We have seen recently , from the latest studies , that they are not naturally the greatest europhiles , in spite of the opportunities that they have been given .
In November , therefore , the Council 's ' Education , Youth and Culture ' programme should be adopting a recommendation on mobility for young voluntary workers in Europe so as to encourage voluntary work at the European level and so provide a clearer image of Europe , particularly for our younger fellow citizens .
First of all , I thank the presidency for its reply and , indeed , commend the French presidency for its initiative on mobility .
However , your response quotes a letter here from the European Commission which is nothing more than a red herring , because it says that the emphasis was put on the diversity of legal status and the lack of harmonised criteria for identifying non-profit activities in the different countries .
Minister , you are very well aware that 32 countries already produce these NPIs including , I am delighted to say , France , and the Czech Republic , who will be holding the presidency of the Council from January .
So I believe that the Commission is , as I said , introducing red herrings and dragging its heels on this , and , given that France is itself producing these accounts , I would be very pleased to hear that you would at least recommend to Eurostat that they recommend to all EU countries that they produce these accounts .
- ( SK ) More than 100 million Europeans of varying ages and varying religious beliefs and nationalities carry out voluntary work and the social capital represented by active volunteering plays a vital role in local democracy through a multi-layered partnership .
I therefore support the plan to declare 2011 the European Year of Volunteering .
Does the Council not think that we could and should do a lot more in this area up to 2011 than we have done to date ?
( DE ) My question relates to how these statistics are collated .
Time and again , we see that statistics in Europe list the various countries such as Germany , Spain , Poland and so on , but rarely if ever relate to Europe as a whole , the Europe of 27 ; and yet these statistics are then compared against the USA , India or China .
We should endeavour to ensure that the Europe of 27 is visible in these statistics , precisely because voluntary work is particularly important to us .
President-in-Office of the Council . - ( FR ) I believe that it is really important , and I shall reply first to Mrs Pleštinská , then come back to Mrs Harkin and Mr Rübig , to see to it that the voluntary sector has a symbol and that 2011 should be the year of the voluntary sector .
That is why the French Presidency wishes to prepare for this and really to encourage youth mobility and see to it that progress is made in developing voluntary services across Europe .
In reply to the question on statistics , I should like to go back to an exchange with Mrs Doyle .
As Mr Rübig has said , I am truly in favour of a better knowledge of what Europe is doing in community and charitable terms , and also of more transparency .
However , we can also easily perceive what is the extension of the European humanist tradition in relation to other regions of the world , notably the United States , but equally elsewhere , and I am thinking here of what can exist in Asia .
However , and I am no specialist on this question , we must also ensure that there is a good balance between statistical requirements and greater simplicity , and try to simplify and alleviate the burdens on structures that sometimes have few resources .
Personally , I am in favour of good statistical knowledge , of going in the direction of what you are recommending .
I am against uniformity in this area : I believe that it is also important to maintain a certain diversity , and I do not see that this would in any way prevent this good statistical approach .
On the other hand , what appears important to me is to ensure that requirements , the usefulness of which I understand , and which must exist , are proportionate to what we are trying to achieve , to simplify burdens , particularly for those structures that are the most lacking in terms of administration .
Questions 10 and 11 have been merged as they are very similar , but their authors will both get the chance to put supplementary questions to the Minister .
Subject : EU policy on GM products
Do the Presidency and the Council agree that the current EU ' zero tolerance ' policy which bans the import of non-EU approved products - containing an adventitious or low-level presence of GMOs - is causing a major supply problem for EU farming businesses dependent on grain and feed imports ?
These products often contain previously EU-approved GM varieties yet if the smallest trace of unauthorised GM is found they are banned and destroyed .
This process lacks scientific rigour and integrity .
A recent report by the Joint Research Centre ( JRC ) of the Commission has concluded that ' no demonstration of any health effects of GM food products submitted to the regulatory process has been reported so far ' .
Given the finding of the JRC report and given the undue delay in the assessment process of GM varieties , what action will the Presidency take to ensure prompt safety assessments of GM products in the European Union ?
Subject : Discussions on the strategic aspects of GMOs
Member States were recently invited by the President of the European Commission to nominate high-level officials to participate in discussions on the strategic aspects of GMOs .
The issues being addressed within the group include the functioning of the approval procedures , the impact of asynchronous GM authorisation , and debate within the general public on the question of GMOs .
The first meeting of the high-level group was held on 17 July ; another is scheduled for this month .
Can the Council indicate what progress is being made in the discussions and when the high-level group expects to be able to report ?
Can the Council comment on how the objectives and recommendation ( s ) of the high-level group might differ from those of the GM working group , put in place by the Environment Council ?
President-in-Office of the Council . - ( FR ) Mr President , this is my chance to reply in the same terms to Mrs Doyle and Mrs McGuinness , I am pleased to say .
The French Presidency decided to carry on the complex and politically very sensitive debate on GMOs - debates that were begun by the previous presidency in order to arrive at a conclusion on this subject before the end of the year .
Yesterday , Mrs Doyle , Mrs McGuinness , the Environment Council had an exchange of views on GMOs following an informal meeting of environment ministers held last July at Celle Saint-Cloud , as you know .
This discussion will be continued with a view to operational conclusions for the December Council , at the end of the French Presidency .
What at this stage are the directions the debates are taking ?
The first is to strengthen the means for environmental inspections and assessments by harmonising them at European level , and quite clearly , in this connection , I shall not miss the opportunity to report back on the results of these reflections in December .
Within the context of these reflections , we must equally take account of the socio-economic criteria in managing GMO-related risks , and look into how we can improve the application of scientific expertise , establish harmonised labelling thresholds , and finally take into account the fragility of certain sensitive or protected areas .
Therefore , as you know , President Barroso has set up a high-level group to address this question , and I think that you should see with the Commission what stage the work of this group has reached .
No report has been published at this stage .
The group is examining the legislative framework , the associated issues , between trade and the environment , and the rise in the prices for agricultural products and its impact on the GMO issue .
What matters , as I have said , is what has come before the Council , and the need to ensure that new guidelines relating to environmental assessments are adopted quickly so as to take account of the long-term environmental risk of GMOs .
This is what I wanted to point out .
I thank the presidency for their answer , but notwithstanding the awaited report by the high-level group , if the role of the World Trade Organisation means anything , should it not include - at the very least - a unified process for safety assessment and authorisation of GM products traded at global level ?
Because surely we are not saying that the United States , Australian and Japanese consumers are put at greater risk by their GM safety assessment procedures and authorisations , which are extremely efficient ?
Finally , would the presidency not agree that anything other than peer-reviewed , science-based safety assessment and authorisation procedures for GMOs would lack integrity and bring our legislation in this House into disrepute ?
I think your merging of the two questions left me short , if you may , because my question is very specific .
First of all I am not sure that there was full cooperation with this high-level group , but I would like to know what progress , if any , has been made , and when they will report , because it seems to me that Europe is more about activity on GM than on action , and what we need is action , because we have a situation where a very large country like the US , and others , are very happy about the way they assess GM , and Europe wants different criteria .
I hear from your answer that you are looking for much more ' strict ' - whatever that might mean - and therefore leave us with the same problem .
It was actually the Council that asked for the questions to be put together .
President-in-Office of the Council . - ( FR ) I accept my responsibilities .
Mr President , I can assure you that you are not here for nothing .
I accept all my responsibilities in this connection and I apologise with regard to Mrs McGuinness .
In response to Mrs Doyle , on the question of possible reviews , particularly peer reviews , the Council has begun a very fruitful exchange of views with experts from EFSA , in particular as regards environmental risk assessment .
These discussions have made a positive contribution , particularly on the theme linked with reinforcing assessment in matters of the environment , on improving the application of technological expertise , as I have told you , and taking account of certain sensitive areas .
Having a peer review seems to me to be really going in the right direction .
I consider it would be a healthy development .
As regards the concerns expressed by Mrs McGuinness , I believe that we cannot dispense with a rigorous assessment of the long-term environmental consequences of using GMOs .
I am aware of American tendencies in this matter .
As regards European concerns , we must also bear long-term concerns in mind , and therefore be really very rigorous in the assessment that we must conduct .
Subject : Situation in Zimbabwe
Could the Council indicate if it has re-evaluated its stance on the situation in Zimbabwe , due to the fact that at the time of writing the efforts to broker an agreement by Thabo Mbeki have failed and the people of Zimbabwe continue to suffer hardship , while the European Union continues to be a bystander viewing the failed negotiations ?

President-in-Office of the Council . - ( FR ) Mr President , in response to Mr Higgins , we continue to pay extremely close attention to the situation in Zimbabwe and to be very concerned by it .
That is why we have condemned the violence from the beginning of last April .
We have condemned the way in which the elections were conducted , but I shall not return to that subject .
As the European Union , we have tried to get the Security Council to pass a very serious resolution on Zimbabwe .
After the agreement providing for a unity government that was signed under the auspices of the SADC on 15 September , the European Union has approached its partners with a view to forming a credible unity government as quickly as possible , in other words to give effect to the will of the people of Zimbabwe , as expressed on 29 March .
The negotiations are continuing , but after President Mugabe 's plan to reserve the important portfolios for his party ( I remind you that it lost the election , the second round of which was fraudulent ) , these efforts at mediation have failed .
The Council has indicated that it will continue to monitor the situation very closely .
It has , moreover , encouraged the mediation efforts of the SADC , under the leadership of President Mbeki , to arrive at a more satisfactory result with regard to the choice made by the people of Zimbabwe on 29 March .
If these efforts continue to be blocked , we are ready to take additional measures by way of sanctions directed at the Zimbabwean authorities .
Given the very grave humanitarian situation , we do not wish the population to become a victim of this situation , and that is why the Commission has just released an additional amount of EUR 10 million to deal with the situation in which the people of Zimbabwe find themselves .
In conclusion , as regards the economic and social aspect , I should remind Parliament that the Union is ready , once a credible unity government is in place , to adopt measures supportive of the consolidation of democracy and of economic recovery in that country .
I should therefore remind you that we remain vigilant and remind you of the fact that the European Union remains active on all fronts - political , diplomatic , economic and humanitarian - to ensure that justice be given to the people of Zimbabwe .
I have two supplementaries to this question , but this will be the last question . I am afraid that I am going to have to draw things to a close now .
I would like to thank the Minister for his very comprehensive replies .
Anybody who is in the Chamber and has a question down will receive a written reply .
( Interjection from the floor by Gay Mitchell )
I realise your problem , Mr Mitchell .
I am keeping to the time .
If others do not then that is their problem , but I can answer for myself .
I said at the beginning of Question Time that we would finish at 19.00 .
( Interjection from the floor by Gay Mitchell )
We try and maintain some order here , and I appreciate your concern .
( Interjection from the floor by Gay Mitchell )
I note your comments but I do not think I am to blame for that .
( GA ) Mr President-in-Office of the Council , the Council is aware that the NDC ( the National Democratic Conference ) is seeking new elections and that the plans to organise talks on power-sharing in Swaziland have been postponed for a week .
This postponement has arisen from the refusal to provide the opposition leader Morgan Tsvangirai with a passport .
Do you think , Minister , that this is correct or helpful ?
And are you now confident a sustainable long-term arrangement may be established ?
I am just wondering if there has been any engagement directly by the European Union with the stakeholders involved in the political process in Zimbabwe .
Even if it does resolve its political issues in the morning , it will require a huge level of support , both economically and also in relation to building up new trade relations .
I am just wondering if there has been any engagement with stakeholders by the European Union .


President-in-Office of the Council . - ( FR ) First of all , as Mr Higgins has indicated , the situation remains of great concern , and we understand what makes the solutions that have been proposed unacceptable at this time to the leaders of the opposition , but I believe that there is to be a tripartite meeting of the political organs of the SADC , that is of Swaziland , Angola and Mozambique , in Harare on 27 October next .
In response to Mr Burke , it is clearly difficult to keep contact , given the lot that is Mr Tsvangirai 's .
His passport has been confiscated and not returned to him ; he did not come to Swaziland .
The Commission , and equally the President-in-Office of the Council of Ministers , Bernard Kouchner , are quite clearly keeping themselves informed , and in very close contact with the representatives of the SADC and of Mr Mbeki .
For our part , we can only ensure that relations with Zimbabwe are restored , but only when the rule of law is guaranteed and when a satisfactory solution has emerged .
However , we have the maximum contacts that are possible in the current situation , whether with Louis Michel or Bernard Kouchner .
That concludes Question Time .
Questions which have not been answered for lack of time will be answered in writing ( see Annex ) .
( The sitting was suspended at 7.00 p.m. and resumed at 9.00 p.m. )

Defence of parliamentary immunity : see Minutes
Reform programme of the Polish shipyards ( debate )
The next item is the Commission statement on the reform programme of the Polish shipyards .
( PL ) Madam President , I would like to inform you that a Polish trade union delegation is seated in the gallery .
They are going to listen to our debate .
The delegation includes representatives of the Gdańsk , Gdynia and Szczecin shipyards .
I would like to ask you to welcome our friends from Poland .

Thank you , Mr Siwiec ; the delegation is very welcome .
Member of the Commission . - Madam President , the Commission is well aware of the historic importance of the Polish shipyards , and that is why we have been working very hard to find a solution that will allow the restructuring of the sector in a way that provides a livelihood for the regions concerned .
However , we depend on the cooperation of the Polish authorities to arrive at a viable solution .
To be quite clear , the state aid investigation in these cases has been pending for around four years .
The investigation concerns a substantial amount of operating aid to the Szczecin , Gdynia and Gdańsk shipyards .
Without even counting the state guarantees from 2002 until now , the Gdynia shipyard received from the Polish state - which means from the Polish taxpayers - aid amounting to around EUR 167 000 per worker .
That is approximately EUR 24 000 per worker per year , and that means that the subsidy to each shipyard worker is at least double the average annual income of Polish workers .
Even without counting the state guarantees , the total aid received since 2002 by the Gdynia and Szczecin shipyards amount in nominal value to around EUR 700 million and EUR 1 billion respectively .

Despite all that money , the yards and the future of the workers remain vulnerable .
That , I would stress , is what really scares me .
I think that the future of the workers needs to be taken into account .
They have avoided the painful but necessary restructuring that , for example , the German and the Spanish shipyards have undertaken and which Malta is also preparing for at this moment .
At all times in those past four years the Commission has had an open door for the successive Polish governments .
I have met quite a number of ministers and prime ministers of Polish governments .
We have tried again and again to reach an agreement and , unfortunately - and I say it with a sad heart - the Polish authorities did not make use of those possibilities .
In July of this year the Commission came to the conclusion that the latest restructuring plans did not ensure the viability of the shipyards , but , again , conscious of the importance of the issue for the Polish economy and for Polish society , we , the Commission , showed flexibility and offered two more months for new final plans to be presented by 12 September .
During the summer , Commission officials remained constantly available and gave feedback to the Polish authorities on the draft submitted to them .
I have now carefully assessed the restructuring plans submitted by the Polish authorities on 12 September .
Unfortunately , I cannot see how to conclude that those revised final plans will ensure the viability of the yards .
Indeed , the plans require even more public money to be pumped in in future , including money for the day-to-day operating aid .
It should also be underlined that the restructuring plans submitted on 12 September - and I am talking about the plans of the Polish Government - foresee job reductions of approximately 40 % .
However , these sacrifices would be made without giving any prospect of sustainable employment to the remaining workers , as the yards would very likely not become viable and would continue to need state support at the expense of the Polish taxpayers .
That is not an acceptable outcome .
It is not acceptable from the EU competition law perspective , but also not acceptable for the future of the shipyards .
Not acceptable to their workers and more generally for the Polish economy .
Therefore , as the situation currently stands , I do not see how to avoid the adoption of negative positions on the Gdynia and Szczecin shipyards .
But the Commission is not in the business of just saying ' no ' .
We have been working actively to help the Polish authorities come up with a solution that would ensure a viable commercial future for the economic centres of Gdańsk , Gdynia and Szczecin and ensure sustainable jobs .
According to this scenario , the assets of the Gdynia and the Szczecin shipyards would be sold on market terms in several bundles .
The assets would be put into bundles following an open , unconditional and non-discriminatory tender ; and the remaining shell company would use the proceeds from the sale of the assets to repay the aid received over the years and would be liquidated , and the buyers of the assets would then be able to speedily resume economic activities at the shipyard sites , without the burden of having to repay the large quantities of state aid received by the yards over the years .
They may re-employ even more people than would be the case if the restructuring plans of 12 December were implemented .
I can only assume that any investor willing to take on the yards - or at least some of their current liabilities - would be even happier to acquire the most important productive assets free of debts and develop them in a competitive and sustainable way .
The final outcome would probably be positive in two respects : on the one hand , the number of workers left without a job would be lower than foreseen in the restructuring plan submitted by the Polish authorities and , on the other hand , the workers re-employed by the purchasers of the yards ' assets would have much more stable working prospects within viable undertakings , because the burden of past debts would have been lifted .
That solution , which would be in line with the recent precedent of Olympic Airways , would allow a fresh restart of economic activities at the shipyard sites , also benefiting the workers there .
The Commission has raised that possibility with the Polish authorities .
We have done that several times , and I sincerely hope that they will take advantage of our flexibility to bring us a concrete proposal .
Technical discussions on the possible implementation of the ' Olympic Airways ' solution for the Gdynia and the Szczecin shipyards are being held between the Polish authorities and Commission officials .
As for Gdańsk , I think there is a good chance of reaching a positive outcome if there remains flexibility and good will on both sides .
You will naturally ask me : why this approach for Gdańsk ?
There are two reasons : firstly , Gdańsk has already been sold to a private operator which injected fresh money into it and , secondly , this yard 's liabilities for past aid are far more limited compared to the Gdynia and the Szczecin shipyards .
On the Commissions side , we have already indicated to the Polish authorities our position in assessing the compensatory measures needed to comply with EC state aid rules .
Because the yard has received less aid in the past , we can be less demanding in this respect .
The quid pro quo for the openness on the Commission 's part is that the Polish authorities must now submit a draft restructuring plan for Gdańsk in order to permit any outstanding issues to be discussed , and so far - and I regret this - we have not received such a plan , and it is essential that the Polish authorities provide it quickly .
Moreover , the Polish Government can request support from the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund - an application which is likely to be successful - and the size of the intervention would depend on the amount of co-funding the Polish Government is ready to invest , as the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund co-finances a maximum of 50 % of the cost .
The European Globalisation Fund analysed by the Commission to date the amount per person to be supported , ranged between EUR 500 and EUR 10 000 from the fund , to which must be added an equal amount to be funded by the Member States .
To conclude , I can say that the Commission has been very forthcoming in assessing these cases and has shown a considerable amount of flexibility .
We have done everything we can , and we will continue to work with the Polish authorities to find an economically viable and socially sustainable solution which is in line with EC competition law and established Commission precedents .
Now the ball is in the court of the Polish authorities .
The future of the shipyards and of their workers depends on the Polish authorities ' willingness to cooperate with the Commission to quickly find a positive solution in the framework I outlined earlier .
I would like to appeal to the Members and their sense of discipline and responsibility , because we have very tight deadlines .
This evening there are very many items on the agenda , and so I would ask you to respect the time limits scrupulously .
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - ( PL ) Madam President , Commissioner Kroes , thank you for your presence here today and for addressing the matter of the shipyards , as well as the positive note at the end of your speech .
Of course , we acknowledge the principle of competition , and we want European companies to make profits and ensure a decent wage for their workers .
Polish shipyards have , for a long time , had difficulties in applying these principles .
However , the Commission 's negative decision regarding the shipyards will now result in their bankruptcy , and this situation is difficult to accept .
We accept that the economic and social repercussions of such a bankruptcy would be regional , or national at most , and that the European Union is currently also dealing with a global crisis .
However , there is no point in adding the plight of Polish shipyards and Polish shipyard workers to the general economic slow-down .
The European and the Polish shipbuilding industries are worth saving .
That is why I cannot accept a negative decision , and I am asking for this decision to be postponed , to allow time for the Polish government and for investors to act .
We therefore await a positive signal from the European Commission .
First of all , during the restructuring period , this will provide an opportunity to ensure that the companies in question remain active shipyards .
If the shipyard structure is split up as a result of privatisation , it will not be possible to revive the shipbuilding industry .
Secondly , a positive outcome will involve keeping shipyard workers in their jobs or finding suitable new work for them , whilst maintaining continuity in terms of production and employment .
Thirdly , during this period , a small amount of protective action will be necessary to maintain production and ensure that the changes are sustainable .
It would be worth identifying the optimal solutions to this situation and I strongly believe that Commissioner Kroes and the Commission will agree to them .
on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( DE ) Madam President , my group requested this debate with you , Commissioner , because we disagree with you in practically every respect .
In the current global economic climate , you cannot turn around and say that , just because certain regulatory conditions have not been met , the shipyards must be closed .
If you close the shipyards now , in this economic climate , as you just stated , you will throw the entire region into economic disaster , and that is not on .
The Polish Government - as well as you in the Commission and we in Parliament - therefore need more time .
In such a tense economic situation , you cannot simply say ' certain points have not been met , end of story ' .
My second point is this .
The argument that EUR 24 000 are being spent on each job is all well and good , but I will tell you something : I used to be mayor of a town in Germany where there was a coal mine in operation , and we were told that too much money was being put into each job , and so the mine was closed down .
It took 20 years - 20 years - until we got back half of the jobs that were lost .
It will be no different in the Polish shipyard cities .
If you say today that it is all over , it will take at least two decades for you to restructure this region .
That is why it is necessary to focus efforts on keeping the sites open , not on closing them .
I call on both the Commission and the Polish Government - as do my colleagues in my group - to make every effort to retain Poland 's shipyards , at all three sites .
That is one of the decisive points that we want from you .
If the Polish authorities have not worked fast enough , if the action plans , the business plans , that you mentioned , Mrs Kroes , are not yet available , then I ask you : must the workers at the Polish shipyards be punished because certain authorities , or the government , have not done their job ?
That is more or less what you are telling us : the workers are paying the price for the shortcomings of the government or the administration , and that is absolutely unacceptable .
Therefore , mobilising the Globalisation Adjustment Fund is a good thing , but you need to mobilise it so that we can provide help on the ground , so that we can retain the sites , in order to preserve a competitive Polish shipbuilding industry .
This is also an important point for those of us Social Democrats who are not from Poland , and it is also why I am speaking in this debate .
The Polish shipyards , sites such as Gdańsk and Szczecin , were an important symbol for us all of the Polish people 's democratic struggle against dictatorship .
That is another reason why these yards must not be closed .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - ( PL ) Madam President , the problem of the Polish shipyards is nothing new .
It has developed over a number of years .
Successive governments have unfortunately failed to address the problem in an appropriate way .
Why did this happen ?
This is neither the place nor the time to discuss that particular question .
Those responsible will be called to account in accordance with Polish democratic procedures .
However , the situation today is difficult .
It is understandable that the Commission could not ignore this failure to act .
On the other hand , we have to stress the fact that different scenarios involve different costs .
The option of improving the situation by stating that , de facto , the shipyards should be closed , clearly involves certain serious consequences .
Above all , there will be job cuts .
The workers affected may be hired again in the future but , until such a time , they face great uncertainty and serious difficulties .
In addition to this , we have to take another factor into account .
I do not want to return to issues that have already been raised , but the whole matter of closing the Polish shipyards , and perhaps the difficult period we are facing , has arisen during the period of European Parliament elections .
It would be very unfortunate if these decisions were to provide ammunition for people , and there are unfortunately quite a number of these people in Poland , who still oppose our membership of the European Union .
Therefore , I would like to appeal to the Commission to be as flexible as possible with regard to Gdańsk .
Of course , for our part , we will also take action in Poland to ensure that the Polish Government also acts with determination and flexibility .
( Applause )
on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - ( DE ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , Commissioner , on behalf of the Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance , I call on the Commission to contribute to safeguarding the future of the shipyards .
We are not talking here about short-term restructuring , as is often the case in western countries .
We must not forget that these shipyards bear a heavy burden from the past - not only the burden of the socialist state economy , but also the burden of mistakes made during the accession process , in that you as a Commission did not take into consideration the fact that this country was undergoing a difficult process of transformation and imposed , back then , requirements that were unrealistic and did not work towards socio-economically appropriate development .
These are mistakes in the process for which you have to share the responsibility .
It therefore makes absolutely no sense now to refuse State aid and destroy jobs , and then to support the redundant workers using the Globalisation Adjustment Fund .
What is the use , at this point , of subsidising the unemployed ?
That would be a huge disappointment for the local people , and the EU would be responsible .
It makes more sense to initiate appropriate development for these shipyards , in order to give the three cities of Szczecin , Gdańsk and Gdynia a sustainable future .
This is an opportunity that we should be supporting , not just reacting to in hindsight .
It is the only option that I can see in this case .
The option we have is for the Commission to say that there will be State aid , but that , within the framework of this State aid , we want these workplaces to be modernised from an environmental point of view , so as to guarantee the long-term future of the sites and to ensure that workers have good long-term jobs there .
on behalf of the UEN Group . - ( PL ) Madam President , the seat of the European Parliament , where we find ourselves today , is viewed as a symbol of Franco-German reconciliation .
That is the only reason why the European Parliament maintains two seats equipped to hold plenary sessions , namely in Brussels and in Strasbourg .
European taxpayers pay several hundred million euros per year for this purpose .
Polish shipyards , particularly the Gdańsk shipyard , are a symbol of the struggle against the Communist government .
They symbolise the fall of the Iron Curtain which had divided Europe in two .
That is why the flagpoles which stand outside the European Parliament buildings , and which fly flags of the Member States , were made in the Gdańsk shipyards .
It is thanks to the heroic actions of Polish shipyard workers , who fought for a re-united Europe , that today we are able to meet here together .
These people deserve our respect , they deserve a dignified life and a decent living .
The closure of the shipyards , which is what the European Commission proposes , will involve the brutal dismissal of several thousand qualified workers , and in addition to this , a further eighty thousand people will lose their livelihoods .
Such a move could result in mass economic migration .
Polish shipyard workers do not want this to happen , they want to stay in their homeland and work in modern , profitable shipyards .
I therefore appeal to Commissioner Kroes - let us not destroy this great potential .
Let us give Polish shipyards a chance to recover from financial ruin .
Madam President , I am aware that the current Polish government , and the Treasury Minister in particular , made a lot of mistakes last year .
However , tens of thousands of innocent people should not have to pay for Aleksander Grad 's incompetence .
Especially now , at a time when Western European states are pumping tens of millions of euros into their banking systems , without a thought for the principles of free competition , a negative decision from the Commission would be interpreted in Poland as a sign of bad faith .
( Applause )
Madam President , the time has come for the Commission to review its strategy with regard to shipyards in the European Union .
The shipbuilding industry of our countries has been sacrificed at the alter of neoliberalism and there is a serious risk of destroying what remains , whether in Poland or Portugal .
It is now clear that the global strategy pursued by the European Commission in relation to the competitiveness of the Community shipbuilding sector is inadequate .
While there are countries where the shipbuilding industry has recovered , in others this is not happening .
Portugal has witnessed the destruction of its most important shipyards , such as Lisnave in Almada , which employed thousands of workers .
To date , no rehabilitation measures have been pursued in that area .
We still have the shipyards of Viana do Castelo , which are strategic for this whole region and which need support for their modernisation in order to avoid serious new problems .
That is why we must express our solidarity with the workers of the shipbuilding industry , whether in Poland or Portugal or any other Member State , and we must insist on solutions that make this industry viable .
If special measures can be adopted for the financial crisis , why are identical measures refused for the shipbuilding industry ?
That is my question , Commissioner .
on behalf of the IND / DEM Group . - ( PL ) Madam President , Commissioner , solidarity involves working together , and never working against each other .
The problem of the Polish shipyards poses a fundamental question - do we serve the economy or does the economy serve us ?
In the case of banks , whose greed and incompetent management precipitated the financial crisis , the finger was pointed at people , or rather , at bankers .
Thus , the world is using taxpayers ' money to rescue the financial system , even though pure economics would require judgment to be passed on the guilty parties and the banks to collapse .
Unfortunately , a different philosophy is being applied to the case of the Polish shipyards .
Is a banker a better person than a shipyard worker ?
Polish shipyards symbolise the changes which led to the fall of the Berlin wall and the creation of a new Europe .
Banks have made no such contribution to our history .
However , it is the banks that we are helping , while we delay the decision regarding the matter of the shipyards .
The difficult situation facing Polish shipyards is not the fault of the workers , neither is it due to a lack of skill in building ships .
Bad management , political games and murky financial interests linked to the collapse of the shipyards are to blame .
While many shipyards in the old Member States of the European Union received state aid , the Gdańsk shipyard , a symbol of the struggle for freedom and human rights , was being destroyed for political reasons .
The financial ruin of the Polish shipyards is of interest to those who expect large profits from taking over their assets and the attractive land on which the shipyards stand .
The collapse of the shipyards will clearly also benefit competitors , including those from outside Europe .
It is worth stressing that the entire European Union 's share of the global shipbuilding industry is three times smaller than that of South Korea alone , which subsidises its shipbuilding industry .
Ladies and gentlemen , it turns out that a significant proportion of state aid earmarked for the shipyards was not used for this purpose .
This matter should be thoroughly investigated .
Commissioner Kroes , creating development opportunties for Polish shipyards will not only secure the livelihoods of thousands of Polish shipyard workers and their families , as well as those employed in related industries .
It is also an opportunity to develop a modern Polish economy , and is in the long-term interest of the European Union , which should support its shipbuilding industry .
Thus , hitting the Polish shipyards is at odds with the Lisbon Strategy .
( Applause )
( PL ) Madam President , Commissioner , the situation facing Polish shipyards today certainly requires immediate action on the part of the government , the entire shipbuilding sector and the European Commission .
Instead of privatising the shipyards , they should be nationalised with a view to implementing a comprehensive restructuring programme .
What sense is there in granting any sort of assistance , if the only solution is privatisation , and the shipyards are to be owned by entities from outside the European Union ?
That would not only interfere with EU competition rules , but would also involve the loss of a strategic sector of the Polish economy , as more than 100 000 people are currently employed in shipbuilding and in related industries .
Against the background of the global economic crisis , the support recently offered to banks will , de facto , lead to their nationalisation and bring them under state control .
State aid is granted in order to make a business profitable through restructuring .
Such action , for example , could save the Polish shipyard industry .
Since 2005 , the European Commission has been asking what the public state aid granted to Polish shipyards has been spent on .
It would be good if the Commission applied equivalent criteria to similar activities carried out by shipyards in other parts of the European Union .
Instead of closing down shipyards without carefully considering such a step , Poland should call those responsible for the improper management of these companies to account , starting with the management and ending with the central administration .
The people responsible for making the wrong decisions in relation to the shipyards should be identified , rather than punishing Polish taxpayers , whose contributions will fund the state aid granted .
I turn to you , Madam Commissioner , to ask you to act judiciously .
We need time to take appropriate and effective action .
I am sure this time will not be wasted .
( Applause )
( PL ) Madam President , everyone in my country expects a positive decision from the Commission .
We should work to ensure a positive outcome .
We should assist with restructuring and modernising Polish shipyards , rather than threatening their closure .
The closure of the shipyards in Gdynia , Gdańsk and Szczecin will lead to the collapse of an entire sector of the economy .
Hundreds of thousands of people will lose their jobs and people will take to the streets .
Is that what we want ?
There are many arguments in favour of saving the Polish shipbuilding sector .
First of all , experts agree that global demand for ships is rising rapidly .
Secondly , the shipyards have full order books for the next few years , which will guarantee their profitability during this period .
Thirdly , Polish shipyards have qualified staff and excellent technology , which is a recipe for success in terms of competition with Asian shipyards .
Fourthly , the collapse of the shipyards , and the subsequent mass redundancies , will also place a greater burden on Poland 's social security system .
The Commissioner 's inflexibility should perhaps make us pause to think , especially when we examine the situation whilst bearing in mind the enormous sums spent by certain European countries on saving banks threatened by the financial crisis .
Are the two cases really that different ?
Or perhaps it is only the good will of the Commission that is lacking ?
Once again , I would like to ask for a positive resolution to the problem of the Polish shipyards .
( Applause )
( PL ) Madam President , I am the Member for Western Pomerania .
Like Gdańsk and Gdynia , Szczecin , as a regional capital , regards its shipyard as one of its symbols .
Commissioner , Ladies and gentlemen , we are currently in the throes of a financial crisis , a crisis of banking institutions and a crisis over the ratification of the reform treaty .
The age of liberalism is drawing to an end , and therefore the Commission needs to become more flexible on the matter of state aid , and not just towards the banks .
It appears that one bank worker is worth much more in state aid than one Polish shipyard worker .
I propose a motion to recognise the expediency of the state aid given to the Polish shipyards .
As state aid , it should not need to be repaid .
There has been a delay in reforming the shipbuilding industry .
The Commission should not punish 100 000 people in Poland , as the Chairman Martin Schulz put it , because of the neglect and callousness of three governments .
So where do things stand now ?
The shipyards have investors waiting for a positive decision .
The shipyards have restructuring programmes .
If these need improvement , that is the Commission 's job , as well as the Polish Government 's .
We know what ships can be built , and what else besides vessels can be produced .
The workers and trade unions are being unusually cooperative .
So let us reform the shipyards without shocks , without bankruptcies , without redundancies , and without terminating contracts with suppliers and customers .
We must make the shipyards efficient and competitive .
This cannot be done in just a few weeks .
It will need at least one year , and that is what I am proposing .
You are well aware , Commissioner , that time is needed , and your parallel with Olympic Airways would appear to be inappropriate for the situation the shipyards are in .
One year is not much when the fate of almost 100 000 families hangs in the balance .
( Applause )
( PL ) Madam President , there is growing bitterness and anger in Poland .
Public opinion cannot understand why the European Commission wants to force the Polish shipbuilding industry into bankruptcy .
The question people are asking increasingly is : whom does this benefit most ?
Will the destruction of this industry really be a step in the development of Europe ?
In the face of a world crisis , when the financial sector is being given subsidies of the order of hundreds of billions , is it sensible or reasonable to demand the return of mere tens of millions in aid given to the shipyards some years back ?
Is this the time to kill off employers and deprive sub-contractors of their main clients ?
Are we really prepared for the knock-on effect which , in the face of the present crisis , may have disastrous consequences ?
I hope that the rumours of the influence of lobbyists on the Commission 's hard line on this have no basis in fact .
The idea of solidarity , which , in the eyes of the people of Poland , was born in the shipyards , in simple terms means that we should all look after each other , unless the Commission believes , like some of the creatures in Orwell 's Animal Farm , that all Europeans are equal , but some are more equal than others .
( PL ) Madam President , I ask the European Commission to accept the restructuring plans for the combined Gdynia and Gdańsk shipyards , and for the Szczecin Shipyard .
The Commission should accept these plans not because the Gdańsk Shipyard is a symbol .
Being a symbol is important , particularly if it is of the rank of the Gdańsk Shipyard , but even this does not release it from the need to respect the law and general rules .
The restructuring plans should be adopted for other reasons - because they are sound , and they are probably the only solution possible .
This is because they address the need to modernise shipbuilding , and their implementation will mean upholding the principles of free competition , because it will mean privatisation , and as a result the shipyards will be able to operate independently under market conditions .
We should be pleased that the current Polish Government is the first in many years which is really trying to help shipbuilding out of its difficult position .
Mr Bielan is greatly mistaken here , because it is thanks to Minister Gradów that we now have the opportunity for a permanent resolution to these problems .
This morning , President Sarkozy said to this House ' we would like Europe to be united . '
Unity also involves an understanding that it is worth creating an opportunity for the rescue of the Polish shipyards .
Adopting the restructuring plans would provide such an opportunity .
In fact , President Sarkozy also said , ' Europe needs strong industry .
Europe has to produce cars and ships . '
If the European Commission does reject the restructuring plans , it will mean yet another European country that will stop building ships .
A logical consequence of today 's appeal by the French Presidency should be to adopt the restructuring plans for the Polish shipyards .
Then we will have the chance of European consensus on this matter , with Parliament , the Commission and the Council jointly contributing to the rescue of the Polish shipyards .
( PL ) - Commissioner , I cannot agree with one single word of the liberal views that you have expressed here .
You proposed quartering the assets of Poland 's shipyards , selling them in an unconditional tender , and then putting them in the hands of private investors .
In whose interest , I wonder , is this proposition ?
It is definitely not in the interests of the shipyard workers , nor in the interests of the shipyards themselves , but of the investors .
I would also like to tell you that the proposal you have tabled is unfortunately not possible under Polish law , as it simply means insolvency .
Why did you and the Commission not propose quartering the assets of European banks and selling them off in an unconditional tender ?
Today governments are proposing 10 billion for guarantees for Holland , 10.5 billion for France , 400 billion for Germany , because Europe is a place of social values and solidarity .
I know that some Polish governments have made many mistakes .
Unfortunately they have to be rectified now , and the Polish Government needs time now - at least one year - to ensure that these mistakes do not hit Polish workers .
I appeal to you for more time .
I appeal to you for social sensitivity and economic common sense .
The Polish shipyards are European shipyards .
( PL ) - Madam President , I remember how some fifteen years ago representatives of the Szczecin Shipyard informed me of the huge amounts of aid the EU and Germany had been giving to the German shipbuilding industry because of competition from the Szczecin Shipyards .
I say this now so that it does not suddenly emerge that Brussels applies double standards , that the EU has better and worse shipyards , equal and more equal shipyards , shipyards which are worthy of the Commission 's benevolence , and those worthy only of nit-picking .
First the leaders of the four largest Member States , then the eurozone countries , and finally all 25 Member States blithely decided to hand out millions of euro to save banks employing hundreds of people , whilst at the same time putting in the balance assistance to shipyards employing thousands , and tens of thousands if you include sub-contractors .
Polish shipyard workers should not have to pay the high cost of redundancy in the strange tug-of-war between the European Commission and the present Polish Government .
It is too easy for the Commission to make a decision that will decide whether the Szczecin and Gdynia shipyards sink or swim .
If the Commission is to make controversial decisions of this kind , at least give the partiesto the dispute some time .
Accept the creation of a committee of experts , and do not turn your backs on Poland 's shipbuilders and their families .
( PL ) Madam President , I have heard the debates on the Polish shipyards with satisfaction , and believe that the majority of the Polish delegation has proved up to the task and put forward water-tight arguments , whilst at the same time refraining from pinning the blame on anyone .
We cannot agree to the liquidation , which ultimately will result in the assets of the shipyards being broken up .
You cited the example of the Greek airline , where liquidation allowed it to offload its debts and to continue operating .
Unfortunately , under Polish law insolvency does not allow for a company to undergo such therapy and to come out leaner and fitter .
The therapy would kill the Polish shipyards .
But the burden of debt will never allow the shipyards to operate profitably .
In a Polish newspaper interview , you said that rescuing debt-ridden banks is a completely different matter from debt-ridden shipyards .
The shipyards may have been poorly managed , and difficult restructuring may have been repeatedly postponed , but one thing is certain , and that is that they did not resort to such downright irresponsible and dubious dealings as the banking sector did .
It is the Polish taxpayer who has paid for the mistakes of the Polish shipyards , while we are all paying , and will continue to pay , for the mistakes of Europe 's banks .
This debate has shown that there is agreement on reforming the shipyards in a way that gives real hope for them to operate profitably in the future .
We are all aware that if the Commission accepts our arguments , and Poland squanders this opportunity , there certainly will not be another .
( PL ) Madam President , Commissioner , is this not a time to acknowledge that something new is happening in Europe , and in the world ?
Is this not a time for a slight shift in our sensibilities and our thinking ?
Is it not time for us to admit that there are not two sides in this conflict , but only one ?
One side on which we are together , and in which we want to do something good ?
Is this not a time to show Polish workers and the Polish people that the European Union actually can do good in this particular situation ?
I would like to encourage you to come over to the good side .
I would like to encourage you to strengthen your sensibility and your imagination , and stand on this new side , because right now the course of history is shifting , and you have the opportunity of being on the good side .
( Applause )

- ( PL ) Madam President , the banks and financial institutions have had hundreds of billions of euro made instantly available to them to protect the free market and the European Union .
Not even a nominal sum has been made available the Polish shipyards , while the financial institutions were those whose speculation led to the world crisis , and a more than 30 % appreciation in the Polish currency led to the collapse of the shipbuilding industry there .
Today the Union is giving aid to those responsible for the crisis from the pockets of its citizens , while the victims are liquidated .
The sentence imposed on Poland 's shipyards is also a gift to Germany 's shipyards , which after 1989 received hundreds of billions of Deutschmarks in non-repayable subsidies .
The loss of more than 100 000 jobs , mainly in Poland , is a price the people of Poland , and not the European Union , will pay .
Should the people and the places which triggered the Solidarity movement , the fall of the Berlin wall , and the liberation of Europe , fall victim to arbitrary decisions from Brussels which have been taken in the interests of speculators who want to make a killing over the rubble and wasteland of the shipyard ?
We demand decisions by the Commission which will help to rescue and develop the shipbuilding industry .
( PL ) Madam President , Commissioner , after so many speeches , and mostly Polish ones , I have only two comments .
First of all , I refer to the letter which the Polish delegation in the PPE-DE Group sent to President Barroso to remind him that , behind the iron curtain , shipbuilding was regarded as a Polish speciality .
Hence the relatively high level of technology and good quality of human capital .
This was a kind of dowry , which we brought to a united Europe , and this can be seen in the small and medium-sized enterprises that are performing well today , but is concealed also the in potential - including the human potential - that resides in the three shipyards we are discussing today .
Today , the credibility of plans for the shipyards is determined by the interest of current and potential private investors , who want to risk their own money in the future of these sites .
My second remark is about the wisdom of competition policy in the present unsettled times .
This wisdom cannot simply end at ensuring fair relations between competitors in the European area .
It should also face the global situation and take that into account .
It must face up to competitors who sometimes play a different game - while we play football in Europe , they play rugby .
The fact that the results are not always good can be seen from an example from beyond Poland 's backyard .
You have probably heard of the Aker Group , the most powerful shipbuilding group in modern Europe , which brought together Scandinavian , French , German and even Brazilian shipbuilding , I suppose to counter competition from the Far East .
But the Aker Group has long since gone .
It has become STX of Korea .
Something did not quite work out there .
So it is all the more important in our troubled times to make decisions which will bring stability rather than danger , and that also applies to the Polish shipyards .
( Applause )
( PL ) Madam President , Commissioner , you have put forward a plan which really can become a basis for the successful restructuring of Poland 's shipyards .
The Polish Government has already started intensive work on this plan , but the key factor is time .
We appeal to you for suspension by the Commission of its decision regarding the shipyards .
We appeal for more time for the Polish authorities to prepare a programme which can promise success , and which will save 100 000 jobs in Poland .
It will also help Europe retain an important industry capable of competing in the international arena .
I have at least two reasons for asking for more time .
Firstly , the plan you propose requires considerable legislative changes in Poland , and this cannot be done in a matter of weeks , but will take several months .
Secondly , the current situation affects us all .
The financial crisis threatens a general European crisis .
The last thing that Europe needs right now , Commissioner , is the collapse of an entire industry .
( Applause )
( PL ) Madam President , there are three issues I would like to raise in this debate .
Firstly , the financial aid that has been given to the Polish shipyards is targeted aid .
In consequence , the European Commission should not demand its repayment .
Secondly , the support for Poland 's shipyards is support for European shipbuilding , just as was the support at one time given to the East German shipbuilding industry .
The European Union needs a modern , productive shipbuilding industry , from which European shipping operators will order vessels .
Thirdly , the levels of state aid that Polish shipyards have received until now , and the amount of aid predicted for the future , are nominal compared with the almost EUR 2 billion in aid reported to have been placed at the disposal of Europes 's private banking sector .
What is more , the governments of some Member States are making such hasty decisions on this that they do not even have time to inform the European Commission of them .
The European Commission 's suggestions , that the best solution for the Polish shipyards would be to restructure them by setting up separate production companies , is unacceptable , as this would most likely mean dismemberment of the assets of the shipyards , thereby depriving the yards of their ability to build ships .
( PL ) Madam Commissioner , on the one hand I appreciate your understanding of the historical and moral dimensions of these shipyards .
On the other , I believe that you are too intelligent not to understand that the economic argument no longer holds water .
In my view , what we are doing for the banks and what we are failing to do for the shipyards does not stand up to scrutiny .
I also believe that in a difficult situation , we need to make courageous decisions .
Perhaps this is that opportunity .
Thirdly , if I were to paint a gloomy scenario of bankruptcy and of assets being sold off to investors , probably somewhere outside Poland , as there are none in our country , I imagine it would be the same as Siemens or Airbus being managed by the Koreans .
The point is , that if such a large national industry as shipbuilding were in other hands , would Poland and Europe benefit from this ?
( PL ) Madam President , Commissioner , as in July and September I twice asked a question to which I did not receive a written answer , I would like to ask it orally now .
The question was whether it was true that on 20 June at the meeting between the European Commission and a delegation of Ulstein Group ( one of the investors ) , a certain Mr Soukup , representing the Commission - and I quote the European Commission 's notes here - when asked about the suggested purchase price for the Szczecin Nowa shipyard , indicated that , bearing in mind the high liabilities and losses , it would not be high .
In this context , he asked why the Ulstein Group was not considering buying the assets after the eventual insolvency proceedings which will be initiated when the decision has been made for repayment of the aid .
He stressed that if the assets in insolvency are taken over , there would be no possibility of support for restructurisation , but it would , however , be possible to receive assistance as part of regional support for new investments and for creating new jobs .
In my opinion , as an experienced businessman , this constitutes suggesting to an investor to hold back and to act against the company 's interests .
Was this the case , Commissioner ?
( PL ) The Gdansk Shipyard , the cradle of solidarity , the chief actor in the struggle against communism , a shipyard which suffered discrimination and which by the political decisions of the communists was brought to a poor financial condition , today awaits a positive decision from the European Commission .
The same can be said of the entire shipbuilding industry .
Polish shipbuilding is not alone in depending on this decision , for the situation of the European Union 's shipbuilding industry in the world also depends on it .
There is the problem of competition from Korea , and from countries which not only give public subsidies , but which reduce standards of employment , and which do not respect the rights of workers .
Here the competition will not be fair competition , if the shipyards are given worse treatment than the banks , which used unfair means to encourage mortgage lending .
( PL ) Madam President , Commissioner , the collapse of the Polish shipbuilding industry is necessary neither to Poland nor to the European Union .
We therefore have to find a solution together .
Firstly , the European Commission needs to withdraw its demands for repayments of public funding , particularly as the bulk of these were backed by government guarantees to the borrowers .
Secondly , asking the shipyards to pay up at a time when the European Union is retreating from the market economy and nationalising the banks is unfair and undermines the purpose of the European Union .
Thirdly , the economy in the European Union and in Poland must develop .
Development cannot be based solely on liquidating or limiting the production of individual industries .
Fourthly , the desire for liquidating the shipyards , the birthplace of the Solidarity movement and the changes in Europe , may result in a defensive reaction of public dissatisfaction on a large scale , which nobody needs at the moment .
And fifthly , in the European Union almost one hundred million people are already living on the threshold of biological survival .
Why multiply poverty ?
Madam President , we are without doubt witnessing a crisis of confidence in the European institutions , a crisis in Ireland , Holland and France .
But not in Poland .
At least , not so far .
Poland has confidence in the European institutions .
Unfortunately , if the shipyards are eventually prevented from operating and gradually reforming , Poland , too , may experience a crisis of confidence in the institutions of the European Union , because it is obvious to everyone that there are two measures , two standards : they were different in the case of the former East Germany , and they are different for the banks .
We can speak of the differences of scale , but this will not be understood by those who are losing their jobs .
When I had the honour of visiting the Polish shipbuilders with the Commissioner , I had the impression - and probably the correct impression - that you want to find a good solution .
I therefore ask you to find what is really the best solution possible , and to give these shipyards a chance . Thank you very much .


I apologise to Mr Janowski , Mr Wojciechowski and Mr Pęk , but I am afraid it is not possible to continue .
I was active in trade unions for 30 years and I understand the tragedy and drama involved , but I must give the floor to Commissioner Kroes .
Member of the Commission . - Madam President , I am impressed by honourable Members ' involvement with this dossier and I have paid great attention to all the remarks made this evening .
I want to do my utmost to give you an answer and , if you will allow me , I shall take a little time and try to explain what the reality is at the moment .
Mr Buzek started by giving an explanation of the situation in Poland , and he rightly mentioned that we should be prepared to offer a positive solution to maintain business activities .
We are offering a positive solution to maintain business activities .
If investors are interested in shipbuilding , as some say they are - and we got that message not only from one member of the government but also from different sides - then they can bid for the assets , and that is what I was underlining .
Please take into account that , as far as the Commission is concerned , the solution could result in viable economic activities in Poland .
We have to talk about viable economic activities , because I do not want to present the workers who are involved with something that is not viable .
It has taken too much time .
All those people have the right to know what is going on and what their future will be , and no one is expecting that we will just say : let us go on , what the hell , what can we do now , let us just continue with what we have been doing .
We are aware that this is not a viable situation any more .
Having said that , we , the Commission , did our utmost to come up with a solution .
Therefore , as I said earlier , firstly , for Gdańsk , the Polish Government should offer us a business plan in which there is a viable future .
All the craftsmen there can do an extremely good job and are already doing a job which there is good reason to think could be expanded - after all , it is privatised , the owners have made investments and there is a possibility that this can continue .
However , we badly need a business plan , and that is what I am asking you for .
You who are so involved in the Polish situation should just address your Polish Government and say : ' Come on , boys and girls , now you have to deliver .
We , as Members of the European Parliament , no longer accept the fact that you are not delivering . '
In other words , they are not delivering a solution to the question that you have in mind .
Assuming that the Gdańsk side of the problem is approached in the way I mentioned , then I will now come to the two other shipyards .
I have just described to you that Gdynia and Szczecin could be approached with an employment future that is viable .
That is what we are talking about , and that is why I mentioned the example of Olympic Airways .
Of course , they are completely different : one is shipbuilding and the other is flying .
But , having said that , the original thought behind the Olympic Airways solution was liquidation and then assets , without the burden of paying back all those large amounts of money , and then , with the new investors , giving these undertakings an opportunity to find a viable future .
Mr Schulz , we did not say that the yards should be shut .
We are seeking a way for them to be strong enough to resist the coming recession and with the activities which are most likely to be profitable on those sites , and there lies the opportunity for both of the shipyards , once the assets are bundled , taking into account that there are a couple of potential investors who are interested in just giving them a viable future .
Ms Schroedter , the Polish yards have had a longer transition than the East German yards , and during a booming period of the economy .
Not only Mr Chruszcz , but also Mr Czarnecki , if you are comparing this to the situation in the German shipyards , - and it is right to say that there is a parallel with the German shipyards - then I have two general remarks .
Firstly , we need to realise that the shipbuilding industry in other countries , such as Denmark or the UK , where the public purse was not so generous , was considerably downsized or even closed .
I have some claim to know about this : in my own country quite a number of shipyards had to be closed .
So if we speak about equal treatment , we need to take into account that in other Member States of the European Union there is a history of closing shipyards which can no longer be viable .
A couple of Members made the comparison with the situation in Germany .
The total size of the three shipyards in Poland - Gdynia , Gdańsk and Szczecin - is comparable to the size of the German shipyards prior to their restructuring , and the aid already granted to the Polish shipyards in the period 2002-2008 is also comparable to the aid granted by Germany to its shipyards - around EUR 3 billion .
So there is a basis for comparison .
However , from both the perspective of competition distortion and of safeguarding stable employment , the length of the restructuring process in Poland is an aggravating factor .
Whereas the shipyards in Germany were privatised in 1993 and finalised their restructuring in 1995-1996 , the Polish shipyards have continued subsidised operations for a very long time , since well before the Polish accession to the EU , and have been bailed out several times since then .
I have mentioned before that now , in 2008 , more than four years have passed since the accession of Poland to the EU , and eight years since the first state aid rules were introduced in Poland in 2000 pursuant to the 1994 Association Agreement .
In addition , the shipbuilding industry has been benefiting from an unprecedented boom over the last five years .
That should also be taken into account : even during a period of a booming sector , it was not possible to put the Polish shipyards in a viable position , so that is something we have to take into account .
Even during that period things were not working properly in a way comparable to the other shipyards .
So if we take into account that the boom , with an assured inflow of orders and ever-increasing prices , created favourable conditions for conducting a far-reaching restructuring in Poland , then that chance has not been utilised by Poland .
Industry experts already forecast a downturn , an overcapacity in the world market in the two or three years to come .
To conclude , the comparison with Germany might be meaningful .
Yes , it is close by ; yes , it is nearby a comparable situation .
It shows that the Polish shipyards are treated exactly the same as the German shipyards .
The same criteria are applied when assessing the state aid , with viability being the most prominent of them .
Finally , a parallel should also be drawn with cases where the Commission has not authorised state aid and even ordered recovery of illegal state aid in other Member States .
In the shipbuilding sector I recall negative decisions ordering repayment of aid - as some of you will remember - with regard to the Spanish public shipyard IZAR , to Greek shipyards and a couple of other ones .
If Mr Bielan is saying - as I too said in my remarks - we have taken years , then this is because of the economic , social and symbolic importance of the yards .
Yes , we did .
I dare to defend that , but the best thing we can give to the heroes of the yards is a viable future , and that is what I am asking you for : just a realistic approach , the approach that those heroes deserve .
A question was asked about European shipbuilding .
The Commission , in cooperation with the European shipbuilding industry , is actively implementing an integrated strategy - and we call it ' Leadership 2015 ' - aimed at increasing the competitiveness of the shipbuilding industry in all the Member States of the European Union .
In that context , work is ongoing in helping industry in Poland and elsewhere to address the key challenges facing the sector by , for example , facilitating innovation and better protection of intellectual property rights .
Continuous subsidisation cannot be an answer to challenges to competitiveness .
We in the Commission , like you , are interested in a viable industry that can operate without state intervention and without state aid and compete on its own merits .
That is the case for many shipyards in Europe , particularly in the sector of technologically sophisticated vessels .
Mr Tomczak and a number of other Members compared the financial sector situation of today and the banking situation , and who does the economy serve ?
The declining EU share of world shipbuilding will not be reversed by keeping yards in unsustainable activity , and Mr Chruszcz and Mr Tomczak touched on the general line with the financial crisis .
I tried to explain this in my first statement .
I would like to say a little more on the questions asked by some of you .
A question was asked about the possibility of applying state aid rules less strictly in the light of state aids currently approved by the Commission for financial institutions .
This is an interesting question , and it is not only within your meeting of today .
But it is also a fact that we have to see why the Commission seems to be stricter in the Polish shipyard cases , while it authorises massive aid to European banks .
The situation of the Polish shipyards , if you will allow me to say so , is completely different to that of the banking sector .
There are two reasons , which I shall explain to you .
No 1 : the bankruptcy of a major European bank could trigger the collapse of a number of other financial institutions and produce systematic negative effects on the whole economy of one or more Member States .
So we are currently considering emergency short-term aid measures for banks , as opposed to restructuring aid spread over many years for the Polish shipyards .
By the way , if banks were to require longer-term state support , they too would be subject to similar requirements to the Polish shipyards .
They have to deliver a credible restructuring plan .
They have to ensure a long-term viability for their beneficiaries .
So it is indeed a fact that , within the banking sector at the moment , we are also approaching the banks with restructuring and viable business plans for the future .
I do not see why some of you are so concerned with the nationality of the purchasers of the assets of the yards .
If they are the ones who are the real entrepreneurs and if they are the ones who are interested in those assets , let us go for it .
We owe it to the workers of the yards to seek a solution without regard to nationality or protectionism .
That is not the answer I would like to give to the workers who are interested in their jobs , in jobs that are viable .
I am very glad that a couple of Members recognise that the yards are flexible and that we do not make a religion out of it .
If only producing ships is the only opportunity , I think we are not dealing with these cases in a professional way .
There should be sustainable production of whatever product over there with the craftsmanship of those people .
If demand is growing and the workers and the yards are competent , which I believe - as you were mentioning - then we can give them a chance by freeing them from the burden of past state aid .
I shall try to conclude , as I can read your body language .
One of the main issues that I was faced with is : can you not give more time ?
Is that the way we should deal with this very difficult issue ?
I think that all those workers have the right to ask us to come up with a viable solution for their future .
What we , the Commission , are presenting and what we are asking the Polish Government and where we badly need your backing towards the Polish Government is that they are aware .
Just deliver the business plan for Gdańsk .
Please , please , please .
And just be aware that for Gdynia and Szczecin there is an opportunity .
There is a future , but then we have to act in such a way that the burdens of all those to be repaid state aid over recent years are taken off the assets and that , with the assets in a bundling , there is a new future for activities in both yards and in both areas and regions .
It is absolutely crucial that those assets are not with that burden , for if there is that burden on the shoulders of those assets then there is less interest from investors .
That , indeed , is the law of just thinking over the solution .
If the liquidation is to be done , it can be parallel , and if it is parallel then it does not take that much time .
If I had to face all those workers , then I would prefer to say , please go with this solution which the Commission is offering .
If you accept it , it can be done quickly , and do not tell me that , because the law in Poland is the way it is , you cannot change a law .
I am not absolutely sure that the law is able to fit in this solution , but if that is the case then you can just act as a government .
With my experience in the last century in another position , I know - and I knew - that if you want a solution , there is a way out .
I ask you from my heart , for all those workers : please address the Polish Government .
The debate is closed .
Written statements ( Rule 142 )
in writing . - ( PL ) Madam President , observing the current activity of the Commission concerning the Polish shipyards has reaffirmed my conviction that Poland should not have joined the EU under the conditions offered a few years ago .
Millions of my fellow countrymen were of a similar view , but the majority were deceived into thinking that the EU would help Poland to reach the levels of development of the ' old ' EU .
This applies not just to the shipyards , but to many other areas , such as agriculture .
I am in favour of my country participating in the European Community , but I oppose , and protest against , Poland being treated like conquered territory from an economic standpoint .
I can see how the former communist East Germany , or indeed the banking sphere , are subject to different criteria .
They are allowed state aid .
Today , when the fate of the Treaty of Lisbon hangs in the air , I am convinced that from the economic view , it will make Poland entirely dependent on the bureaucracy in Brussels .
That is why in the coming elections to the European Parliament , the peoples of Europe must support the politicians who will say ' no ' to this treaty .
Promotion of clean road transport vehicles ( debate )
The next item is the debate on the report by Dan Jørgensen , on behalf of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety , on the revised proposal for a directive of the European Parliament and of the Council on the promotion of clean and energy-efficient road transport vehicles .
rapporteur . - ( DA ) Madam President , every day there are Europeans who become ill because of air pollution .
Every day there are Europeans who die because of air pollution from traffic in Europe .
We also know that we are facing extreme climate changes , which are not least due to the fact that too much fuel is being used by the transport sector .
For those two reasons , this is extremely important legislation that we are debating in the House this afternoon .
For those two reasons also , this is an extremely important compromise that we have successfully negotiated between Parliament and the Council of Ministers and that we shall , I hope , adopt tomorrow .
What we would be adopting is an obligation on the part of European authorities to play a much greater role in combating air pollution .
What we are adopting is an obligation for authorities to take account of more than the price in pounds and pence or euros and cents when making a decision to purchase a vehicle , whether it be a refuse collection lorry , bus or other vehicle they use to carry out public sector tasks .
Account must also be taken of the costs to health , the environment and the climate of the fact that vehicles emit different types of particles and that , in burning fossil fuels , they cause increased pollution and thus more global warming .
We are not compelling local authorities to choose the most environmentally friendly solution , but we are forcing them to take account of the consequences in terms of health and the environment when making their calculations .
We are also creating openness and transparency in connection with the decisions made . I am thus also certain that far more public authorities in Europe will make the correct - that is to say , the green - choices rather than the short-term , albeit perhaps cheaper , options involving calculations merely in pounds and pence .
Moreover , that is the whole purpose of the proposal .
What is more , the proposal will presumably , I hope , have some direct environmental impact because the public sector is in actual fact responsible for a large proportion of the purchases of a wide range of vehicles : for example buses , with public authorities in Europe accounting for approximately a third of bus purchases .
Over and above the very direct environmental impact , this proposal will also have a secondary effect , as we want to create a demand for special environmentally friendly vehicles - a demand that can drive the market and that can make it profitable for industry to develop new , better and more environmentally-friendly vehicles , and before legislation requires them to do so .
I think it important to emphasise that this is not a very bureaucratic arrangement .
It is not a question of imposing a whole lot of onerous rules on local authorities .
Nor is it a question of creating a huge amount of red tape .
On the contrary , we have put together an arrangement that is very easy to implement and roll out .
It is an arrangement that also contains exemptions wherever they may be required and , especially , one that ensures that a country already in possession of an efficient system that takes account of the impact on health and the environment of vehicle purchases can retain that system .
As has already been pointed out , we have successfully negotiated an agreement , a compromise .
In the process , I believe we have also sent an important signal that we stand shoulder to shoulder here in Parliament where this important piece of legislation is concerned .
I should like to thank all the shadow rapporteurs and the Commission for its constructive cooperation .
I should also like to thank the French Presidency for the focused effort it too has made to reach this compromise .
I am proud that , tomorrow , we can vote through a piece of legislation that will reduce pollution in Europe and whereby local authorities will be in the driver 's seat in the fight against global warming and the fight against the air pollution that makes many Europeans ill every year .
Vice-President of the Commission . - ( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , as you know , the objective of the proposal is to increase the presence on the European market of energy efficient vehicles that produce low levels of pollution , with the aim of reducing both energy consumption and emissions of CO2 and other pollutants .
These measures will benefit citizens who live in large towns and cities , who now account for the majority of Europe 's population .
First of all , I would like to thank the rapporteur , Mr Jørgensen , and the shadow rapporteurs , for their commitment and constructive input , as well as the close collaboration that has taken place in the interinstitutional discussions throughout the summer .
This collaborative process has enabled us to produce a compromise text which has received broad support at first reading .
The provisions of the proposal for a directive stipulate that public bodies and companies , and also companies offering a public passenger transport service , must include energy consumption and the emission of CO2 and other pollutants among the criteria for selecting vehicles procured by means of competitive tendering .
The procurement decision would thus in future not be based solely on the price of the vehicle but also on the environmental costs that it involves throughout the vehicle 's life .
At the same time , the proposal leaves an option for local authorities to decide on the details of implementation of the provisions , and thus fully abides by the principle of subsidiarity .
The legislative text which we are approving does not bring in new administrative procedures .
The proposal is thus perfectly consistent with the existing regulations on procurement and public services and all the provisions contained in them , such as those on exemption thresholds , remain in force .
Furthermore , the proposal represents a major step forward in Community policies on energy , climate and the environment .
The directive will incorporate general parameters for energy consumption , emissions of CO2 and emissions of other pollutants into procurement through competitive tendering .
The public sector in Europe will therefore serve as an example , promoting more advanced innovative technologies in order to produce sustainable transport systems in the future .
In my view , this is a very clear message , and it can be transmitted by local public concerns or those that produce local services in relation to the very important sector of pollution reduction .
Furthermore , the proposal introduces the sustainable economy into public tendering for the supply of vehicles , without giving rise to higher costs .
Instead , the impact that the vehicles will have throughout the period of their use will be forecast and made transparent before they arise .
Therefore , the purchasing of public transport resources will be decided on in a rational manner so that higher costs can be avoided , both for operators and for public transport companies themselves .
The effects of the directive - and I am just finishing , Mr President - are anticipated to go far beyond its immediate sphere of application .
Public procurement procedures are a key , high-visibility market and they can influence decisions taken by companies and private individuals .
It can be anticipated that , thanks to this directive , in the long term clean , energy efficient vehicles will come in greater numbers onto the market and there will be a reduction in their costs through economies of scale .
As a result , energy efficiency will rise and emissions of CO2 and other pollutants will fall for all vehicles circulating in Europe .
Now I would like to hear what the MEPs that are to participate in the debate have to say , so that at the end of the debate I can provide the necessary clarifications to them .
I hope that , through this debate , we can achieve a positive outcome and that the revised proposal for a directive can be adopted .
draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on the Internal Market and Consumer Protection . - ( DE ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I should like to start by saying that it is clear from this draft report that environmental protection and climate change really matter to the whole of the European Parliament and to all of its committees , but also to the Commission and the Council .
I therefore think that we can certainly get behind Mr Jørgensen when he says that everyone in Europe should pay attention to reducing pollutant emissions and that environmental and climate protection factors play an important role in the procurement of vehicles .
However , the environment and climate change must also be a matter for the people , for the citizens of the European Union themselves - it must be an autonomous concern , in other words a concern for those who purchase cars or buses in the European Union .
I therefore continue to wonder whether the provisions we are proposing here will really strengthen citizens ' consciences in this matter in the end , or whether they will in fact weaken them , and whether this directive actually serves the objectives we are aiming for at all , or whether it will actually just create yet more frustration at alleged Brussels bureaucracy .
As I see it , there are a multitude of examples in many European countries showing that hydrogen-powered vehicles and low-CO2 vehicles are already being purchased today , without this directive - in other words , there is already an environmental awareness .
I rather doubt that a directive will really bolster this , because in my view the directive does very little , and it is not true , as you claim , Mr Jørgensen , that the environmental effects will be particularly large .
Our target ought to be to raise the awareness of purchasers , and not necessarily to influence 1 % of the passenger car market and 6 % of the truck market with this directive .
I think that the impact will be relatively small : the tendering conditions will be relatively extensive and ultimately the national implementation will dominate the decision .
This means that it is quite possible , at least according to the Council 's legal services , that environmental effects will have a weighting of only 1 % , and thus that the impact on the environment will be relatively small .
However , the directive will also do no harm , because in the end all those involved will be able to carry on more or less as before .
That is an achievement of the Council and of the shadow rapporteur in the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety , Mr Hoppenstedt .
The opinion of the Committee on Internal Market and Consumer Protection , of which I was the draftsman , also took a position along these lines , and it was possible to make considerable improvements to the directive in the trilogue .
I therefore think that there are certainly some positive points that are worth emphasising , because some of the directive 's bureaucratic teeth have been pulled .
It now provides the Member States with the option of laying down technical requirements for tendering , which gives a considerable degree of flexibility .
It also states that specialised vehicles are generally not included in its scope .
Nevertheless , there is still the risk of zero weighting , and I would therefore say , in conclusion , that the directive is trying to reach the right destination by the wrong path .
The amendments that came out of the compromise in the trilogue mean that - assuming it is implemented at national level in a way beneficial to contracting entities - in many Member States it will in all likelihood have almost no effect .
Those involved in the EU institutions need to ask themselves whether this directive , as it currently stands , still - following the admittedly difficult compromise in the trilogue - actually meets the goal for which it was intended .
The quality of its provisions depends almost entirely on their transposition by the Member States , in which case there is no real need for Community-level regulation .
I would point out once again that , regrettably , this directive ultimately applies only to 1 % of passenger car sales and 6 % of commercial vehicle sales , and will therefore unfortunately not be of very great benefit to the environment .
draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on Transport and Tourism . - ( RO ) The directive introduces green criteria among the criteria examined for purchasing clean and energy-efficient road transport vehicles .
Member States will inform the contracting authorities and entities which provide public passenger transport services about the provisions relating to the procurement of environmentally friendly vehicles .
The Committee on Transport and Tourism is proposing that Member States and the Commission consider the eligibility of urban mobility projects for financial support and the promotion of environmentally friendly vehicles during the mid-term review of the national strategic reference frameworks and national and regional operational programmes .
Similarly , urban transport initiatives and the Civitas and the Intelligent Energy-Europe programmes must be continued .
The Committee on Transport and Tourism has suggested the use of the label ' clean and energy-efficient urban road transport ' by the authorities whose purchases of environmentally friendly vehicles account for the largest share in the total annual specific procurement .
I would like to congratulate the rapporteur and I am sure that this document will change the attitude of local public authorities towards the environment .
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - ( DE ) Madam President , the Commission proposal before us on the promotion of energy-efficient vehicles is a revised version of the original proposal that we rejected two years ago .
The new Commission proposal represents a considerable improvement .
It has to be said , however , that this text too contains numerous points that can be criticised , such as the absence of an impact assessment , the relatively small market share of the vehicles concerned - a point that has already been made - and , not least , the compulsory inclusion , in contravention of legislation by the European Court of Justice , of environmental criteria in the applications procedure .
These defects have been exacerbated by the agreement in the lead committee , which would produce rigid and bureaucratic regulations .
This outcome would have been unacceptable to me .
Within the framework of promoting a compromise - and this is something positive to be noted - the content has been completely changed in conjunction with the Council and the Commission - so that there is now a text to be agreed on in plenary that can be supported .
Flexibility for the municipalities is at the heart of this .
The Member States are free to set their own guidelines , replacing the standardised methodology of the Commission proposal .
In Germany alone am I aware of numerous standards governing the procurement of environmentally friendly vehicles .
These standards are already being used successfully today and , according to what is stated by our municipal associations , should remain in this form in the future .
In these cases , no new obligations are to be expected , therefore .
For Member States without corresponding regulations , the text presents , on the other hand , guidelines for an environmentally friendly procurement policy .
If , however , Member States should opt for the model developed by the Commission , they can now count on simplified procedures .
In the case of procurements of up to EUR 249 000 , no formal applications procedure needs to be set in motion .
The de minimis threshold values apply .
Special vehicles too are excluded , as we have heard .
The compromise text is supported by the Council and the Commission and is accepted by the municipal associations , as well as by the motor industry .
Even if it had perhaps been possible to dispense with the whole legislative text , there are practically no contrary interests left .
Overall , I recommend falling in with the compromise approach .
Mr President , I firstly want to thank the rapporteur for his persistence on an issue that Parliament initially rejected .
I also want to thank the European Commission for also having persisted with this issue , by presenting a revised text which is fundamental given that it uses an instrument that is already available , namely the capacity of local authorities to promote exemplary public procurement , particularly in an area such as clean road transport vehicles , which are now vital .
I also welcome the fact that a risk was taken in speeding up the process which , I hope , can now move forward , just as happened with the pact or conciliation .
I also welcome the support for and recognition of initiatives such as CIty-VITAlity-Sustainability ( CIVITAS ) and Intelligent Energy Europe , which form the basis for this kind of programme .
We hope that this support will continue , together with recognition of the participation of all stakeholders , including the support expressed for hydrogen .
However , as regards supply infrastructures , I must regret that , in the end , we have not been able to use an instrument from the field of transport which has been rejected to a certain extent by this Parliament , namely trans-European energy networks , which were previously proposed but not in the end accepted .
There has been talk about all the funds and all the state aid , but no particular fund or programme of trans-European energy networks has been identified .
There has been some dragging of feet in recent years with regard to these and yet , for the supply of new alternative fuels , such as gas or hydrogen , they are now vitally necessary .
I would therefore ask Commissioner Tajani whether , in the future , when reviewing this text or perhaps even before that , he could present us with a proposal in this respect : namely , to use this instrument of the trans-European energy networks to ensure the supply of these new fuels in one of the areas where there is the greatest need , in other words the area of these essential infrastructures for new fuels .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - ( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to thank Mr Jørgensen for the report .
I believe that this really is an action that is consistent with the entire energy and environment package that we are debating .
It will certainly have an effect on public procurement procedures , undoubtedly guiding the choices made by the institutions , but first and foremost - upstream of that - guiding the choices made by manufacturers .
This truly equates to the presentation of a coherent framework of specifications that vehicles will have to meet in relation to both the parameters for reducing greenhouse gas emissions and other parameters directly relating to pollution and health .
A monetary evaluation would also be of some concern : as far as carbon dioxide is concerned , this is already a current topic for the Kyoto Protocol in terms of emissions trading .
In other areas , it would also strictly mean a monetisation of health , or a monetary evaluation of health .
It is clear , though , here that the specific aim is to find points of comparison , certainly not to encourage but rather to reduce emissions , including those that have an impact on health .
Thus , there are technical specifications for energy efficiency and environmental performance .
That is the major opportunity which this directive offers .
The situation is therefore clear but it does not restrict the choices available to institutions .
I am rather amazed by the opposition voiced , which seems to me to be full of preconceptions .
This directive makes a strong suggestion to the institutions , but in my view it is directed above all at vehicle manufacturers .
on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - ( DA ) Thank you , Mr President , and thank you Mr Jørgensen for your frank and constructive cooperation .
The law that we shall , I hope , adopt tomorrow is a necessary one . Experience from , in any case , Denmark , where Dan Jørgensen and I come from , has taught us that , if we do not create proper frameworks for green purchasing , we never move beyond the talking stage .
Public authorities choose the cheapest offer , not the greenest one .
It is therefore right to make it compulsory for European authorities to take account of , for example , CO2 and particle emissions when they are about to invest in new vehicles .
We should ideally have liked to see all authorities use a common method of factoring environmental impact into their distribution of tenders , so that it became clear that the polluter paid .
The internalisation of external costs , as we call this principle , is something that we all want to see .
It would also give producers a degree of security in relation to the distribution criteria used .
However , we are happy to live with the solution we have come up with in this House , whereby local authorities and the State itself can choose whether they want to impose specific requirements in connection with fuel consumption and particle emissions in their tender material or whether they want to use a model in which a value is placed on the vehicle 's environmental impact , which thus becomes part of the basis of the contract .
In this connection , we are satisfied that the price , which the proposal sets per kg of CO2 , more closely approximates to the anticipated market price .
Only in this way is a strong incentive created for developing clean buses , lorries and private cars .
It is a shame that , in the committee , we could not obtain a majority for imposing the same requirements on the trade in used vehicles .
There are no technical reasons for not applying them in this connection too .
By only applying them to new cars , it will be too long before the beneficial effects of the proposal filter through , and we do not in actual fact have time to wait for these entirely necessary improvements .
Nonetheless , this legislation is an important step in the direction of making use of the public sector 's huge purchasing power to press for green solutions across the board .
on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group . - ( GA ) Mr President , I welcome the recommendations in the conciliation measure agreed by representatives of Parliament , the Council and the Commission on clean road transport vehicles .
Local authorities and other public bodies must be urged to invest in sustainable clean transport .
When green , efficient transport choices are made , especially in our cities , this benefits citizens ' health and the environment .
This will help us to comply with our climate commitments and , more importantly , this can be a market catalyst for clean transport choices .
Those involved in public procurement ought to consider the long-term benefits .
All costs relating to the measures chosen should be taken into account in the calculations .
The transport sector is where Europe is experiencing the most difficulties .
I hope that this directive shall be adopted - as soon as possible - so that it can be implemented by 2010 as a support for local authorities and for public bodies who value the environment .
on behalf of the IND / DEM Group . - ( NL ) Mr President , the importance of a sustainable society is always underlined in the climate and energy debate that is currently being held in this House , and a sustainable transport sector forms part of this .
In the past few months , we have tried to impose stricter standards on freight transport ( Euro 6 ) and cars .
In this , we have addressed the problem at source .
We could make transport more sustainable at subsequent stages too , by issuing green invitations to tender , as is being suggested in the proposal we are discussing at the moment .
I wholeheartedly support the principle of including energy and environmental impacts in tenders for vehicles .
It makes for sustainable vehicle development , because demand for sustainable vehicles is promoted , which spurs manufacturers on to innovate .
Important aspects that should be taken into consideration are fuel consumption and the related CO2 emissions , but also the emission of toxic and otherwise harmful particles and substances , such as carbon dioxide and fine particulate matter .
For effective policy , it is important to guarantee a valuable exchange of knowledge and information between the Member States .
In that way , best practices can be exchanged , as a result of which the green procurement procedure can be optimised .
I should like to thank the rapporteur , Mr Jørgensen , for the compromise he has struck with the Council on this topic .
In a previous phase , this issue was difficult to discuss , but at second reading , to my mind at least a reasonable agreement was thrashed out , which I have been able to put my name to .
( PT ) Mr President , Commissioner , just this morning President Sarkozy spoke in this House about the difference between protectionism and intelligent market intervention .
If we add to that the countless instances in which European industry is overlburdened with rules and restrictions which , while necessary , make it less competitive , we can easily understand the reason for praising and voting in favour of the proposal currently under discussion .
It is well-known that the European Union has various instruments with which to achieve the proposed ' three times twenty ' targets : one of the most common approaches is to require European industries to comply with environmental and emission control criteria ; an alternative , which is what we are discussing today , is to suggest that public authorities should act as market catalysts .
This makes total sense .
Encouraging major public buyers to drive the markets and create a demand for clean and energy-efficient vehicles , the production of which may be more costly but is certainly environmentally positive , is a way of intervening in the market which is legitimate , appropriate and defensible .
Clearly this intervention cannot occur in a manner contrary to the interests of taxpayers .
However , these interests must be measured in terms of both the immediate costs and the potential environmental benefits brought to citizens ' daily lives .
Under the commitment being debated today , public authorities shall , when purchasing their road transport fleets , be required to calculate not only the purchase price but also the vehicles ' lifetime costs in terms of fuel , CO2 emissions and air pollution .
Ultimately , these costs must be used as a procurement criterion .
Public authorities shall therefore have the opportunity in the future to set an example and act as a catalyst for the automobile sector so that the latter develops and invests in the production of environmental vehicles with ever-decreasing CO2 and pollutant emissions .
Finally , I congratulate Mr Jørgensen and the draftsmen , whose work has enabled this document to be debated today , in the expectation that it will actually help to change habits with positive consequences for the sustainable future of our societies .

( DE ) Mr President , even though we have now arrived at compromises , or perhaps precisely because we have now arrived at compromises , which - as Mr Schwab has just said - have removed the teeth from this legislative text , the question arises as to what is the point of this directive .
In view of the very small market share of publicly purchased vehicles - we are talking about 1 % of private cars and 6 % of lorries - there can be no question of a significant contribution to climate protection being made .
It is no more than a drop in the ocean .
The expenditure it involves us in is not justified in terms of value .
Above all , I find the use of procurement law as an instrument to be questionable .
As an instrument of economic purchase by public authorities , procurement law is clearly designed to be related to the product , its suitability and its performance .
Additional environmental criteria are simply not included .
I should also like to point out that we shall debate product standards in Brussels .
We are to debate emissions standards for lorries and private cars and are then also to debate CO2 thresholds for private cars and lorries .
We do not need additional European regulations governing product acquisition .
We are in this case once again creating additional and useless bureaucracy and we are once again infringing the principle of subsidiarity .
( FR ) Mr President , at a time when our debates revolve inexorably , like whirling dervishes , around the crisis , I cannot resist the temptation of describing the approach of my colleague , Dan Jørgensen , as a circle , but this time a virtuous circle ; one , what is more , that is virtuous in its transparency .
With public procurement , to encourage the replacement of old vehicle fleets with new vehicles , is to put the economy at the service of the environment ; to reduce CO2 emissions in order to create demand is to put the environment at the service of the economy .
This is a perfect equilibrium constructing this virtuous circle on the budgetary level , on the ecological level and on the level of transparency .
It is at this price that it will represent a real step forward .
In order to do this , we must be guided by two principles : a true assessment of the cost of a vehicle over its entire lifespan and transparent local decision making so that a socially responsible audit of the consequences for the benefit to the environment can take place .
Without transparency , we shall have a circle , but far from a virtuous one .
I should like to pay tribute to the work carried out by our fellow Member to reinforce this transparency .
By making use eventually of all the facts relating to his or her purchases and of a record of achievements emphasising the real goodwill of local authorities in acquiring clean vehicles , every citizen will make the same assessment , will publicly and actually evaluate the reality of these commitments , beyond the rhetoric .
In this vein , we can do no better than promote the creation of an ecological label , a visible , legible and understandable label of this ecological quality .
In this time of crisis , the European car industry will find that this new demand for clean , ecologically labelled vehicles , far from acting as a brake , will act as a stimulus for development , a challenge to respond to .
The economic crisis must in no way serve as a pretext for going back on improving our practice aimed at reducing the harmful effects on the environment .
On the contrary , we have an opportunity here .
Let us know how to grasp it and create new virtuous circles by thinking of our planet , here and now , but above all of future generations .
Mr President , thank you for your forbearance .
After much debate over its first report , the Commission submitted a revised proposal last January , the aim of which is to contribute to making the EU a highly energy-efficient and low-greenhouse-gas-emitting economy through the promotion of clean and energy-efficient vehicles .
This policy is in line with several other proposals , including those under the climate and energy package .
In my view , the directive would accelerate the take-up of cleaner and more efficient vehicles , while creating a market dynamic in favour of such vehicles .
The Council has amended the draft proposal and redefined the scope to ensure coherence with the public procurement directives .
It has , furthermore , introduced more flexibility as regards options .
The draft directive now applies to the purchase of vehicles by contracting authorities and various parties and operators , for the purposes of the Public Procurement Directives , and by operators of public passenger transport services under the Public Service Obligation ( PSO ) Regulation .
It requires the authorities concerned either to include requirements relating to energy consumption , CO2 emissions and emissions of other pollutants in the tender specification , or include such impact in the criteria for award of the contract .
I support the general approach , which gives a choice of options for taking into account lifetime costs and also allows flexibility as to the weighting given to the lifetime costs in award criteria .
Furthermore , the directive will sit well with the sustainability agenda , which would demand that the cleanest of vehicles possible always be required .
Might I suggest that this directive might be an important addition to the non-trading agenda of Member States to reduce CO2 emissions in our general thrust in the climate and energy package ?
The directive will apply to all vehicles purchased by government departments , local authorities and state bodies , with of course the exception of emergency vehicles , rescue and military vehicles .
I have been assured that many of these bodies already factor lifecycle costs - including fuel costs - into the criteria for procurement .
It is estimated that the effective cost , including emissions , would be small in overall cost terms .
I am not a fan of red tape , and this proposal has no new administrative hurdles , to quote Commissioner Tajani himself .
But action is needed at every level if we are to transform our economies into the low-carbon economies we so desperately need .
For these reasons , I support the proposal .
( PL ) Mr President , the issue we are discussing today , as you can see , unites rather than divides us in the European Parliament .
We are discussing the issue of how to do our citizens a favour , and make the vehicles we use as environmentally friendly as possible .
The document we are debating is by no means perfect .
It is full of compromises , which are probably a necessity at this stage of the debate .
But it is undoubtedly a step in the right direction .
It encourages in particular public vehicle users - local and central government authorities - to purchase environmentally-friendly vehicles .
This is the great value of this directive , but more likely than not , as in many matters we have discussed in this House on road and transport safety , it is just the beginning , and not the end of the debate .
( DE ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , this proposal for a directive on the promotion of clean road transport vehicles in public institutions is highly bureaucratic and impractical .
It really cannot be assumed that it will have any detectable effect on the environment .
There is certainly nothing wrong with the objective ; moreover , we support it .
We also want , however , to try everything we can to bring about a proper climate in Europe .
I cannot , however , go along with this bureaucratic approach , which actually creates more problems than it solves and does not constitute an improvement .
If , as has been pointed out today on several occasions , the percentages of private cars and lorries involved are , respectively , just 1 % and 6 % , it can hardly be assumed that any effects are going to be felt .
If the local authorities constantly have to calculate what is going to be produced by a vehicle in the course of its life and what costs it is going to give rise to and then have to make their purchasing decision in the light of these factors - and in view , too , of the objection that the directive will entail still more bureaucracy - then we are engaging in a wholesale repudiation of procurement law .
What we are saying quite simply is that , now , something else is being decided .
It is a fact that local authorities have to decide on the basis of price .
Because what we have here is duplicate legislation , we are creating legal uncertainty .
That is a very reprehensible state of affairs , which I cannot endorse .
Even the compromise designed to tone things down does not bring about any improvement .
We cannot anticipate any improvement in the climate .
Nor can we anticipate any reduction of bureaucracy in the near future .
Moreover , all this is happening just six months before the European elections .
It is not you who needs to conduct this discussion , Commissioner .
Rather , we must conduct it in the election campaign .
If I am still here in two years ' time when the Commission presents its report , I can just foresee its saying : the measure has been unsuccessful ; we need to tighten up the provisions .
It will not see that it has made a mistake - just as it did not foresee the rejection two years ago - but will just go on to say that , as has emerged from the consideration given to the matter , passenger transport by private individuals needs now to be included .
That is the objective , and I simply cannot go along with it .
Our debate needs to be at grass-roots level , so the Commission also needs to be aware that , in this case , it needs to listen more to Parliament and the MEPs .
( HU ) Thank you very much , Mr President .
Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , in the debate this morning we already agreed on one thing : the world is heading for an environmental disaster .
We can still change course and Europe does want to make changes .
Neither the financial crisis nor any other consideration can force us to give up our leading role in bringing about a more sustainable development .
If we take this seriously , radical changes are needed in order to create a more environmentally aware automotive industry .
It is difficult to persuade consumers to choose more environmentally aware , but currently more expensive vehicles .
However , with good regulations we can do much to help create a cleaner vehicle fleet .
On the one hand , in the case of publicly funded vehicle purchases we can pay more attention to environmental considerations , setting a good example from the public sphere ; on the other hand we can increase demand on such a scale that it will make the development of cleaner technologies more economical .
Since this regulation is important not only for environmental protection but also as a key opportunity to maintain a strong European automotive industry , we must introduce it as soon as possible , on the widest possible scale . Thank you very much .
Mr President , this directive is very welcome because it puts legal flesh on previous proposals in the 2006 Directive and in the Commission 's Action Plan on Energy Efficiency .
Public procurement has a vital role to play , not only through leading by example , but also because big contracts stimulate mass production and therefore bring down the cost of energy-efficient vehicles .
Technically , too , the time is ripe for this directive .
The range and speed of electric vehicles has been transformed by innovation in battery technology .
Many vehicles procured by contracting authorities are fleet vehicles - which return at night to a base where they can easily be plugged in and recharged - so they are not dependent on the prior development of recharging facilities at service stations .
To conclude , I hope that this directive will serve as a stepping stone towards a comprehensive proposal on limiting CO2 emissions from commercial vehicles .
( FI ) Mr President , the facts speak for themselves : 26 % of all energy consumption and 24 % of CO2 emissions .
Energy consumption and emissions are increasing by around 2 % a year .
Emissions are making the quality of the air worse in many European cities and many areas will have problems achieving the Community 's air quality targets .
The high costs of development have slowed down the growth in demand for low-emission vehicles , which in turn is slowing down the fall in acquisition costs , even though the assessment of the impact would suggest that the rules on reduced fuel costs would compensate for any higher acquisition costs for low-emission vehicles .
These facts regarding road transport are known to all and it is at long last time to act .
The savings in costs in this proposal for a directive we are now considering is estimated to be around EUR 21.5 billion , not to speak of the benefits to the environment .
Nevertheless , it is no insignificant matter how the targets set are to be achieved .
We can all recall many examples of being hit twice as the result of overlapping legislation , where ideological ambition has in the end created a bureaucratic treadmill .
The rapporteur 's proposals , for example , for environmentally friendly procurement labels or making improvements to existing vehicles using the criteria intended for new ones would , if they came into effect , eat into any cost benefit achieved through legislation because of the additional costs involved .
This is precisely why we should not be in such a hurry in our quest to solve environmental problems .
Mr Jørgensen , however , has had good intentions and he has succeeded in many areas .
Greater transparency regarding public procurement is something worth our support , as long as we ensure that information is not misused for populist intentions .
Similarly , the role of public procurement as a catalyst for the environmentally friendly vehicle market is probably an inevitable one .
I nevertheless understand those here who intend to vote against this legislative proposal tomorrow .
A compromise at first reading rarely meets the criteria for democracy : that is something that was made clear to us when we debated Parliament 's climate and energy package , if not before .
( DE ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , climate protection is the aim of us all .
There are different methods , however , and they are not always recognisable at first glance .
I have no objections to green procurement in cases where it makes sense .
I reject this directive , anyway , aware though I am that my doing so will change little in terms of the overall outcome in Parliament .
Nonetheless , I shall explain the reasons for my decision .
A first reading agreement on an important co-decision issue such as this , where more than a technical adjustment is at stake , undermines democracy .
The fact is that the rapporteur , whose work I very much value , does not represent Parliament 's vote but only that of a committee and it is on this basis that he deals with the Council and the Commission .
Parliament is ultimately excluded .
Secondly , the directive has been amended by the compromises to such an extent that it is more or less without content , yet entails considerable bureaucratic expenditure for local authorities .
Bureaucracy is not free of charge , but it is often pointless .
We are in this case contributing needlessly to further dissatisfaction with Europe on the part of Europeans and our local authorities .
Since many substantial parts of the directive have been toned down , I would have wanted the Council and the Commission to withdraw the whole thing .
All the issues that are still relevant have already been regulated in the European context , or else no regulation is necessary or the issue concerned would have been better resolved on the basis of subsidiarity .
Withdrawal would have sent out a signal that together we are taking the removal of bureaucracy seriously .
In my area there are , for example , very many local authorities that already make the relevant decisions via the EMAS system .
The money expended in this way would have done a hundred times more for climate protection if it had been spent on methods for insulating public buildings .
For me , the question arises as to whether the directive is being pursued for its own sake or in order to bring about action .
Most Europeans will not understand either approach .

- ( SK ) I welcome the report by Mr Jørgensen , which adopts the aim of promoting clean , cheap and energy-efficient vehicles on European roads .
I firmly believe that through the introduction of common rules at European level we will achieve a more positive impact on the environment .
Local authorities play a key role in determining the criteria for public procurement in the area of road transport .
I therefore support the proposal , under which public procurement must take account not only of procurement costs but also of consumption costs , CO2 emissions and information on atmospheric pollution over the whole life of a vehicle .
I firmly believe that a clear set of environmental criteria can play a significant role in supporting the market for clean vehicles .
I also agree with the view that information on the procurement of vehicles for urban mass transport must be transparent and publicly accessible .
Intensive and open dialogue between local authorities , environmental protection groups and citizens will surely contribute towards reinforcing the importance of environmental factors in the purchase of new vehicles .
- ( CS ) It is an important and perfectly legitimate aim to have clean vehicles , but today local authorities already have the option to include environmental considerations in contracts for public transport services .
And they are doing so .
The directive does not provide any new added value for the environment and it is an unnecessary administrative burden for local and regional authorities .
Member States have undertaken to reduce emissions by 20 % and it would probably be better to leave it to them to decide whether to invest in home heating or other things .
Just leave it to the regions .
Nobody has spoken the truth here .
It is really a matter of how to secure an outlet for the European car industry , which we have weighed down with demands for emission reductions .
This means that it is a matter of who is going to buy expensive vehicles in a situation where consumption is falling and we are heading into recession .
And yet here we are imposing another burden through this directive on local and regional authorities .
I simply cannot agree to this .
I therefore ask you , ladies and gentlemen , to lend your support to those of us who believe that this proposal must simply and clearly be rejected .
- ( CS ) Mr President , allow me , as a former local councillor to voice my rejection of the proposal under discussion .
The directive is unnecessary and we do not need it , and there are several reasons for this : first it goes against the rules of the free market , secondly it interferes in the subsidiarity of local authorities who ought to be defining their own priorities , thirdly the conditions applying to public tenders already include environmental requirements and monitor vehicle emissions closely , fourthly we will achieve a minimal effect at a very high price and we will increase the administrative burden on local authorites and cause a growth in bureaucracy .
It would be better to use the already stretched financial resources of local authorities on heating buildings , improving window insulation and exchanging old-style light bulbs for modern ones .
That way we will achieve a far greater effect and greater savings while also protecting the environment and the climate .
( RO ) This directive helps to raise the awareness of local authorities with regard to the impact which urban transport has on the environment .
Member States may apply more stringent award criteria to the procurement of clean and energy-efficient vehicles than those proposed in the directive .
They may also elect to purchase reconditioned vehicles or have existing vehicles modernised by fitting them with particulate traps or adapting engines to run on cleaner fuels .
I personally believe that it should be possible to purchase clean and energy-efficient road transport vehicles and to retrofit these vehicles with engines and spare parts when they have not exceeded 75 % of their total lifetime mileage .
The present directive does not apply to retrofitting road transport vehicles with engines and spare parts when they have exceeded 75 % of their total lifetime mileage .
I believe that these aspects are necessary if we are talking about an investment which should be sustainable .
( DE ) Mr President , Commissioner , what is missing is quite simply a system of incentives , and Commissioner Kovács really ought to be asked about this .
Would it not make sense in this area too to consider reducing amortisation periods or providing allowances or paying bonuses ?
From the European Union 's point of view , I could see us also supporting assistance in this area , for example within the framework of the Competition and Innovation Programme .
We have the Intelligent Energy Programme and we also have the Seventh Framework Programme for Research .
What I would propose would be to be active in this area , on the one hand in the area of tax relief and , on the other , in the area of assistance .
A huge amount could be achieved in this area , and I would propose that we embark on a new initiative in this connection .

Vice-President of the Commission . - ( IT ) Mr President , first of all , I would like to say to Mr Rübig and Mrs Ayala Sender that I will speak with the relevant Commissioners and ask them to reply to the issues that they have raised .
I would like to thank all the other Members who participated in the debate , which was by no means dull , but a lively one , with sound observations , as well as some controversy , which is always good to hear .
Mr President , there are just three things that I wanted to stress in reply .
The first point is that a cost / benefit analysis carried out within the context of assessing the proposal 's impact indicates that the potential gains are significant , because the initial investment costs for the vehicles , which are likely to be higher , will be offset by savings made as a result of lower energy consumption and lower emissions of CO2 and other pollutants .
Secondly , including the vehicles ' lifetime impact among the assessment criteria will not only not result in greater costs but might instead lead to considerable savings , both for operators and for the public .
Thirdly , the saving on fuel costs , which directly benefits the operators , by itself largely offsets any higher costs incurred at the time of purchase .
rapporteur . - ( DA ) Mr President , I believe that , in ten to twenty years ' time , Europeans will be environmentally aware in a quite different way than at present .
I absolutely believe that , by then , the idea of using taxpayers ' money , that is to say the pound in people 's pockets , to buy anything that is less than environmentally friendly will be unimaginable .
By then , those of us who support the compromise that will be voted through tomorrow will perhaps be able to look back with pride at the time when we were involved in taking some of the first steps in the right direction .
I would therefore like to say thank you again to the shadow rapporteurs who were involved in putting together the compromise .
I should also like to say thank you for all the many positive comments that have been made in this House today about the negotiations that have been carried out .
I must also just comment , however , on the critical voices - and there have been some of these - that have made themselves heard .
I believe it was Mr Ulmer who spoke most stridently .
He said , for example , that the whole thing is too bureaucratic .
Well no , it is not especially bureaucratic .
It has in actual fact been done in a very easy and very flexible way .
It has in actual fact been put together in such a way that the tiniest local authority or even the smallest town or region will be able to deal with these matters quite easily .
There are also exemptions in areas where these are justified .
He said something else too , namely that what is being done will have no influence .
Ladies and gentlemen , a hundred thousand passenger cars are bought each year by public authorities in Europe .
A hundred thousand - that comes to a million over ten years .
You cannot say that it will have no impact if we help make purchasing greener .
Of course it will have some influence .
The figure for lorries is 35 000 per year and that for buses 17 000 per year .
Seventeen thousand is , in actual fact , a third of all the buses purchased in any one year in Europe .
Obviously , what we are doing will have a big impact .
There was one thing in Mr Ulmer 's speech to which I was more sympathetic , however .
It was when he stated that his attitude would scarcely have any influence on the outcome of tomorrow 's vote .
I think that - fortunately - he is quite right about that .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place on Wednesday , 22 October .
Written statements ( Rule 142 )
in writing . - ( NL ) Mr President , Commissioner , if we want to adopt credible climate policy - and we are , in this respect , facing crucial weeks - then the government should in the first place set a good example .
That is why this is a fine directive and we would do well to introduce it as quickly as possible .
Nobody is stopping the national governments from implementing it in a year 's time .
This is perfectly possible .
Whilst a label at European level is not on the cards for the time being , there is nothing stopping us from coming up with initiatives at national level that raise awareness and have a canvassing effect on public opinion .
This is , after all , the whole point , namely to convince the consumer , us all , that environmentally-friendly cars are available and need not cost more than their polluting counterparts .
This is why it is important for there to be maximum openness about the purchase of these new vehicles , so that everyone , particularly at local level , can check things for themselves and make comparisons .
We too can set the right example , by for example deciding against travelling to Strasbourg or Brussels in our 4x4s , but by using an environmentally-friendly version instead , one that emits less dust and soot and less CO2 , without taking anything away from your driving comfort .
in writing . - ( PL ) Mr President , all the initiatives taken to meet the climate change criteria outlined by the Council of Europe in March 2007 , and which have been repeated in the conclusions of the current Presidency , will clearly strengthen the EU 's position as the world leader in the fight against climate change .
In keeping with this , the present report has also become part of the direction of our ongoing debate , by attempting to find effective means of reducing harmful CO2 emissions .
It appears that the new impulse that will be sent by public bodies to car manufacturers is a step in the right direction .
However , we must remember to strike a balance between encouraging innovation in the EU economy , and maintaining open competition among Europe 's businesses .
Let us hope that the motor industry will take this as a stimulus to intensify research which will lead to the faster introduction of new , environmentally friendly and energy-saving technologies .
in writing . - Climate change and depleting natural resources are important issues in our world today .
This initiative is a great start to helping clean our environment and helping make Europe more sustainable in the future .
This legislation is key if the EU is going to reach its goals of reducing 20 % of greenhouse emissions by 2020 , increasing energy efficiency by 20 % , and using renewable energies for at least 20 % of overall consumption .
Additionally , clean and energy-efficient cars tend to cost more .
If the demand for green vehicles increases , this could cause prices to drop so that green cars would be competitive and more affordable to the consumer .
It is important that we encourage all Europeans to play their part in protecting the environment .
in writing . - I welcome the recommendations in the compromise package .
It is right to challenge local authorities and public bodies to lead in sustainable , clean transport .
Public procurement should be based on sustainability .
In our cities in particular , choosing efficient , green transport options will benefit citizens ' health , our environment and our climate commitments and can act as a market catalyst for clean transport options .
These long-term benefits should be considered by those in charge of public procurement .
We know transport is one of the areas where CO2 emissions must be reduced , and it is my hope that the revision of this directive can be signed off as soon as possible so that it can be implemented by 2010 as a support for environmentally conscious local authorities and public bodies .
( GA ) I think the committee is right to challenge local authorities .
We all know that transport is one area where CO2 emissions need to be reduced .
This Directive would support local authorities and public bodies who value the environment .
Public procurement should be based on sustainability and not only should the price be considered but all other costs such as health , environment and carbon emissions should also be taken into account .
in writing . - ( RO ) Launching clean and energy-efficient vehicles on the market will make a significant contribution to protecting the environment , improving air quality and making modes of transport more energy efficient by reducing pollutant emissions .
The objectives of the Air Quality Directive and those suggested in the Green Paper on urban mobility will be implemented more effectively by promoting environmentally friendly public transport .
At the same time , the motor vehicle industry in Japan , which is focusing its efforts greatly on manufacturing clean cars , poses a threat to the European Union market , which needs to invest more in the technological development of vehicles which emit less carbon dioxide and in promoting alternative fuels .
In order to encourage car manufacturers to continually increase the number of environmentally friendly cars they produce , consideration needs to be given , in the case of public procurement , to the costs incurred throughout the entire lifetime of the respective vehicles and their impact on the environment and public health .
However , these demands will not distort competition between the public and private sectors as this will ultimately be subject to the same environmental regulations and criteria when providing public transport services .
in writing . - ( DE ) The proposal by the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety for the compulsory setting of energy efficiency and emissions standards as criteria for the procurement of road vehicles by local and regional authorities disregards the principle of subsidiarity in some respects and entails , above all , unsustainable additional bureaucratic expenditure .
The guarantee of ' clean and energy-efficient road vehicles ' is , for example , too complex a matter to set up and implement to be of any great use .
The compromise submitted does , however , somewhat simplify this bureaucratically overloaded system .
What is to be particularly welcomed in this connection is the fact that the Member States are to be given more flexibility in transposing the proposal .
The de minimis principle , according to which , beneath a certain threshold , vehicles do not come within this procurement process , will do a huge amount to reduce the burden on small local authorities .
The question remains , however , as to whether the hoped-for impact of this model on the private car market is in actual fact to be as great as expected , bearing in mind that the relevant market share in terms of the public procurement of commercial vehicles is a mere 6 % .
Impact of aviation security measures and body scanners on human rights , privacy , personal dignity and data protection ( debate )
The next item is the debate on the oral question to the Commission on the impact of aviation security measures and body scanners on human rights , privacy , personal dignity and data protection , by Philip Bradbourn and Marco Cappato , on behalf of the Committee on Civil Liberties , Justice and Home Affairs - B6-0478 / 2008 ) .
author . - Mr President , I would like to focus the House 's attention on the recent announcement by the Commission to apply whole-body imaging technology to Europe 's airports by 2010 .
Here I would like the Commission to clarify and justify many points which have been raised in the Committee on Civil Liberties , Justice and Home Affairs .
The most important is why this step is seen merely as a technical change to the existing aviation security regulation and , thus , why parliamentary scrutiny of fundamental issues of personal privacy and dignity are being bypassed .
This technology has the potential - and , I stress , the potential - to force air passengers to undergo what could be seen as undignifying treatment , and this is certainly not a small technical step .
If we are to justify this to our citizens , we first need to know why it is needed at all .
Are we heading down the route of using more technology just for the sake that that technology is available , and also , what extent will the technology be used for ?
I can understand that , in some cases , this should be a secondary measure , where an individual chooses not to be , as we say , frisked by a security official .
But as a primary screening measure it is a very serious breach of our basic rights to privacy and is intrusive .
We have already seen , with the liquids rules , that the precedent is being set for extra security measures to become the norm in airports .
However inconvenient these liquids rules are to passengers , it is certainly not an invasion of privacy .
Other major concerns I have are with the storage of data .
As I understand , storing of images is not the initial intention , but this is not to say that it is not possible to do so .
Therefore , could the Commission outline what events could lead to the storing of this data , how it would be protected , and whether ( and how ) it could be ruled today that this possibility would not be used , so that it could be ruled out completely , thereby greatly alleviating many of the concerns of law-abiding passengers ?
I would also like to see that proper consultation is carried out with user groups .
Tests have , indeed , been carried out on these machines at some airports - including in my own country at London Heathrow - but as yet , I understand , the results of this process have not been scrutinised by experts or the relevant parliamentary committees .
Finally , I would urge the Commission not to head down the route of forcing individuals to submit to a potentially degrading process without first understanding the rightful concerns of innocent travellers .
Of course we should be serious about security , but this form of blanket approach to technology has the potential to turn a legitimate security concern into an unacceptable peepshow for security industries .
Vice-President of the Commission . - ( IT ) Mr President , I would like to thank Parliament for having tabled this oral question , because it allows me to clarify an event and an issue which I consider to be important .
With regard to passengers ' rights - their right to safety and security and also their right not to have to put up with sometimes very long queues - as well as a control system that seemed to be obsolete and not always very effective , we have criticised all of this , and when I was an MEP I did so too .
Instead , we must aim at having a control system that allows citizens to travel in as easy and pleasant a manner as possible .
Thus , a few weeks ago we also announced which objects can be carried as hand baggage and which objects cannot .
The objective of the action being taken by the Commission and the Transport and Energy Directorate-General is to move in a direction that is helpful to citizens : always to protect citizens ' rights under all circumstances is a commitment that I have made before this very Parliament , and which I intend to continue to honour .
The aim of the proposal - I want to state it very clearly , and therefore I am happy that we can discuss this matter today - is not the decision by the Commission to add body scanners as from 2010 .
There has obviously been a misunderstanding .
The Commission has put a question to Parliament : does it consider that it would be useful to discuss the application and use of body scanners in airports as a non-mandatory checking system ?
That is the aim of the proposal , and that is what is stated in Article 4 ( 2 ) of the regulation of the European Parliament and of the Council on common rules in the field of civil aviation security .
The measure currently being considered by the European Parliament , under the comitology procedure with scrutiny , is restricted to making provision for the possibility of using body scanners as a means for ensuring aviation security .
With regard to the timetable , only if Parliament declares itself in favour , and only if we have verified that these instruments are useful and not damaging , particularly in terms of citizens ' health , will we be able to assess whether to then start to make a decision establishing under what conditions these technologies can be used .
With regard to the procedure , in line with the comitology procedure with scrutiny , on 4 September I informed the chairman of the relevant parliamentary committee , which is the Committee on Transport and Tourism .
Mr Costa replied to me on 26 September by letter , requesting further information , particularly with regard to the use of body scanners , namely , as to how the Commission intended to use the body scanners should a positive opinion be given .
In my letter replying to Mr Costa , sent on 7 October , I stressed several points .
The first was that the measure under consideration was perhaps to look at the possibility of using body scanners as a supplementary option for checking passengers and not as a mandatory requirement .
In short , passengers would be able to choose whether to go through a body scanner , should body scanners be deemed to be suitable , or to submit to a manual check as is currently the case .
I stated that some aspects , especially the impact on passengers ' health and particularly their privacy , will have to be analysed in more depth before any regulation is adopted regarding body scanners .
In addition , the European Data Protection Supervisor 's office would be involved - this is still what I put in the letter sent on 7 October to Mr Costa .
Amongst other things , the Supervisor has already been invited , together with national experts , experts in the sector , and the MEPs on the Committee on Civil Liberties , Justice and Home Affairs and the Committee on Transport and Tourism , to take part in the workshop that is to be held on 6 November , with the aim of guaranteeing transparency , and of course prior to any decision being made .
This meeting , which may also be repeated , is to establish whether there are any health risks , which is the issue that most concerns me .
We need to know if these body scanners are damaging to the health of those who freely choose to go through them .
We will then seriously evaluate their effectiveness , and this means , of course , listening to everything relating to citizens ' rights to privacy .
On this point , I repeat , the European Data Protection Supervisor will be heard , and I also intend to hear the view of the European Union Agency for Fundamental Rights .
How might they be used , if Parliament were to decide to give the green light to an examination of the idea of body scanners ?
In my view , they would be used only as a non-mandatory tool and , of course , an alternative would always have to be provided under all circumstances , and there would therefore have to be such an alternative in airports .
Thus , it would not be the only option , but one of the possibilities .
The second point is that the images would not be kept but would be immediately deleted ; that is , there ought to be a technical mechanism to prevent the image of a person who decides to pass through a body scanner from being recorded .
Thus it would be immediately deleted and absolutely not recorded - recording would be made impossible .
The other issue is with regard to health , which I consider to be a priority : at the workshop to be held on 6 November , we will ask all those responsible for air safety to give us news from the various countries of the EU on any reports of damage that might be caused by body scanners to human health : this means studies by universities , investigations by the various ministries of health or similar bodies , or statistics from countries that already use body scanners , starting with the United Kingdom , to find out if such risks exist .
Having said that , I have not taken any decision , nor do I intend to force the issue on this point .
I am merely putting forward a problem to Parliament for consideration .
Do we wish to examine this alternative , non-mandatory form of carrying out checks in airports , or not ?
That is the question .
If we wish to examine this proposal , then we must verify whether it is feasible , or in other words whether it is possible , first and foremost with regard to health , and then we will have to look at other criteria , starting with respect for individual rights .
Additionally , it will be vital for the regulatory provision that may result from this to establish that operators will have to be far away and unable to see directly , but will have to be in a special , closed location .
In other words , every guarantee must be given to ensure that this does not become an invasive tool , since it ought to be merely a tool intended to make things easier for citizens and to provide them with greater assurances .
It is also true that , from the data at our disposal , in airports where the body scanner system exists , the majority of people choose to go through the body scanner rather than undergo an alternative form of check .
These are some of the matters that need to be considered .
Of course , we have an option to regulate , if Parliament decides to agree to an examination of the idea of the body scanners .
Then , there is also the possibility of further scrutiny by Parliament .
It is my intention , as I have always said , partly because of my lengthy experience in this Chamber , to involve Parliament .
That is why I was very willing and very happy to come to this Chamber today to debate the issue of body scanners .
My aim is to involve Parliament and to come to a decision together .
Do we want there to be Community regulation , if all the stages in examining body scanners are passed , or do we want to leave using this tool up to individual Member States ?
I believe that , if a decision is taken to look into the possibility of body scanners and if this possibility were found to be viable , it would be fairer and better for European citizens to have Community legislation .
I believe that this would provide a better guarantee to all citizens who freely chose to go through the security checks using the body scanner system , as an alternative to another system , which would remain available in all the other airports , namely a manual body search .
Of course , I realise that every kind of check is personally invasive .
For me personally , a manual search is perhaps more invasive than being checked in a body scanner .
Everyone is free to make their own choice .
We do not live in a perfect world .
Unfortunately , we have to face many unpleasant situations ; unfortunately , we have to tackle the terrorism problem , we have to tackle the crime problem , we have to tackle the drug trafficking problem , we have to tackle the Mafia and Camorra problem , all in the country that I know best , and so checks are unfortunately necessary .
We do find some consequences of that , including for individuals , and we must ensure that the consequences for individuals are as slight as possible , by ensuring that there are no recordings , no notes and no infringements of privacy or fundamental human rights .
That is why I believe that it is right to debate this issue .
Naturally , I defer to the wishes of Parliament , after having sought to explain the reasons why I have brought this possibility to the attention of Parliament .
I hope that it can be dealt with and discussed purely with the interests of citizens in mind .
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - ( ES ) Mr President , Mr Vice-President of the Commission and Transport Commissioner , we are well aware of your efforts to inform the Committee on Transport and Tourism through its chairman , Mr Costa , and of the contents of this exchange of letters .
I must now warmly thank you for the information provided to the House as a whole .
However , I must criticise the fact that this resolution is being presented now when the deadline for this expires at 10 o 'clock in the morning .
This is not right .
In other words , and in all sincerity , this is neither one thing nor the other .
Likewise , I must say that , although there was consensus , the comitology procedure , even where subject to scrutiny , is totally inadequate for such a sensitive issue as that of body scanners .
In my opinion , we have to assess the impact on fundamental rights .
We also have to assess , in advance , the impact on health .
We must apply the principle of proportionality between what is proposed and the benefit that this will bring .
This House is frustrated about the issue of liquids , and this is being said by someone who advised the Spanish MEPs not to vote for the rejection , because making concessions , in the fight against terrorism , on the usefulness of a measure seemed to us to be taking things too far .
It is true that we passed a vote of confidence and what you say in your letter is also true in that not even the new checks on liquids that are being trialled will be able to absolutely stop all possible explosive liquids .
However , the intention - albeit voluntary - with regard to the body scanner seems to me to be woefully inadequate .
It is true that this may be voluntary and that it may be used as an additional tool - as already happens - in suspected cases of drug trafficking , where something is hidden in the body , but not as a replacement for a totally reasonable check which can be very useful and is accepted by everyone .
In any event , Mr Vice-President , this must be submitted to Parliament and to the Committee on Civil Liberties , Justice and Home Affairs .
Fundamental rights and personal dignity must be preserved .
Any measures adopted in the fight against terrorism will have our support , but they cannot be presented in any old way .
I feel that you should be very careful and tactful with how you make your announcements on this .

Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I would also like to thank the Vice-President , Mr Tajani , for some of the clarifications he has given , and I would like to respond immediately to his request .
He is asking this Parliament if we want to examine this proposal together : the answer is yes .
The oral question stems from this demand of ours .
We would like to examine it while having at our disposal all the information needed in order to understand , as you rightly wonder , whether this tool is a necessity and above all whether it is safe and respects citizens ' privacy , which is our priority .
We welcome the letter that you sent to Mr Deprez , chairman of the Committee on Civil Liberties , Justice and Home Affairs , in which you make a commitment that we would like to take as an official commitment .
That is the commitment to consult the European Data Protection Supervisor .
Our group does not yet have an official view regarding body scanners : we need more information and to examine the issue more thoroughly .
Meanwhile , with regard to health , we would like to understand what actually constitutes an exposure overdose , particularly for frequent flyers , and on this point we need to be certain that the information is reliable , because for many years we have been forced to leave liquids behind , and now we discover that it was probably an excessive precaution and that the information and the assessments were probably unfounded .
We need an assessment of the principle of proportionality and the full involvement of the European Parliament .
We do not believe that these measures can be seen merely as technical ones : they are measures that have a direct impact on human rights and on privacy .
It is complicated to combine security , privacy and the protection of passenger health , but that is the responsibility that this Parliament endorses and which it entrusts to you .
We hope that we can have this information and that you and the European Data Protection Supervisor will give it to us .
We need some more data in order to be able to make a confident decision on how useful these body scanners are .

on behalf of the ALDE Group . - ( IT ) Mr President , Mr Tajani , ladies and gentlemen , it seems to me that this is first and foremost a procedural problem and not a problem on the substance of the issue , on which it is clearly not difficult to find agreement .
In other words , it is clear , regarding the substance , that any security tool must be examined in terms of people 's safety and privacy and the effectiveness of the measure itself , the cost-benefit ratio - how much these machines cost , because that too is a problem - and I believe that that will become the most sensitive aspect .
In fact , technologies like these are usually easy for well-organised terrorist groups to avoid , whereas they have an impact on citizens .
This is true for fingerprints , it is true for the storing of telephone traffic and telephone tapping - well-organised groups are not afraid of these checks , but on the other hand they become mass checks on tens of millions of individuals .
I therefore believe that we are in agreement that a tool of this kind can receive the green light from the European Union only after a rigorous analysis of all these aspects and only after such an analysis has resulted in a positive opinion on all these aspects .
With regard to the procedure , we have been given a document which , in part A of the annex to document 1258 , has the title of screening allowed ' ; perhaps it is that title that has prompted us to sound the alarm , perhaps excessively , with regard to the procedure , because of the meaning of the word ' allowed ' .
What we are asking is that they should be allowed only after a technical assessment has been made and that therefore a totally political decision is taken .
That is the message behind tomorrow 's resolution .
At that point , it will be for you , following the political commitment that you have made , to find the technical path by which to achieve this objective , and in Parliament you will find a fair partner .
on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , in the Committee on Transport and Tourism we discussed the possibility of looking at these machines , following which , we received the first photographs that showed what the pictures were really like .
It then became clear that the proposal should crumble on a technical argument .
As I say , I do not want to go into more detail on this matter now , but there has not been , any impact assessment , as there was , for example , in the case of rear-view mirrors for lorries where almost every contractor in Europe was asked whether he agreed with there being a different type of rear-view mirror .
On an issue such as this , which is so important , nothing was said .
It was not thought to be necessary .
The images we have seen resemble slightly blurred black and white photographs of naked bodies .
That is entirely obvious .
It is certainly not prudery on my part , moreover , if I say to you today that I have reservations about this aspect , as an image of a naked body is a very private matter , and I want people to have the opportunity to decide whether or not people are to see them naked .
We are told that everything is , of course , on a voluntary basis .
Yes , this is not the first time we have been told such things .
Anyone who refuses to fall in with the system would be under suspicion from the outset .
The next step will be its compulsory introduction .
As for the next step after that , I dread to think what it might be .
I believe that this really is an approach that cannot be allowed to prevail as it stands .
In a few years ' time it will be compulsory , as security people have always come up with arguments in favour of arrangements such as this .
Moreover , the next step after that is certain to be data retention , even if this is still at present rejected .
We know , however , that whatever security people can do technically will in time be done .
Commissioner , the European Union is in this way succeeding only in making itself still more unpopular and in sliding still further down the popularity stakes .
That is because the Member States will blame the EU and not take on the responsibility for introducing this system .
on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group . - ( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I too should like to thank Mr Tajani , and to make a few points .
The first is that in recent years airports have become the places in which the ' security ' obsession finds its prime application .
There is a common thread running through this proposal and the PNR proposal , with the indiscriminate handling of air passenger data , and the regulation on liquids , which was put in place after an alleged attack two years ago , but it was then discovered , after the regulation had come into force , that all those who had been suspected of terrorism had been acquitted .
The body scanner is the last frontier in this modern torture , as Stefano Rodotà describes it .
The mania for extracting ever more information that could be useful in the fight against terrorism is fostering an authoritarian interpretation of the rule of law .
There is a clear violation of privacy , human rights and personal dignity .
The new requirement for total surveillance is reproducing the apparatus of social control .
The control mechanism of a ' mass-surveillance prison ' is being developed within society , so that all citizens are gradually being transformed into suspects who need to be monitored .
The creation of these instruments is a confirmation of Foucault 's theories , and the body scanner seems like a page taken out of the book Discipline and Punish .
It is no accident that the main cradle of this strategy is the body : Foucault says that through the political technology of the body we can read the shared history of power relations .
So , for these reasons and in this context the authoritarian character of the body scanner is apparent , and for these political and philosophical reasons it is not , in my view , acceptable to subject our bodies to this tool , which is yet another despotic display of technological power .
( NL ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , we are in favour of a European approach .
Let there be no doubt about this .
It should also be clear , though , that as the power of decision is being transferred from the Member States to Europe , the European Parliament should also have far more powers to take decisions and carry out inspections in the area in question .
In fact , this is also what we agreed a few months ago when the regulation was amended .
Today , we have a first set of measures that we need to look into .
There are two important aspects in this respect .
Firstly , there is the abolition of the liquid ban by April 2010 , which is very positive , although we would like to see this implemented even sooner .
The second is the inclusion on the list of possible screening methods of the notorious body scanner .
In that respect , you mentioned that trial projects are already underway in a number of airports , including Heathrow and Schiphol , and that European agreements are necessary .
As I understand it , the Member States in question cannot carry on running their trial projects if we do not regulate the issue at European level .
The reasoning is therefore turned on its head .
I think that we as the European Parliament should get to the bottom of this and that , before we can give it the thumbs up , we need a detailed response to a number of questions that have been raised here and elsewhere .
You have already given an answer to some extent , which fills me with great delight , but I think we should be more systematic with regard to privacy , something to which reference has already been made , and also with regard to the impact .
What are the benefits of the new system compared to existing screening methods ?
We expect an answer from you to this question , and other questions , in a structured manner , and if the answers are satisfactory , then we will be able to actually give it the green light at a later stage .
( ES ) Mr President , Commissioner , we are not here tonight to talk about technical measures relating to transport nor about whether one machine is more efficient or cheaper than another in terms of security checks .
We have opened this debate because what we are talking about here is an issue of fundamental rights , the right to privacy and the possibility that the irresponsible , bureaucratic and uncontrolled installation of a machine may represent a serious attack on passengers ' rights .
We therefore demand that no decision is taken on this matter without firstly examining its impact , without consulting the European Data Protection Supervisor , without establishing a legal framework laying down who is authorised to see us all naked and in what circumstances , and without confirming how it can actually be guaranteed in practice , at each airport , that its use will be free and voluntary and not imposed by the officers there at the time .
Please tell us who will keep such private images of our bodies .
I myself participated in the work on the Spanish law on closed-circuit television cameras in public places .
This was made law in the case of Spain .
I defended the usefulness of the system , but subject to full guarantees .
These guarantees have not been given in this case and , until they are , adopting this proposal through comitology , Commissioner , is simply an exercise in the abuse of power .
( ES ) Mr President , Commissioner , as we say in Spain , ' llueve sobre mojado ' , which means ' it never rains but it pours ' .
Until very recently , part of the Security Regulation was secret .
This secrecy , this lack of transparency , caused serious prejudice to our citizens who did not know what to expect .
We are now turning the screw even further , through a totally inappropriate procedure because it does not take account of the views of this House .
However , it is not just about including this House , in plenary , but also about opening a public debate with our citizens , once and for all , so that they can give their opinion .
We have actually reached a line beyond which the right to privacy , data protection and personal dignity may be cast into doubt .
As a result , this Parliament demands that we take a leading role as representatives of our citizens and that we have this debate , once and for all , as all the issues surrounding this line that must not be crossed , in other words the right to privacy , data protection and personal dignity , must be resolved .
We question the effectiveness , necessity and proportionality of this measure .
As a result , we believe that it must be formally debated by the plenary of this House - and not through the comitology procedure - and of course a public debate must be opened with the people of Europe , who are , after all , the ones who will suffer all the checks - as is already happening - at all the airports in the European Union .
( ES ) Mr President , using body scanners at airports is a sensitive issue which directly affects the security and privacy of citizens .
Our citizens demand transparency on such a delicate issue as this and we , in turn , demand transparency from the Commission .
This is not simply a technical issue that can be resolved using the comitology procedure .
If we take that approach , then legitimacy and democratic scrutiny will be missing .
People must be fully informed of those measures which directly affect them .
We cannot allow the lack of transparency that has dogged the most recent airport security measures to occur once again .
Obviously , in this House we are in favour of measures that guarantee greater security when travelling and that speed up checks at airports .
However , above all we are in favour of ensuring that our health and privacy are protected .
We want a technology that respects health and privacy and that does not cause more problems than it is trying to prevent .
For this reason , as has been said , prior medical and scientific studies must be carried out on the direct consequences of millimetre waves on the health of passengers and , in particular , in the case of the most vulnerable , such as pregnant women , children , the sick , the elderly and people with disabilities .
In terms of obtaining and processing these images , what does the Commission propose to guarantee confidentiality and privacy ?
As you said , it is vital that these images are immediately deleted and that there is no possibility of their being printed , saved or transmitted .
Mr Tajani , will passengers be able to choose or will they have to refuse to go through the scanners ?
It is clearly not the same thing .
Is specific training planned for the security staff who will be operating this new technology ?
Has the cost : benefit ratio and the proportionality of a technology that would be used as an option been assessed ?
Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , our objective is clear .
We must ensure that information is provided to the people and that all aviation security measures respect fundamental rights and are applied equally at all airports .
The use of this new technology cannot represent another turn of the screw towards greater security - I am about to finish - to the detriment of fundamental rights .
It is a question of balance .
Mr President , let me put this straight .
I am committed to fighting terrorism and to ensuring security for all citizens , but I am not going to explain to my constituents how 11 MEPs decided , in an obscure bureaucratic procedure , to allow body-scanning in European airports which would show them naked .
This whole comitology procedure is yet another example of how to push European citizens into Euro-scepticism .
The Commission 's argument - but also that of the developers of this technology - is that body scanners are intended as alternative to physical searches .
But the moment we allow this technology , we will have no guarantee that it will not be used for primary screening .
We all know from our experience in airports that some of them perform a mandatory physical search .
Therefore the issue is whether we allow body scanners or not .
Perhaps we should forbid them .
So I urge the Commission to suspend this procedure , which has put us in a messy situation .
We need to have a large democratic debate in which Parliament and the EDPS have to be involved .
This is invasive technology , and issues such as privacy , proportionality and efficiency must be carefully looked into .
( ES ) Mr President , as evidenced on several occasions , the Committee on Transport and Tourism is in favour of maximum security with the least inconvenience to passengers and travellers .
In principle , we therefore agree with reducing this inconvenience for passengers while , at the same time , maintaining a high level of checks and security .
In the case of liquids , Parliament has already suggested the alternative of scanners specifically to avoid all these difficulties .
It is true that advances in technology should make this process easier .
In the current case of body scanners , you might think that there is a need for greater discretion in body searches and that a machine would perhaps make things easier and specifically avoid those exceptional situations in which a surface body search alone is not sufficient .
However , I absolutely agree , as suggested by the Committee on Transport , with the need for every type of precaution to be taken , for travellers and European citizens to be guaranteed total security in relation to the application of this technology , if it is applied , and for current studies and tests - which are merely studies and tests - to provide positive conclusions .
These scans must not be harmful in any way to health , they must not infringe the privacy of the person , they must not humiliate people , and the data and images collected must be subject to data protection .
Mr President , I shall be very brief .
There are just two points I want to make .
I do not think that we should close all the doors on this matter .
For instance , in a trial run at London Heathrow Airport over a period of four years , 98 % of passengers opted for a body scan instead of the normal physical search .
Clearly this represents a vote of confidence in the technology .
It also increases security .
I know other people disagreed with this tonight , but it increases security as it can detect ceramic and plastic weaponry which are undetectable to standard metal detectors .
The second point I want to raise is in relation to people who have metal implants in their bodies as a result of injuries or disabilities .
They suffer constant humiliation , always being singled out for additional searches at airports .
I propose a system for endorsing users ' passports so that they are not subject to this humiliation on a regular basis .
I ask that the Commissions look at this problem , because it is a huge problem at the present time for people who have suffered a physical injury and have an implant .
I ask that that be looked at .
( RO ) I am proceeding on the assumption that passenger security in the aviation industry is vitally important .
However , body scanning suggests obtaining detailed images of a human body .
These images are an invasion of a person 's privacy .
I would like to refer to the conditions in which these images are to be used .
Commissioner , we understand that the images will not be stored .
However , are they to be used in accordance with all the conditions imposed by data protection legislation ?
What measures are you intending to take to ensure that staff using these scanners are familiar with , and abide by , the provisions of data protection legislation ?
Commissioner , even in circumstances where passengers give their consent to using these scanners , I would like us to receive the guarantee that the images produced will be deleted .
Unfortunately , it will only be a number of years down the line before we are able to learn about the effects on people 's health of using these scanners .
( NL ) Mr President , a measure which may seem justifiable for reasons of transport safety and terrorism is , from other points of view , anything but obvious .
Press reports about body scanners in the Dutch press have caused a torrent of indignation .
If the body scanner is a sound instrument , then it is presented in the wrong manner .
Certainly as long as the effects on health and privacy are unknown , we cannot use them .
Precisely because people feel threatened by all kinds of other , new developments , there is every reason to exercise extreme caution here .
Commissioner , pending the required clarifications and investigations , you now have the task of body-scanning this debate .
Vice-President of the Commission . - ( IT ) Mr President , I believe that today an important goal has been achieved , and that is the goal of launching a debate on body scanners , in order to understand whether this is an issue that needs to be addressed or not .
It seems to me that the debate has shown there is a clear will to discuss the issue .
With regard to the method , and partly because of what has been decided with the adoption of the Treaty of Lisbon - and I hope that it will later be adopted by all the EU countries - I realise that Parliament wants to have its say , and wants to feel that it is a full legislator .
I have only abided by the current rules .
I do not have the authority to modify comitology ; that is not within my powers .
I can only have a report and ensure that Parliament is always involved in any case when there is a debate on an important issue , and also say whether a debate on the issue ought to take place .
The workshop that we have arranged for 6 November , which will include representatives of the Member States and MEPs , will be an opportunity - not that it is the only one , since it might be the first of a series of specific meetings - to assess all aspects of the use of body scanners , starting with what I consider to be the most important , human health .
We will then tackle all the other problems relating to the possible non-mandatory use of this instrument , with the consensus of Parliament at the time .
I do not wish to impose anything on anyone : I just want to assess possibilities .
I say again that I believe that it is right to do this with Parliament , with the commitment that I have made - and I repeat it now , at the conclusion of this debate - to officially consult the European Data Protection Supervisor and listen to the views of the European Union Agency for Fundamental Rights .
As far as I am concerned , if after all the evaluations , on which I will report to Parliament , it is decided to go ahead with the choice of using body scanners , as far as the European Commission is concerned , my commitment is that body scanners - and I can guarantee this and I say it once again - will never be made compulsory and an alternative to them must always be provided by the airports .
If there is a European regulation then it must be on these terms : then , of course , if the laws are infringed it is clear that there will be consequences .
If a legal provision is adopted , if we have a European regulation , then as far as the Commission is concerned one may agree or disagree , but that is the way things are .
I make a commitment to do something : then if someone does not believe what I say and thinks it cannot be done .
Otherwise we will not do anything .
As far as the images are concerned , they will not be recorded and they will never be stored .
Thus it will only be a sort of walk through , given everything that will have to be done first .
Should a decision be taken to use body scanners as an optional tool , the images will never be recorded or stored .
That point will be in the text of the European Commission 's regulation .
If anyone subsequently breaks the rules , then the European Commission will take the appropriate measures .
The same goes for any provision , and any criminal code .
If anyone breaks a law then they incur the penalties laid down by the criminal code .
Today there is a manual body search : any official who touches a citizen inappropriately is violating their privacy and breaking the rules , and is thus not abiding by the law .
The official will certainly be charged and found guilty , after a proper legal process .
Above all , I undertake to take great pains on the issue of health .
I believe that all these guarantees must and can be assessed afterwards by Parliament , which I intend to consult again at successive stages , starting with the workshop to be held on 6 November .
This will be a meeting where MEPs will be able to put questions , say what they think and raise any queries , including technical ones .
I can give guarantees of a political nature , but not of a technical nature .
We need the technical experts to respond .
After the technical assessments , we will be able to give a response on that point .
The MEPs who have been invited to the workshop will also participate in the assessment .
I therefore believe that I am in agreement with what was said in particular by Mr Fava and Mr Cappato on this point .
A general consensus can be reached , which will be a joint assessment as to whether or not it is advisable in the future to use this technological tool .
If it proves not to be possible to use it because the relevant criteria have not been met , then it will not even be included in the list of possible tools to use .
If we were to come up with a positive verdict , after all the steps that I have promised to carry out , then the text of the regulation would contain all the guarantees that I have undertaken to incorporate into it , as I have said both in my opening remarks in response to the question and in my concluding reply .
This is a commitment , and I am used to keeping to my commitments , above all those made to a Parliament of which I was a part for nearly 15 years .
Mrs Lichtenberger , I must interrupt a scanning procedure currently underway that is extremely dangerous , particularly for the health of the interpreters , whom we thank for their cooperation .
I have received a motion for a resolution1 tabled by six political groups .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place on Thursday , 23 October .
Agenda of the next sitting : see Minutes
Closure of the sitting
( The sitting was closed at 12.14 a.m. )
Opening of the sitting
( The sitting was opened at 9 a.m. )
Variations to the terms of marketing authorisations for medicinal products - Counterfeiting of medicinal products ( debate )
The next item on the agenda is the joint debate on :
the report of Françoise Grossetête on behalf of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety on the proposal for a directive of the European Parliament and of the Council amending Directive 2001 / 82 / EC and Directive 2001 / 83 / EC as regards variations to the terms of marketing authorisations for medicinal products - C6-0137 / 2008 -
the Commission report on the counterfeiting of medicinal products .
rapporteur . - ( FR ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , allow me first of all to warmly congratulate the Council , the Commission and the shadow rapporteurs for their cooperation on this dossier of amendments regarding marketing authorisations for medicinal products .
It must be made possible for medicinal products , whatever procedure is applied in authorising their marketing , to be subject to the same evaluation , approval and administrative processing criteria in the event of changes being made to them .
These changes , known as ' variations ' , relate , for example , to the manufacturing process , the introduction of a new therapeutic indication , updating of information leaflets , or administrative changes .
These variations must be reported to the competent authorities by the holders of authorisations to market medicinal products .
However , the current way of managing variations is proving increasingly inefficient and is no longer satisfactory either for the authorities or for the pharmaceutical industry as a whole .
There is too much red tape , adversely affecting patients , whose access to the best medicinal products is delayed .
The pharmaceutical industry devotes a growing part of its regulatory work to managing these variations .
By way of example , in the case of a medium-sized company producing generic medicines and carrying a list of 400 products , the total number of variations submitted would exceed 4 000 per year .
In the case of a large company , the number can reach 19 000 .
Changes to purely national marketing authorisations take place in accordance with provisions specific to each Member State , which are different from the European regulatory requirements .
Given that 80 % of all human and veterinary medicinal products are authorised via national procedures , this revision will have a considerable impact on the pharmaceuticals market in the European Union .
Any one change to products authorised under national procedures in different Member States is therefore treated in a number of different ways in terms of the dossier to be submitted and the evaluation procedure .
This situation has some undesirable repercussions : namely , it entails an unjustified additional administrative burden for the competent authorities and pharmaceutical businesses ; logistical issues for the actual implementation of changes ; and widely differing deadlines for introducing changes to the summary of characteristics of the product and the information leaflet for health care personnel and patients , with a knock-on effect on the overall working of the single market in pharmaceutical products .
Lastly , it adversely affects patients , since the introduction of some changes that improve the effectiveness of a medicine may be delayed or , worse , never happen at all .
My report therefore has as its main objective the simplification and harmonisation of the rules relating to these variations of marketing authorisations for medicinal products .
With this directive , the situation will be more straightforward , clearer and more flexible for all concerned .
The rules relating to variations will be the same everywhere , whatever the type of authorisation , whether it is a national authorisation , mutual recognition procedure or centralised procedure for a medicinal product .
Simplifying these variations will mean they are subject to the same criteria with regard to the authorisation , administrative management and supervision of the changes made , whatever the legal procedure may have been whereby the medicinal products were licensed .
Moreover , I have proposed an additional amendment to the system where a change concerns a number of marketing authorisations .
In this event , it must be made possible to submit a single application covering all these marketing authorisations .
I am aware , Mr President , that Mr Verheugen is to speak after me about the counterfeiting of medicinal products .
We expect a great deal from his statement since it is important for this package , which includes the counterfeiting of medicinal products , to be presented to us .
We have been looking forward to it for a long time .
Counterfeiting is a crime which concerns public health .
It is important for Mr Verheugen to tell us what stage he is at , as we are anxious to see this text .
In any case , we offer him our full support .
Vice-President of the Commission . - ( DE ) Mr President , honourable Members , today 's debate takes place in the context of a development in the health sector that changes a great deal .
The development concerned is the ever increasing number of senior citizens in our societies , whose supreme concern will be the issue of health .
This must be understood .
The more senior citizens in society - and this group will keep on growing - the more important the issue of health , of how to deal with care for these people and with therapies and medicinal products ; and , incidentally , the more important the issue of how to ensure that these people obtain the information they need in order to not only stay abreast of their state of health but also to do what is necessary to remain in good health .
Such is the background to today 's debate .
The issue we are dealing with directly today is the Variations Regulation .
I am very pleased that a compromise has been reached on this .
The Regulation governs any variations required - be it on public-health or economic grounds - after a medicinal product has already been authorised .
We cannot just stand by and watch as variations - of any kind - are made to a medicinal product after its authorisation .
It goes without saying that regulation and scrutiny are required .
Your decision today , honourable Members , will contribute significantly to ensuring that medicinal products continue to be safe and effective in future .
The existing legislation has brought a number of problems , which we have analysed .
For example , the current legislation entails considerable financial and administrative burdens on all parties concerned .
This can result in certain variations not being implemented - and we have examples of this - even though , in themselves , they are necessary in the interests of patients .
For example , there have been cases where medicinal products have required further development at a certain point but this has not happened because the costs associated with putting variations through the authorisation procedure are too high .
For this reason , it is very important that the proposal to be adopted here today improves the existing legislation in terms of simplicity , precision and flexibility .
This will also mean that this solution is in keeping with our better law-making agenda .
I should like to express my sincere thanks to Mrs Grossetête and all those who have contributed to her report for their work on this difficult dossier .
I should also like to thank the House for the massive support the European Parliament has already given me on many occasions with regard to the fight against counterfeit medicines .
I understand Mrs Grossetête 's impatience to see this proposal adopted , which I share , but in this case , too , of course , quality is more important than speed .
In a moment I shall be saying a few things about the timetable .
The pressure Parliament is exerting in the matter of the fight against counterfeit medicines is helpful and important .
Please do not think that this bothers me ; quite the reverse , I feel strengthened by it .
How do things stand ?
We are currently having to contend with an alarming increase in counterfeit medicines discovered in the European Union itself .
Previously , we had always assumed that Europe was a transit area for illegal products destined for third countries .
I remember that when we discussed the matter here for the first time that I took the view that this was not , in fact , a problem for Europe , but one for Africa and other less developed parts of the world in particular .
This situation has changed : it has now become a problem for us , too .
The European market itself is increasingly becoming a destination for counterfeit medicines . This represents a very serious threat to public health .
It can cost many lives , and so the Commission is determined to act .
Parliament 's very important resolution of 12 July 2007 contained a very significant statement on which I , too , base my deliberations , namely ' that counterfeiting of medicines is not a patent issue as such ' .
This is a very important point to note .
Under discussion here are not intellectual property rights , nor patent rights , but criminal offences .
Counterfeiting of medicines constitutes criminal wrongdoing whether or not the medicine concerned is still under patent ; that aspect is completely irrelevant in this regard .
Counterfeiting is counterfeiting and , in the case of medicines , should always be classed as criminal behaviour .
Parliament then continued : ' measures to tackle counterfeiting need to be taken in the area of criminal enforcement [ ... ] and drug regulation by strengthening the regulatory capacity of the national authorities and not by increasing levels of intellectual property protection ' .
In its work on its proposal on the fight against counterfeit medicines , the Commission has been guided precisely by the deliberations presented by you , honourable Members .
Over the next few weeks , the Commission will present legislation to strengthen the existing legal framework .
This is intended to ensure , with a probability verging on certainty , that is , where humanly possible , that no more counterfeit medicines can be smuggled into the legal supply and distribution chain .
As you know , the Commission has not yet dealt with the proposal .
I have not even presented it to the Commission as yet , as a large number of very difficult issues has still to be clarified , and I should also like to include the outcome of today 's debate in my final decision on the proposal .
What I can describe to you already , however , are the most important elements , the foundations .
As has already been mentioned , the distribution chain must be strengthened in the first instance .
Therefore , we must ensure that it is possible to verify the authenticity of every single pack at all times on its way from the manufacturer to the consumer - that is , the patient .
This requires the origin of the pack and of the medicine to be traceable at all times throughout their journey from the manufacturer to the patient .
You can guess what that means .
It is a very ambitious demand that will make tough technical demands on all links in the distribution chain , from the manufacturer to the chemist 's shop , and will require large-scale investment .
I am happy to say , however , that all parties concerned consider it right and necessary , and that the technical solutions concerning the traceability of medicines do exist .
Secondly , the rules for products passing through the hands of importers must be absolutely clear , and all parties concerned must be subject to stricter supervision .
In this regard , it must be made quite clear that , naturally , the risk at our borders may be even greater than the risk within the European Union ; i.e. , that there is the risk of counterfeit medicines being brought into the EU from outside .
This is a problem best combated directly at the external borders .
The proposal will also therefore contain the relevant improvements .
Finally , a further important point consists in ensuring that the active ingredients , that is , the most important components of the medicine , be produced according to legislation with safety standards corresponding to those within the EU .
Honourable Members , why should that be a problem ?
Incidentally , I was surprised when I saw this : it is a fact that the active ingredients , the most important components of the medicine , very often , indeed even usually , originate from non-European countries , third countries .
In this regard , we must ensure that the active ingredients , wherever they may be produced , are manufactured to the same standards as our own .
This , in turn , will be a very ambitious , difficult task .
However , I believe that , in our globalised world , Europe needs a dynamic , competitive pharmaceutical industry in order to take advantage of the opportunities presented by globalisation .
Yet we must also take up the associated public-health challenges .
The forthcoming Commission proposal will be moderate , sound and balanced , but also determined and clear wherever determination is called for .
Our society is entitled to the most effective protection possible against counterfeit medicines .
When , very shortly , in just a few weeks ' time , we are in a position to discuss the Commission proposal , I would ask that you judge it precisely on the basis of the following principle : are we doing our best here to protect Europeans effectively against counterfeit products ?
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the report we are discussing today relates to some very important issues of harmonising the terms of marketing authorisations for medicinal products .
As draftsman of the opinion of the European Parliament 's Committee on Agriculture , I would like to express my support for the Commission 's proposal .
To date , only a small proportion of medicinal products falls within the remit of European legislation .
Products that have received only national marketing authorisation are not subject to current European legislation on variations , and are therefore subject to various specific national laws .
On the one hand , this is inefficient and costly to the economy while , on the other , it prevents the internal market from functioning smoothly .
Implementing the present directive would provide a legal basis for harmonisation and would bring great benefits to consumers and to the sector .
It would also enable faster access to the latest medicinal products in all Member States .
The lack of harmonised regulations means that each country applies its own specific national rules .
This situation gives rise to red tape , barriers and difficulties in the operation of the internal market while resulting in differing safety criteria .
Special attention should be paid to the cost to the Member States of implementing the new legislation .
I do not believe that the countries of Europe will be able to amend their internal legislation within the short timescales provided to accommodate the additional changes , and which will entail high costs .
My congratulations to the rapporteur and I ask you to vote in favour of Mrs Grossetête 's report .
Mr President , on this subject I want to do two things : firstly , congratulate the Commission and Mrs Grossetête , and , secondly , talk about subsidiarity .
I have frequently criticised the European Union in this respect , as , for example , with the Services Directive and also the current attack on pharmacies in the name of liberalisation .
In these examples , the European Commission has entered into areas which properly come under subsidiarity and which have been developed for each individual society and with which this society is content .
In other words , the European Union 's meddling could damage what is working effectively , as in the case of pharmacies .
However , in the present case , I feel that this report must be clearly welcomed , bearing in mind that it represents the only way of controlling quality and guaranteeing good health .
Why ?
The reason is that , without a single point of control for all medicinal products , there are too many avenues left open and the system is much more vulnerable to infiltration by harmful or unauthorised products .
This is also true in the case of active ingredients on which there was a resolution last year , tabled by Mrs Sartori and myself , which I see has been taken up by the Commission .
I therefore feel that this is a good proposal which will cut through a lot of red tape and offer safeguards to society .
I also welcome the emphasis placed on information because it is clear that , in a society with patient mobility as it is , where patients can easily travel for treatment and where many elderly people live in countries other than their countries of origin , it is very important that doctors and all health care staff can have access to the same information and criteria in their work .
on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I wish to express my sincere thanks to Mrs Grossetête for her work on this report .
It has been a pleasure to work with her , and she has undoubtedly achieved two things with the compromise she has reached .
Firstly , she has made a procedure simpler and less bureaucratic and , secondly , she has met the needs and requirements of small enterprises in individual Member States with purely national systems and authorisations in a flexible manner , and done them a great favour .
The report by Mrs Grossetête is also connected with patient safety , and this is another issue we are discussing today .
We are speaking broadly about the safety of individuals , patient safety .
Commissioner Verheugen rightly pointed out that , with the ageing of society , people 's health needs and fear of illness have grown ever larger .
Fear is something that has already been growing in society for a long time , and it is up to us , where we have competence and where we are able , to keep this fear to a minimum or to tackle or resolve it as far as possible .
A great many of the measures necessary to this end are ones on which we have competence and are able to give advice .
One among very many issues is undoubtedly patient information and the safety of medicinal products .
Patients are entitled to be fully informed about their illness ; and , if they are fully informed and able to act on a par with medical practitioners , they must be entitled to safe medicinal products and safe treatment methods .
This is not the case in the European Union at present , and we are conscious of a growing danger .
I am really not one to dramatise ; I may sometimes be rather emotional , but I do not dramatise .
I am also the last person who would arouse fear .
Yet I would caution against overlooking , or closing our eyes to , a problem that exists .
The banking crisis is a good current example of what happens if we omit to solve small problems we are capable of solving , if we wait too long : we find ourselves overcome by a giant wave of almost tsunami proportions .
That is why I thank Commissioner Verheugen for his words here today , and also urge him to be true to them and combat counterfeit medicines .
There are no simple solutions to this problem , and those who believe that patient safety and the safety of medicinal products are an issue only with regard to parallel trade - I glance up at the gallery , but it is probably a little too early for the representatives of parallel trade - take too narrow a view and insult my intelligence and that of my fellow Members .
What we must endeavour to do here is to protect patients .
This can be done by means of various measures , for example , by checking whether the packaging of the medicinal product is intact .
What would you say if you were to buy a product in your home country whose packaging was in a language you did not understand , with only a small sticker on it , and small , chopped-up blister packs inside ?
Would you have confidence in the product ?
I ended up with a pack such as this , containing an urgently needed medicine , and I can tell you that I did not have confidence in it .
This is something we must prohibit , and I am sure that parallel traders - for it is they who evidently believe we wish to threaten their livelihoods , which is not the case - will have enough intelligence to find an alternative .
They will come up with new packaging , or will at least stop cutting up blister packs .
As Commissioner Verheugen pointed out , there are technical solutions .
The medicinal products industry is prepared for a complete traceability system , with a bar code enabling the tracing of each medicinal product .
In addition , there is a pilot project .
Switzerland and Belgium have demonstrated that it is possible .
It is our task to give patients this security .
I should like to say a final word about ingredients , where the issue is not only with counterfeit medicines .
As you know , there was a major scandal involving heparin - a blood-thinner .
When people use a counterfeit medicine , they can die ; it is extremely dangerous .
We obtained these counterfeit preparations from China .
It is also our task to ensure that no counterfeit preparations or active ingredients are produced in our third-country trading partners and that our markets are properly protected .
Two things are needed to this end : we must properly protect our borders , we need traceability systems and we must ensure safety in these countries .
Mr Donato Tommaso Veraldi has the floor on behalf of the Alliance of Liberals , but I am informed that he is not in the hall , and I therefore call upon ... there you are .
You were hiding somewhere else .

Mr President , I am not Mr Veraldi ; I am Mr Matsakis .

I will be speaking later on behalf of the ALDE Group , and I was wondering if , in the absence of my colleague Mr Veraldi , I could take his slot .
No , I am sorry : we have to keep to the order of speakers .
When your time comes , I will ask you to take the floor .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to express my support for this report , which is perfectly in line with the commitment to better regulation that Europe has stood for for many years .
The new system of marketing authorisations for medicinal products will considerably simplify the procedure in the case of minor changes or new scientific discoveries and will signify a substantial easing of the technical and administrative burden on businesses .
All of this is fully in keeping with the goals set out in the Lisbon strategy launched by the European institutions at the dawn of the new millennium .
It identifies better regulation as one of the pillars underpinning the growth of the economy and jobs in Europe .
It cannot be denied that the competitiveness of our businesses is suffering under the excessive legislative and bureaucratic conditions on manufacturing that have accumulated in recent decades , and that the impact of this is becoming ever more burdensome and unsustainable in the case of small and medium-sized enterprises that form the backbone of the national production system in many Member States .
More to the point , at this precise moment in time , when the international crisis is threatening to suffocate our economy , we cannot allow ourselves to put our businesses at a further disadvantage with wasted costs and administrative delays .
The will to streamline the legislative framework must be perceived as a duty and an unbreakable commitment .
I am pleased that the Council , too , has accepted the European Parliament 's request to protect small and medium-sized enterprises by excluding from the scope authorisations for pharmaceuticals issued by Member States up to 1998 .
This has prevented small and medium-sized enterprises from having to make further efforts in order to comply with current legislation .
I would first of all like to express my thanks to the rapporteur for producing such an extensive piece of work in this report , and especially for the successful efforts , or should that be the potentially successful efforts , in negotiating a compromise with the Council and with the Commission .
I would also like to thank the Commission for directing its efforts towards unifying the administration in the area of certifying drugs and also to thank it for the fact that these efforts should result in higher levels of safety for patients .
It is clearly essential to harmonise legislation at a European level in the area of registering drugs .
We need a unified set of administrative rules for all drugs on the internal market , in order that we can prevent negative impacts on human health .
I therefore warmly welcome the aim of this proposal to ensure that all drugs on the market are subject to the same criteria , including those drugs that have been approved purely at a national level .
I would like to consider the question of purely national registration in more detail .
Even though I was a supporter of unified criteria with no exceptions , I believe that the text of proposed amendment number 36 , allowing national regulations to continue in use for drugs that have been registered at a purely national level and approved prior to 1 January 1998 , should not be an obstacle to harmonisation at a European level as it is so well thought-out and provides sufficient guarantees , such as the requirement to inform the Commission of decisions to continue with the application of national regulations or the requirement for transfer to European regulations where a drug has already been registered in another Member State .
Regarding the implementation of a single application covering one or more identical changes , I feel that it would bring a certain measure of relief to the large pharmaceutical companies , which is surely a good thing .
I am not quite so sure , however , that the positive effect will be to reduce the administrative burden in the individual Member States .
That is a negative effect which we may be able to eliminate in the future .
Despite the minor reservations that I have expressed here , I consider the text which has emerged from the debate to be a positive step in the area of registering drugs and , bearing in mind how difficult it was to achieve this compromise , I recommend it as shadow rapporteur to colleagues from my political group for approval .
Apart from anything else , there is also the practical reason that if this directive is not passed at the first reading this year , it will be up to the Czech presidency to find a solution to these very difficult questions .
Therefore , we have an opportunity now .
I would like to point out that it is not the President who has been kind and given more time to speak , but the group .
Perhaps it was because of the coming holidays .
on behalf of the IND / DEM Group . - Mr President , there are many things people want to know about medicines before they take them or give them to their animals : that they are safe and effective , and come from ethical sources , and how they will interact with other medicines .
This should be the focus of our authorisation process .
In terms of business , companies want to know that their investment is safe .
Simplification will not mean being lax , but sticking to the essentials .
While I am on the topic of authorisation , I would like to alert the Commission to the fact that hexafluorosilicic acid is put in Irish drinking water and yet it has no authorisation at all ; nor has there been any attempt by successive Irish governments to obtain any authorisation at all , and yet it is the most widespread medicine in Ireland .
If we are going to be serious about authorisation and correcting the authorisation process to make it more effective and safer , we must tackle this flagrant abuse of the process .
( SK ) In most Member States , there has been no harmonisation with community law in the area of marketing authorisations for medicinal products , and therefore varying practices have emerged in these states .
The aim of the proposal is that all medicinal products , regardless of the procedure under which they were authorised for release onto the market , should be subject to the same assessment criteria in respect of the administrative process for approving changes .
I welcome initiatives of this kind , aimed at simplifying the framework , without abandoning the criteria necessary for protecting the health of humans and animals .
Harmonisation is necessary mainly because of the risk to public health which arises through Member States applying varying sets of scientific criteria when evaluating changes to medicinal products .
Without this legal amendment , such a state of affairs constitutes a barrier to the free movement of medicinal products , which is to the detriment of patients .
The consultations relating to the drafting of the amendment to the directive themselves showed that many Member States support harmonisation in this area .
The administrative burden and logistical complications are , however , a shared issue which we must resolve .
We must therefore emphasise that the improvements to the system will , apart from anything else , be beneficial for patients in the long term , since better use will be made of drugs and better use will also be made of the resources employed by the relevant authorities for protecting public health .
Despite this , I recommend caution in view of the hidden costs which will arise for the Member States .
Care must also be taken to ensure a reasonable timetable for practical implementation .
Member States cannot be called on to change their internal laws in order to fulfil this provision , but must rather be assisted in order to ensure that excessively short implementation periods do not impose a major expense on them .
( FI ) Mr President , I wish to thank my colleague , Mrs Grossetête , for her excellent report .
It is important to reform the laws on marketing authorisations because it will reduce the administrative burden that goes with processing them .
At the same time , too , it will allow the use of resources to be steered towards issues that are essential for drug safety and public health , which is also in the interests of patients needing medication .
After all , the main criterion is ultimately the interests of the patient .
I am in favour of a system where the same rules would apply both nationally and for authorisations granted in the context of EU processes .
At present , the rules on the issue of market authorisations are harmonised regardless of the issuing process that is applied to them , but that has not been the case with the changes to the marketing authorisation .
Accordingly , different Member States have been expecting partially different rules for such matters as the classification of the applications for amendments and in connection with the process for evaluating them .
It is important for the pharmaceutical industry that it will still be able , in future , to submit a complete , new application for a market authorisation for a drug that already has one , but which has another commercial name and a different summary of product characteristics .
This is necessary in situations where a marketing authorisation is being applied for in respect of medicinal products for a new purpose , and permitting a new name to be used is also clearer for the patient than using the same name when the drug is being used for very different purposes .
I therefore support Amendments 4 and 18 , which deal with this .
As pharmaceutical companies often supply the entire EU with medicinal products , it is important that the administrative processes in different countries are harmonised .
Any other approach would mean not just a huge administrative burden for the industry , but often also logistical problems .
I hope that Parliament will support Mrs Grossetête 's report in tomorrow 's vote and that the Member States later on this year will also support Parliament 's views , so that the reform of the laws on marketing authorisations can be brought to a conclusion by the end of this year .
( RO ) Creating harmonised criteria for the approval and administrative management of any kind of variations to marketing authorisations for medicinal products will benefit patients as they will have access to better and safer products in the long term .
Bearing in mind that only 20 % of medicines for human and veterinary use are authorised via Community procedures , this revision of the directive will have a considerable impact on the pharmaceuticals market in the European Union .
Any variations in the production process , changes to the packaging , or the manufacturer 's address , must be reviewed and simplified to ensure the best protection for public health .
We need to create a simple , flexible legislative framework so that all medicinal products , whatever the procedure applied in authorising their marketing , are subject to the same evaluation and approval criteria .
This measure will ensure the free circulation of medicines in the European Union by abandoning the controls required to guarantee the quality of imported medicines and will help establish and make the internal market operate efficiently .
This will speed up access to the latest medicines for consumers and the pharmaceutical industry , while also eliminating the discrepancies between national provisions and creating a harmonised system .
Mr President , I hope it does not have to do with counterfeiting medicines .
Will I get a little extra time along with this allocation ?
In view of the lack of other representatives from your group , I think you can speak for a very long time !
I do not know about the others who are on the list , but for sure you are on the list .
Mr President , I shall not speak for a very long time , but I might speak for longer than my allocated time .
I would like to say to the Commissioner that it is undoubtedly a fact that the current system of dealing with variations in the terms of marketing authorisations for medicinal products is unsatisfactory and , in many cases , works against the interests both of the pharmaceutical industry , but also - most importantly - of the patients themselves .
It is therefore essential that the revision should be conducted .
In this respect , the Commission 's proposal , and indeed Mrs Grossetête 's report , are , overall , sound and fair and should meet with our agreement .
I would , however , like to register my reservations in relation to the following point which concerns the extension of marketing authorisations .
The Commission and the rapporteur both seem , in my understanding , to agree that it should be possible for an authorised drug to have its name completely changed if it is found that it has a new pathology application .
For example , the drug aspirin , whose active ingredient is salicylic acid , could , if the Commission 's proposal is adopted , be marketed with a number of different names , even though the chemical component is exactly the same - i.e. salicylic acid .
Hence , a patient could end up taking three different tablets , all looking different and having a different name , for three different pathologies , whereas in reality , all three tablets would be exactly the same as far as their chemical composition is concerned - i.e. he would , in effect , be taking three tablets of aspirin .
This is , in my view , misleading and confusing to the patient and to the doctor , and increases the risk of overdosing and of causing dangerous side effects .
I therefore call on both the Commission and the rapporteur to have second thoughts on this point .
Since I have a few more seconds , I would like to say that , on the question of counterfeiting medicines , I agree entirely with the Commissioner that this is a criminal offence and it puts at risk the lives of patients .
But I fail to see why there is a delay .
This is a straightforward case as far as I understand .
These medicines , which are produced by registered pharmaceutical companies , are sold under prescription by registered pharmacists .
If we cannot get to the bottom of this and discover whether some of these are criminally manufactured , then I do not know what we in the EU can do .
I would have thought that this is more a police case than a change-in-legislation case .
Commissioner , we should get to the bottom of this as fast as possible .
( DA ) Mr President , I would like to take the liberty of giving a general , overall perspective since , up to now , EU harmonisation of medicinal product legislation has only involved relaxing the rules in Denmark. and the sale of medicines has increased .
The new proposal with regard to marketing authorisations for medicines extends a helping hand to the pharmaceuticals industry .
It will , in general , be easier to make small changes to medicines and release them under the same name , as mentioned by the previous speaker and , at the same time , it will be easier to change the name of a product if it is to be sold to treat a different pathology .
There is a fear that these changes could make it more difficult for consumers to see the wood for the trees and make life easier for the pharmaceuticals industry .
We also need to give consideration to the fact that the relationship between easier access to the authorisation of medicines and an increased risk for consumers is often , unfortunately , directly proportional .
I am not saying that we should put unnecessary administrative obstacles in the way of the industry , but neither should we accept a slackening of the reins to make it easier for the pharmaceuticals industry to make a profit when it is people 's health and the health of animals that are at stake .
In doing this , we will purely and simply be barking up the wrong tree .
If we view it in a wider context , this directive is part of the industry 's efforts to improve profits in relation to the US .
Let us not be naïve .
We must not allow ourselves to be misled by fine-sounding , but empty statements relating to patients and consumers .
( CS ) The proposed directive , which will greatly simplify the introduction of pharmaceutical products onto the European market for both human and veterinary use , is very good news for patients and also for the European pharmaceutical industry .
Technological progress makes possible the almost continuous improvement of drugs that have been registered already .
Every change , however , must go through an approval process , as health and safety is involved .
While registration at a purely intra-state level is subject to the same regulatory requirements as registration within the framework of European processes , the regulatory requirements for changes to registration have not , however , been unified .
This situation represents an unnecessary administrative burden and brings no added value .
Just one declaration will now be enough for the entire internal market .
I therefore warmly welcome the Commission 's proposal and I congratulate the rapporteur for her report , which has improved the proposal and made it more precise .
By means of the proposed changes , the administrative burden connected with the process for introducing new products of this kind onto the market will be lightened .
Pharmaceutical companies operating at a supra-national level will be better able to cooperate and the result will be faster access to the latest drugs for everyone , especially those most in need .
Europe is , however , facing a very dangerous development in the spread of counterfeit drugs .
This is no longer a problem just for Africa or Asia .
In Europe , too , people are often purchasing drugs over the internet or from places other than pharmacies .
That is why it is so important to ensure high standards for the introduction of drugs onto the market , which will simultaneously make it possible to trace packages back to the producer and to check whether they have actually been registered .
It will be necessary for all drugs to be bar-coded and packaged in such a way that even the man in the street will see from the packaging whether they are safe drugs or counterfeits , in case the drugs have been purchased from somewhere other than a pharmacy .
In my view , Member States have enough time in these two years to prepare for the introduction of the directive .
( FR ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I would firstly like to pay tribute to the work of Mrs Grossetête and that of my fellow Members who worked on this report .
This is a very important subject since it concerns our health .
This report is a big step forward in harmonisation of the internal market , but also in consumer protection , especially for the elderly .
As Mr Verheugen stated , our population is living longer , which , of course , we are delighted about , but this is an issue set to grow in importance .
When this directive is implemented , the indications appearing on a medicine will be identical in all Member States , providing clarity and transparency for European users , whether they are patients , veterinarians or farmers .
Likewise , with the implementation of a single procedure to apply for authorisations , this report will greatly contribute to simplifying current procedures on an administrative and technical level .
Indeed , it will no longer be necessary to submit 27 applications within the Member States .
A single application to the European Medicines Agency will suffice .
This report marks a further step towards European integration .
( DE ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I should like to congratulate Mrs Grossetête on her draft report on variations to the terms of marketing authorisations for medicinal products .
I must make two brief comments on what previous speakers have said .
As I see it , new medicinal products represent an opportunity to treat and cure health conditions , and the risk is proportionate .
In addition , in the Federal Republic of Germany , for example , active ingredients already exist in many pharmaceutical forms and under many names without any increase in risk .
The main focus of this Regulation , however , is the simplification of variations ; that is , of the partial extension or variation of the pharmaceutical form of a medicinal product .
Current practice is extremely cumbersome and entails a great deal of bureaucracy for companies , and the competent authorities are occupied with relatively inefficient measures .
Therefore , the amendment creates a rare win-win situation .
The report significantly improves safety and reliability in the internal market .
In addition , thanks to the work in committee , numerous other interests have been taken into account that further expedite or simplify the procedure .
For example , sufficient account has been taken of the issue of national authorisations , thus avoiding a duplication of effort .
Due account has also been taken of the interests of Germany and German pharmaceutical companies .
The draft has been aligned with omnibus proposal EU / 2008 / 0032 .
The extension of marketing authorisations under other names has been expressly simplified .
It has been made easier to supplement or extend product characteristics .
I am as satisfied and positive today about the report by Mrs Grossetête as I was critical about the Jørgensen report yesterday evening .
The Grossetête report goes in the right direction : towards the Lisbon process objective of becoming the most efficient knowledge-based area in the world .
I support this report .
A word of apology : there is some confusion involving the Secretariat , because my list is different to the one displayed .
As long as I am chairing the sitting , I shall follow my list .
If the Secretariat takes my place , they will follow their list .
So , Mr Buşoi will take the floor after Ms Grabowska .
( PL ) Mr President , I would like to start by congratulating the rapporteur since , from the technical point of view , this report will provide greater safety for patients and greater safety for European Union citizens who need to take medicines .
It is good that we are eliminating the difference between issuing marketing authorisation for a medicine , and the procedure for amending that decision .
I would also like to refer to the words of Commissioner Verheugen and express my pleasure at the news that we will have new common regulations to combat counterfeiting and the illegal marketing of medicines .
You made statements to the effect that you are doing everything to prevent counterfeit medicines from getting into the legal distribution network .
My question is , what will happen outside the legal distribution network ?
Do the new regulations also cover this , or will the pharmaceutical industry just get a rap over the knuckles ?
My last question is as follows : do you plan to include a solution for greater pharmaceutical information for citizens in the new regulations ?
( RO ) It is my firm belief that this draft directive marks significant progress in terms of speeding up access to medicines .
I would also like to congratulate the Commission , Commissioner Verheugen and the rapporteur for this initiative .
Given that the free circulation of goods is one of the basic principles of the internal market , it seems completely natural to me that this principle should apply to medicinal products as well .
At the moment , due to the complexity and diversity of the administrative procedures for authorising variations made to medicines already on sale , the actual operation of the internal market is distorted .
Of course , this situation affects the pharmaceutical industry and authorities , but it is patients who are primarily affected because these complex procedures delay them receiving the benefits of improved medicines .
I therefore totally agree with the Commission 's proposal to harmonise the procedures for authorising variations made to medicines , regardless of the initial authorisation procedure , as this simplification will streamline the entire system and , above all , guarantee a higher level of public health protection .
I also support the idea put forward by the rapporteur , Mrs Grossetête , concerning the need for a single procedure for authorising variations which will provide greater authority .
With regard to the final remark concerning the Commission 's proposal to retain the medicine 's initial name in the event of extending authorisation , I support keeping the initial name , since frequently changing the names of medicines may confuse patients who need , in any case , to see a doctor before receiving any treatment , and the doctor will be up to date with the medicine 's new therapeutic indications .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I am very pleased with this directive .
It will ensure that the rules on variations are made clearer , simpler , more flexible and truly harmonised .
Congratulations , Mrs Grossetête .
I am also pleased to hear from the Commission that , partly in response to several resolutions of this Parliament , including one tabled by myself , Mrs Grossetête , Mrs Gutiérrez-Cortines and Mr Ulmer , there is to be a directive aimed at combating counterfeiting .
It will require manufacturers and importers of active substances to obtain a certificate of good manufacturing practice , issued by the European authorities following mandatory inspections of manufacturing sites .
By introducing product traceability in terms of country , company and manufacturing site , this measure will discourage the relabelling and repackaging of extra-Community products .
( SK ) I welcome the report of Françoise Grossetête , which has the aim of simplifying and improving the system of regulatory conditions applying to changes to marketing authorisations for medicinal products .
The original system for administering changes appears ineffective and unsatisfactory in view of new scientific knowledge and technological progress .
The process for granting authorisation varies enormously at an intra-state level across the Member States of the European Union .
There are variations in the procedures for reviewing medicinal products , in the time it takes to implement changes , and also in the requirements relating to the submission of documents .
I firmly believe that the harmonisation of these aspects will make a big contribution to the protection of public health .
A more effective system will also have a positive impact on the pharmaceutical industry as a whole .
I support the rapporteur in the improvements she has proposed .
I agree with the view that all drugs , regardless of the procedure under which they were authorised for release onto the market , should be subject to the same assessment and approval criteria .
A new improved regulatory system will deliver benefits for all patients , for the approval bodies and also for the pharmaceutical companies .
( DE ) Mr President , I have a further two questions for Commissioner Verheugen .
Commissioner , do you agree that the intactness of packs and bar codes on packs are no obstacle to additional forms of trade and that , on the contrary , with a modicum of intelligence , a bar code can be applied to another product or a patient information leaflet inserted in further repackaging ?
Do you agree that a modicum of intelligence , and the flexibility that is expected of all Europeans , is also to be expected of all those involved in the trade and distribution of medicinal products here in the European Union ?
I have one final question .
We shall increasingly be seeing problems involving active ingredients entering the European Union from third countries .
Do you envisage any prospect of our creating incentives to ensure that more active ingredients are produced in the European Union again and that manufacturers of medicinal products obtain these substances from within the EU rather than from countries in which we cannot guarantee their safety ?
( DE ) Mr President , I should like to start by congratulating Mrs Grossetête .
I also wish to thank the Commissioner for his speech , particularly the aspect of piracy and counterfeiting .
A 300 % increase over the last year is no small amount , and this also endangers the health of European citizens .
Yet we must also think about where piracy originates , its sources .
In this regard , we note that 80 % of counterfeit products originate from Internet trade and only 20 % from actual smuggling .
This must be our starting point .
In the case of the smuggled goods , we must mobilise our customs authorities , we must use new technologies , and we must look much more closely and thoroughly at how we can ensure safety in the case of blister packing , too .
We must , of course , also ensure that there are safe Internet chemists and that citizens know which chemists are safe .
I should also like to draw attention to new principles .
We need a coherent approach based on the principle : ' Know your supplier , know your client . '
( RO ) In many European countries , the procedure for authorising medicines is clear and even well regulated from an official point of view .
However , I would like to draw your attention to some authorisation procedures that are too rapid , which then lead to many deaths caused by medicine overdoses , medicines taken on an ad hoc basis , or by medicines which can cause side-effects that have not been investigated sufficiently before .
I think that new medicines and improved medicines with miraculous properties are released too easily on the market , but are then withdrawn within a very short time .
Who is responsible for their quality and the side-effects they cause ?
We welcome this initiative for introducing on the market a harmonisation procedure which is unanimously accepted in Europe .
However , new medicines should be included as part of an analysis carried out by an international committee of experts .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , thank you for the opportunity given to me to discuss the excellent work carried out by the rapporteur , Mrs Grossetête , and this proposal for a directive aimed at providing Community regulation applicable to all types of marketing authorisations for medicinal products .
This is a positive directive , welcomed for its objectives of protecting public health and cutting red tape .
The proposal for a directive is of a legal nature , introducing simple amendments to the legal basis behind the rules on variations , such as the introduction of a new therapeutic indication or a new method of administration , made to medicinal products for human or veterinary use after they are first placed on the market .
Harmonisation in this area has become necessary , if not crucial , because without a single Community legal framework , variations concerning national authorisations will continue to be subject to national laws that differ from one Member State to another , as is the case at present .
( EL ) Mr President , I too should like to congratulate the rapporteur and to make two comments in reply to the Commissioner .
Firstly , as far as the trade in counterfeit medicinal products is concerned , we were surprised to learn that some of them are being produced in two countries of the European Union and then marketed through a third European country , namely Switzerland .
This is something you need to look into , Commissioner .
My second comment concerns the industry which produces raw materials for medicinal products , which may have been flourishing 20 years ago , but which is now slowly dying .
The reasons are , firstly , the high costs and , secondly , the protection of innovation , about which we are all agreed , but which has resulted in European companies being unable to manufacture raw materials for medicinal products which come under the rules protecting innovation .
As a result , research centres have moved to China and India .
There are certain policies which you can apply so that they return to the European Union .
Vice-President of the Commission . - ( DE ) Mr President , honourable Members , indeed , the debate has confirmed the broad consensus on the Variations Regulation , and so I shall not discuss it further .
We should now bring this into force as it stands and make sure that we do so as effectively as possible .
I think that , beyond this , what are more important overall are the other issues that have been raised here .
Allow me to make a couple of very fundamental points .
It is not my job , of course , to explain technical rules to you , but to tell you why we do certain things and why we do not do certain things .
There is a conflict in our societies between the requirements of the health care bureaucracy , on the one hand , and those of patients on the other .
This is absolutely clear .
The proposals that will be occupying our attention in future lie at the centre of this conflict area .
The health bureaucracies in the Member States are not interested in informed patients .
Informed patients mean more work , more effort .
Those who should be there for them are forced to give them information , answering questions such as : why am I being given this medicine , why am I not being given that medicine ?
Why should I be given this treatment and why am I not being given that treatment ?
They are entitled to know this as human beings .
An unwavering principle for me is the following .
In a democratic society , it should not be the case that those wishing to provide information must justify themselves , but that those not wishing to provide information do not have to .
It is the health care bureaucrats in the Member States who must explain why they do not want to see informed patients .
I do not have to explain why I do want to see informed patients .
To be perfectly clear , there will be a heated , lively , controversial debate here , and it is my hope and wish that the European Parliament will support the Commission and me in this debate .
After all , this issue is quite fundamental , and concerns not only public health but also social policy .
It is a question of what the freedom of citizens in health care , too , means to us .
On the second issue , with regard to counterfeiting , I agree with all those who have said that this is a criminal matter .
Counterfeiting in the illegal distribution chain is a matter for the police .
Illegal is illegal - we cannot do much more than that .
I do think , however , that the proposals we can make will ultimately make it virtually impossible to introduce counterfeit medicines into the legal distribution chain .
That is what we can do .
Mrs Roth-Behrendt is absolutely right .
In my opinion , it really is an impertinence to suppose that , in reality , this is about placing obstacles in the way of any forms of distribution of pharmaceutical products for competitive reasons .
I could not care less about that .
Parallel trade is a legal activity within the European Union .
This has been confirmed unequivocally by the European Court of Justice .
I am absolutely not thinking of getting my hands on parallel trade , but one thing I would say is that all parties involved in the distribution of medicinal products must be subject to the same strict safety requirements .
I fail to see why someone should be exempted from safety requirements just because they buy cheaply in one Member State a medicinal product that is sold for a higher price in another Member State , bring it back into the more expensive country , and resell it for a high price there .
I do not understand this .
Those of you with some knowledge of food law will have already been asking themselves , as I did , why it is most strictly forbidden in Europe to open a pack of spaghetti on the way from the manufacturer to the consumer - this is indeed most strictly forbidden - yet it is permitted to open on the way from the manufacturer to the consumer medicinal products which , when taken wrongly , can result in death .
It is worth reflecting on why this astounding disparity exists , why it is forbidden in the case of spaghetti , for example , but permitted in the case of vital medicinal products .
I find this difficult to understand .
We shall find solutions that make it possible for all parties to continue their business , precisely in the spirit of what Mrs Roth-Behrendt said : we must apply a little creativity , use our brains and give it some thought , but the safety requirements apply in full to all : there can be no exceptions !
I believe I have answered your questions and also given you a foretaste of the coming lively debate .
The proposals will be presented in a few weeks ' time , and all I can say in this regard is that we shall meet again in this Chamber and we shall have to discuss this matter further .
rapporteur . - ( FR ) Mr President , firstly I would like to thank my fellow Members who have spoken in support of the report that I presented .
I would remind those who , unfortunately , are no longer here but who expressed some concerns , that this really does constitute an improvement , harmonisation and simplification of procedures .
However , the simplification of procedures does not mean lowering quality or having fewer controls .
It represents lower costs for industry and , above all , for SMEs , which is essential .
Lower costs and saving time : in other words , European patients will finally have quicker access to medicines .
I sincerely hope , moreover , that we will conclude at first reading .
We have done everything possible so that an agreement can be reached , and naturally I would like once more to thank the Commission for its help , as well as the Council .
With regard to counterfeiting , we were delighted , Mr Verheugen , to hear the information you gave concerning the text which you will present to us , as soon as possible I hope , since you are aware that we are anxious to see it .
Counterfeiting , as my fellow Members said , is a crime and we cannot wait when it comes to crime .
We know that the vast majority of sales of medicines on the Internet concern counterfeit medicines which are therefore dangerous for citizens ' health .
Well , you spoke of active ingredients and the controls which we must apply to active ingredients , including when they are manufactured , when they are produced in third countries , and not in the European Union .
Yes , this is essential .
We will be there to help you because we are going to have to work on traceability , penalties for offenders and safety of the distribution chain .
It is important for patients to have 100 % confidence in the medicines they are prescribed : it must not be possible to open or repackage these medicines .
This is what I wanted to say on behalf of all of my fellow Members .
Mr Verheugen , I would like you to know that when leaving here today , you will have Parliament 's full support , and it is essential to convince the College of Commissioners that we must not waste any more time but at last take action against the counterfeiting of medicines .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place today , 22 October 2008
Written statements ( Rule 142 )
The European Union needs clear and stringent regulations with regard to the conditions for launching medicines on the market , and for all medicinal products in general too .
I would like to illustrate the need for this by referring to a recent case which occurred in Romania .
In September , a woman died following an operation during which unsterilised surgical thread imported from China was used .
Other patients suffered complications which put their lives in danger .
The Romanian Health Ministry 's inquiry committee acknowledged without a doubt that the surgical thread in question did not carry the CE quality mark .
The law on assessing the products ' compliance clearly shows that the guilt lies mainly at the door of the relevant ministry , but clearer rules and greater transparency could have prevented this situation .
Although medicinal products from the European Community are constantly faced with regulations drawn up by national governments and the Community throughout their entire existence , discrepancies between the Commission 's regulations and the Member States ' provisions have negative repercussions from a public health and administrative perspective , as well as in terms of the general operation of the internal pharmaceuticals market .
The purpose of this report is to make sure that all medicinal products marketed in the Community , including those authorised at national level , are subject to the same administrative approval and amendment criteria , no matter which procedure was used to authorise these medicines .
This proposal simplifies the administrative procedures for Member States and facilitates the harmonisation of evaluation and supervision requirements for all medicinal products .
Adopting this report will protect far more consumers who will benefit directly from improved efficiency , consolidated organisation , as well as clarity and transparency .
This is the result of implementing a simplified , standardised regulation system supporting marketing authorisations for medicinal products in Europe .
Protection of consumers in respect of certain aspects of timeshares ( debate )
The next item is the report by Toine Manders , on behalf of the Committee on the Internal Market and Consumer Protection , on the proposal for a Directive of the European Parliament and of the Council on the protection of consumers in respect of certain aspects of timeshare , long-term holiday products , resale and exchange - C6-0159 / 2007 - .
rapporteur . - ( NL ) Mr President , I should , as ever , like to start by thanking everyone involved : Commissioner Kuneva , the shadow rapporteurs , and also the three Presidents of the Council , for we started this report in 2007 , under the Portuguese Presidency .
This was followed by the Slovenian Presidency and , finally , we have managed to strike a compromise with the help of the French Presidency .
It is unfortunate that State Secretary Luc Chatel is unable to attend , because it is , of course , wonderful to be able to observe that we have a compromise , and at first reading no less .
In 1994 , a Timeshare Directive was approved which has given the sector a thorough overhaul .
The big problem was that Member States implemented the directive differently .
It was a patchwork of legislation and compliance which was , wittingly or unwittingly , different in the various locations and which sowed a seed of doubt in the minds of consumers when they considered buying timeshare property across the border .
We are now thrashing out a new directive .
We have extended the scope somewhat , because in the 1994 directive , a number of products were insufficiently defined , if at all , such as long-term holidays or product exchange , to name but a few .
To my mind , we have managed to make a distinct improvement in this respect , and both industry and consumers are thrilled with the outcome .
I hope that we as politicians are too .
We worked with our fellow MEPs in the various groups very closely , and we have arrived at an attractive result .
There is , for example , a prohibition on advance payments , because this proved to be a frustration to many consumers .
Once you had paid up , it was impossible to get back this EUR 1 000 or EUR 1 500 which you had paid in front .
The cooling-off period of fourteen days is , to my mind , also a very important matter .
Subsequently , and I am personally very pleased with this , there will be a checklist , a standard information form which sets out your purchase in detail and also states that you have the opportunity to dissolve the contract within fourteen days with a no-quibble guarantee .
There are also voluntary codes of conduct for the sector , as well as the hallmark , a recognition or quality mark , and also the fact that the Commission has promised to monitor this .
This is music to my ears , for indeed , it is to be welcomed , in my view , that the Commission has promised to monitor these codes of conduct .
I am particularly pleased with the fact that the Commission promised to monitor compliance with the regulation in the Member States in the trialogue .
It will , in some cases , become easier for the consumer to appear before a national court .
It saddens me that the jurisdiction , the establishment of a competent court , is not explicitly mentioned in this directive .
This is regrettable to me , but in a compromise , you sometimes need to add water to the wine .
It is also regrettable , for example , that , if crucial information is not provided , a contract will still exist one year on .
This is all possible in a compromise .
By and large , enormous progress has been made in relation to both the consumer and the sector , particularly in terms of maximum harmonisation .
This will , in any event , make it easier in a number of cases to appear before a court in one 's own Member State .
For the sector , it will become much easier to trade across the border .
What is before us is , to my mind , a good result , one of which we here as Parliament , together with the Commission and Council , can be proud .


Member of the Commission . - Mr President , let me start by thanking the rapporteur , Mr Manders , and the shadows , in particular Mr Harbour and Mrs McCarthy , for their political commitment and support , and the teams of the IMCO Secretariat and DG SANCO for their very close cooperation .
This will lead us , hopefully , to conclude at first reading .
I really appreciate your tremendous efforts and I am grateful that we finally reached an agreement .
For the same reasons , I would also thank the French presidency .
This proposal would bring about very significant improvements for consumers in the market for timeshare and similar holiday products .
There is clearly an urgent need to revise the existing rules on timeshare .
Consumers are losing out by purchasing products which are economically similar to timeshare but which do not fall under the definition of the current directive .
I am speaking here about products like discount holiday clubs , where consumers often have to pay a substantial amount up front , ranging from EUR 6 000 to EUR 20 000 , for membership of a club , which will only give a right to a discount on future holidays .
I am also referring to the resale and exchange of timeshare which are currently unregulated .
It is my deep conviction that we need to work on the database site for complaints , and data on complaints show that consumers encounter significantly more problems with these unregulated products , in particular , with the discount holiday clubs , compared to timeshare .
There is , therefore , a compelling case for applying similar rules to these products in order to achieve more fairness in the holiday market .
The proposal to be put to the vote today fills in the loopholes in the current legislation by extending the scope of the directive to cover not only timeshare but also long-term holiday products , resale and exchange of timeshare .
With the new rules , traders marketing these products will have to provide a consumer with comprehensive pre-contractual information so that the consumer will be able to make an informed choice .
Thanks to amendments from this House , which I wholeheartedly support , this information will have to be provided on a standardised information sheet , which will make it easier for consumers to assimilate the information .
The standardised information sheet will also facilitate the life of traders , in particular , since it will be available in all EU languages .
Consumers purchasing these products will also benefit from the right of withdrawal and a ban on advance payments , as is already the case for timeshare .
It will also be clarified that withdrawal can be notified to the trader by letter , email , fax or other similar means .
Moreover , consumers purchasing long-term holiday products will be given additional protection .
The total payment for membership will no longer be allowed up front but must instead be divided into yearly instalments .
The consumer will also have the right to terminate the contract before each yearly payment .
The fully harmonised rules of the directive will be good for consumers .
Currently , consumers wishing to purchase a timeshare while on holiday in another country will do so on the basis of that country 's rules , which may not be as protective as the rules of his home country .
With the new fully harmonised directive , consumers will know that the same consumer protection rules will apply , regardless of whether they bought their timeshare holiday products in their home countries or while on holiday abroad .


draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on Transport and Tourism . - ( PT ) Mr President , Commissioner , I must thank the rapporteur , Mr Manders , the shadow rapporteur , Mr Hasse Ferreira , and all the other draftsmen and colleagues for their cooperation , willingness to engage in dialogue and readiness to reach a consensus .
The Timeshare Directive will be extended to new activities and will make a positive contribution to European tourism , operators and consumers .
Consumers are the group least well informed about their rights and obligations and least qualified to conduct negotiations .
That is why , in the Committee on Transport and Tourism , I defended a high level of consumer protection , particularly by extending and updating the basic definitions of the directive , reinforcing language requirements , and improving contract information and withdrawal rights to ensure a clear and stable market without any hidden costs for consumers .
After this process started , a horizontal review of the Community consumer law acquis was initiated .
I argued that we should not wait for this review given the serious problems faced by consumers when exercising their rights , mainly at international level , and given the new activities covered by timeshare .
These problems do not stem from the harmonised Community law in this area , but from the lack of a clear Community legal framework , possibly supplemented by more rigorous national legal frameworks rewarding honest businesses and consumers .
This is a basic objective of this proposal for a directive which I call on everyone to support .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , firstly , I must once again regret the fact that the Conference of Presidents did not allow enhanced cooperation between the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Committee on the Internal Market and Consumer Protection with regard to this report .
In my opinion , the Committee on Legal Affairs did not want to alter the legal basis proposed by the European Commission or change the legal instrument .
The main objective was to protect consumers from abuses committed by certain ' holiday clubs ' , without harming the development of legitimate and job-creating businesses such as those known as ' timeshares ' .
In my view , it is not enough to simply apply the safeguards specific to timeshares to holiday clubs .
We must go further as the legal nature of these two systems is intrinsically different .
Timeshares involve a property right , whereas holiday clubs are simply a services contract .
In actual fact , with holiday clubs , the consumer pays a sum of money in exchange for a long-term promise of tourist services .
We should not forget that most complaints from consumers relate to holiday club abuses and not to the timeshares with which everyone is familiar .
As Commissioner Kuneva indicated , the aim , which is shared by the Committee on Legal Affairs , is to regulate opaque sectors and lay down rules allowing honest businesspeople to develop their businesses to the benefit of consumers .
I an convinced that , with this report and its proposed measures , we are heading in the right direction .
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - Mr President , it gives me great pleasure to be able to welcome , on behalf of the group and as , indeed , the second shadow rapporteur for my group that has worked on it , the agreement we have reached with Council today .
I also want to thank Council for their cooperation .
I want to place on record the indebtedness that we pay to Mrs Luisa Rudi Ubeda , who was elected to the Spanish Parliament in the summer but who had actually done the bulk of the shadow work on this directive .
In particular , in relation to the point to the rapporteur from the Committee on Legal Affairs , I just want to emphasise that the special section on holiday clubs , which I think is probably the biggest single advance we have in this directive in dealing with that particular type of product , was very much due to the tenacity of Mrs Rudi Ubeda in ensuring that we kept it on the table .
Council and Commission , in particular , were rather reluctant , but I am delighted that we have reached agreement on that because I think it is crucially important .
My rapporteur , Toine Manders , who has also done an excellent job on this and to whom I pay tribute as well as the rest of the team that worked with him , and Mrs Kuneva , have covered a number of the other issues , but I just want to highlight what I think are two other very important issues where we have sought significant improvement .
The first one is on the question of advertising .
If you look at the advertising clause it is now clearly spelt out that any promotional activity in relation to a timeshare or holiday club has to be clearly shown and designated in advertising as such .
Also , the standardised information that we have asked to be available has to be available at all times at any sort of promotional event , so there can be no question of people being misled by some attractive trip , visit or offer .
It has to be absolutely clear what it is they are talking about , and that it should not be sold as an investment .
Secondly - and here I address the Council , though , unfortunately , the Minister is not here - the Member States ' encouragement of codes of conduct and out-of-court dispute resolution is absolutely crucial .
Overall , this is a major advance in consumer protection .
I fully commend it and I am sure that it will get the overwhelming support of the House today .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , after a year of parliamentary work , the proposal for a directive now being discussed is a significant improvement on the document that was presented in 2007 .
The rights of European consumers , whether current or potential customers of timeshares or holiday cards and clubs , have been reinforced at various levels .
This proposal therefore provides for three different periods , applying under different conditions , which will allow contracts to be cancelled unilaterally by the consumer .
It also lays down a series of essential elements that must be specifically included in contracts .
In addition , it clarifies and explains the use of languages , which will be much better for consumers , and also the rules on advertising , which merited special attention .
This is therefore a good proposal for a directive which , following determined and detailed negotiations between various parliamentary groups , is now being presented to Parliament and has already been agreed by the Commission and the Council .
Mr President , I must congratulate the Slovenian Presidency on its efforts to solve and overcome a number of differences of opinion on the text .
The French presidency should also be warmly congratulated , particularly Ambassador Léglise-Costa , on the magnificent work carried out in the final phase of the negotiations , as should the Commission representatives on the willingness and technical ability that they demonstrated , both in the trialogue and in bilateral contacts .
Within Parliament , the draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on Transport and Tourism , Manuel Jardim Fernandes , deserves particular congratulations , as do the members of the Committee on the Internal Market and Consumer Protection , especially its draftsman , the group shadow rapporteurs and coordinators and , last but not least , Chairman Arlene McCarthy .
Before ending , I want to thank the consumers ' associations , particularly the British associations and the Portuguese association DECO , as also the European Business Association for the sector , for the useful contributions that they gave me throughout the process .
This directive on timeshares and holiday cards and clubs is excellent .
I therefore call on you all to adopt it .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , our ' internal European market ' is , and must , increasingly be a Europe which protects consumers .
on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - ( DE ) Madam President , Commissioner , I , too , should like to thank the rapporteur , on behalf of the shadow rapporteur for my group , who unfortunately cannot be here today , for his constructive cooperation .
I believe that the cooperation enjoyed with Mr Manders really was constructive and produced sound results of which we can be proud .
Our extension of the scope to holiday clubs - a major problem - and also cruise ships , houseboats and caravans , is particularly important .
In so doing , we have closed numerous loopholes that unfortunately existed in the old directive .
Our establishment of greater transparency , by means of both pre-contractual information and the information sheets , the standardised information already mentioned by several of the previous speakers , is also very important .
I also think it important , and wish to emphasise , that we have introduced an extension to 14 days for the right of withdrawal in the event of misuse of information , and also that the consumer can take advantage of an extended period of three months and , in the event of criminal neglect of the information obligation , of as much as one year .
This creates more transparency and more legal certainty , and this is in the interests of not just consumers but also industry which , of course , has every interest in distancing itself from disreputable providers in this field .
Together with industry , Member States and consumer organisations , we can now make this sector respectable once and for all .
For this reason , I believe this will enjoy the wholehearted support of our group .
We have not achieved everything we wanted to , but this represents a major step forward .
Mr President , Commissioner , the tourist industry is playing an increasingly important role in the economies of the European countries , and this includes time-shares , long-term holiday products , and the exchange and resale of timeshares , which have often harmed consumers .
The directive counters this problem and creates conditions for harmonising these services on the European market by adopting a package of fundamental rules to improve transparency and protect consumers by , inter alia , establishing a uniform model contract , the obligation to provide a contract in the language of the consumer , improving the consumer 's opportunity to make a considered decision , and a cooling-off period in which the consumer may withdraw from the agreement without having to give reasons .
Together with the amendments , the directive provides conditions for the development of these services and increases consumer confidence in them .
Thank you , Mr Manders , for your excellent report .
The Union for Europe of the Nations Group supports this directive .
( DE ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , we , too , should like to start by thanking the rapporteur , and also the shadow rapporteur and rapporteur for the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats on the Committee on Legal Affairs .
This House has shown that , when a market comes apart at the seams - as was the case in the timeshare sector , of course - we are prepared to take action together .
It should be reiterated that the timeshare market in its traditional form has been increasingly infiltrated by disreputable providers - of clubs and resorts , for example - who are scattered throughout Europe and who have indeed failed to inform consumers in a transparent manner about the possibilities and disadvantages of this kind of investment .
The new regime will bring considerable advantages in this regard .
The extension of the withdrawal period from 10 to 14 days has been mentioned .
I also think it right that we have exempted multi-annual hotel bookings , as this is a completely different situation for consumers from entering into a recurrent annual investment in a holiday club or resort .
Much has already been said about this , but I should also like to point out that the rule that consumers must be informed either in the language of their country of residence or in their mother tongue will also ultimately force a significant proportion of disreputable contract models out of the market and thus , in general , put the timeshare market back on a respectable basis , while also ensuring that consumers wishing to buy into holidays in such facilities can do so with complete confidence .
The revision clause not found in the last directive gives this House the opportunity of evaluating , after three years , whether the course we have suggested is really solving the problems or whether there are further problems on which we must further intervene .
I thank you , Commissioner Kuneva .
I believe that this measure is a very positive one as far as the internal market is concerned .

( DE ) Madam President , Commissioner , I think we have done a good piece of work here , and not only for the internal market , as Mr Schwab has just said , but also for citizens - and this is much more important to me , as we want to ensure that they find themselves in a Europe that is growing together , in a very positive sense , and I think that has indeed been happening here .
As coordinator , I am particularly obliged to our shadow rapporteur , Mr Hasse Ferreira , for the excellent work he has done together with the rapporteur and the other shadow rapporteurs .
The Socialist Group in the European Parliament would also have liked to see a greater extension of the scope - that goes without saying - but compromises sometimes cannot be helped .
I think we have nevertheless found a very good solution .
Facilitating the comparison of offers , the right of withdrawal and advertising will lead to better conditions for our citizens in future , so that they can be king in a market that used to be a real jungle .
This rank growth has meant that many people who maybe did not pay too much attention when it came to their holidays have ended up in a very difficult situation .
We want to prevent this happening in future , and I do believe that this compromise will make this possible .
( SV ) Madam President , we have unfortunately become well acquainted with this problem in my own country , Sweden .
Tourists in a holiday mood are duped into buying shares in apartments with which they are not particularly satisfied when they arrive home , if they have anything at all to show for their purchase when they get there .
The new directive on timeshare properties will entail much better protection if the same rules apply anywhere at all in the EU to the purchase of timeshare properties .
Proper consumer protection is required if people are securely to be able to make use of the freedoms of the internal market .
Consumers must be able to feel strong , secure and safe .
It is to be prohibited for vendors to demand down payments during the period for reflection which , moreover , is to be extended from 10 to 14 days .
In that way , consumers will not have to worry about making down payments if they are not satisfied or if they wish to withdraw from the purchase during the period of reflection .
The directive will probably deter frivolous companies that do not meet the requirements for above-board marketing and reasonable purchase agreements .
I believe that many people at present hesitate to purchase such services in other Member States precisely because they cannot feel secure and rely on consumer protection .
Through harmonisation and the measures in the directive , consumers will be given stronger consumer protection .
This may contribute to more people feeling able to make use of such services involving timeshare properties outside their own Member States , and this is something we all of course welcome .
In other words , this is an excellent proposal obtaining broad support .
Sun-loving northerners wish to thank both the Commission and the rapporteur and shadow rapporteurs .
Madam President , this timeshare law is long overdue .
The Committee on the Internal Market and Consumer Protection first held a hearing on this in 2001 , exposing all the problems in the market .
We are , of course , very pleased that we have come to the point today where we are now delivering for consumers .
We are extending the law to cover all timeshare-like products , especially the problematic discount holiday clubs .
We are covering resale and exchange and giving consumers better protection and better rights .
Critically , I believe consumers will have the same rights whether they are buying in Varna on the Black Sea or Valencia on the Costa Blanca .
With this law , consumers must be given the key information on the standard information sheet - including all fees and charges - and , if the company fails to provide it , the law extends the right of withdrawal to three months .
Failure to inform the consumer of the right of withdrawal extends the right of withdrawal to one year .
These really are good rights for consumers .
They will turn our traders into responsible traders and we will have informed and protected consumers , which means we can drive out of the market the dodgy dealers and the scam merchants .
Today we have demonstrated that , when consumers complain , Parliament 's Committee on Internal Market and Consumer Protection not only answers , but we act and we deliver .
Commissioner , I would ask you to follow up , as you always do , on enforcement issues .
We must now use the new cross-border enforcement network to tackle the continuing problems that consumers have and to make sure we reduce the number of complaints that turn up on timeshare in European consumer centres right across the 27 Member States .
( RO ) Our aim is always to ensure that we introduce legislation which offers more benefits for consumers .
This is why I would like to express my support for this new directive , which creates a simplified model framework for timeshare products .
I believe that the proposals to grant consumers a cooling-off period of 14 days to withdraw from a contract and to ban demands for advance payments during this period are welcome .
I hope that the changes made will contribute to a properly operating internal market through harmonising European legislation in this respect and therefore , increase the level of protection for consumers .
We need to make sure when it comes to signing the contract that consumers are fully informed and that all the necessary precontractual information about the costs involved and the services they are going to enjoy has been supplied to them .
We need to encourage the development of timeshare and long-term holiday products .
We therefore need to increase consumers ' confidence in buying holiday packages abroad and encourage firms which sell abroad to make the most of the benefits offered by the single market .
I would also call on Commissioner Kuneva to intervene in credit agreements because following this financial mess we are now in , most banks have changed these credit agreements too as they continue to dupe consumers .
I would like to congratulate the rapporteur for his efforts and I hope that we will achieve a market which benefits consumers .
( FR ) Madam President , Mrs Kuneva , ladies and gentlemen , we shall be voting on the necessary revamping of a 14 year old directive affecting millions of people in Europe , both professionals in the tourist industry and consumers of timeshare holidays or holiday clubs .
This industry , worth more than EUR 2 billion a year and employing 200 000 people , is a major driver of the internal market within the framework of the Lisbon Strategy , particularly as forecasts indicate rapid growth for this kind of service .
The economic rationale , while not insignificant , should not impede greater protection of the countless users of these services , who often have moderate holiday budgets and need protection and more legal clarity .
The harmonisation of conditions for withdrawal from a contract , as well as the prohibition of unfair commercial practices , such as advance payments during the cooling-off period , and the requirement to provide an accurate , clear and legible contract in the chosen language of the purchaser , therefore constitute significant progress in consumer protection and empowerment .
This text will at last enable us to put a stop to unacceptable practices made possible by the inadequacies of the current directive , and will reinstate credibility in an industry crippled by a negative image .
We therefore have reason to hope , on the one hand , for fresh positive dynamism among traders freed from unscrupulous competitors and , on the other , renewed confidence for reassured consumers .
I am therefore keen to congratulate the rapporteur , Mr Manders , and the shadow rapporteurs , in particular my friend , Joel Hasse Ferreira , on their successful work which will lead , at first reading , to an agreement which preserves the many advances sought by Parliament but rejected by the Council .
Madam President , for a number of years I have been concerned that current legislation on timeshares did not take into account the range of new products in this area coming on to the market .
Therefore , I welcome the revisions being made in this proposal .
Extending the scope to cover holiday clubs and other similar products is a great step forward in protecting the consumer from what had previously been an easy target for the unscrupulous tout .
This directive certainly shows that the EU is taking steps to stay ahead of the game .
I have to admit , however , that I am disappointed that Parliament had to give way on a provision calling for cooling-off periods of 21 days in order to reach agreement with the Council .
However , this is not to say that the improvements made have had no effect on the current directive , and , in fact , it is to be welcomed that no upfront payments have to be made until the end of the cooling-off period .
A great deal of effort has gone into reaching this compromise with the Council , and I hope to see the report adopted today with a large majority .
( CS ) I welcome the revision of the fifteen year old timeshares directive .
This will expand the definitions of long-term recreational products , allowing greater levels of consumer protection and ensuring the competitiveness of honest providers .
The directive , in other words , prevents the emergence of new products that are aimed merely at circumventing the rules .
Timeshare products are , by their very nature , services that are offered across national boundaries .
I am therefore delighted that in Europe , this market will be fully harmonised and that the consumer will have the same rights in all states , for example the fourteen day period within which it will be possible to withdraw from a contract without having to make a down payment in advance , or the obligation incumbent upon the provider to draw up a contract in the language preferred by the consumer .
This is good news for Czech consumers wanting to go on holiday .
I also support the idea of introducing a European registration system such as travel agents have , which would be a source of information in the case of judicial disputes and could also include the setting up of a guarantee fund for consumers in the event of a company going bankrupt .
I congratulate the Commissioner and also the rapporteurs .
Member of the Commission . - Madam President , we need to ensure that consumers all over the EU are adequately protected against aggressive selling tactics by rogue traders operating in the timeshare and holiday product markets .
The need for action at EU level is all the more crucial because of the cross-border nature of most timeshare contracts .
Furthermore , we need to ensure that consumers have enough confidence in the regulatory framework so that they do not refrain from purchasing timeshare abroad from legitimate traders .
A healthy market in timeshare and similar holiday products will contribute to boosting growth and job creation in the European Union .
It is my firm belief that the compromise package that you will vote on today will make an important contribution to the achievement of these aims .
The amendments put forward by the ALDE , PPE-DE and PSE Groups - with which the Council has agreed - are , in my view , fair and reasonable .
The package is also in line with the Commission 's original proposal .
In my opinion , this package constitutes the best option in the interest of both consumers and traders .
A vote for this package is a vote for consumer confidence in holiday products , for clear consumer information , and for a competitive and responsible holiday industry .
I therefore look to the Members of this House to vote to support an agreement today on rules for timeshare and similar holiday products which will provide real added value for holidaymakers all over Europe .
rapporteur . - ( NL ) Madam President , if this directive meets with approval this afternoon , although we may be laying down a directive for only a small segment of the internal market , it will represent an enormous step for the European consumer .
This directive is , after all , a precursor to the horizontal instrument for consumer protection .
As rapporteur , I proposed in the first instance that we lay down a number of aspects in a regulation .
We eventually ended up with maximum harmonisation and , in my view , this maximum European harmonisation will provide considerable protection not only for consumers , but also for the bona fide companies involved in the trade in question .
Tourism will receive an enormous boost , and the internal market can only function well if there is consumer confidence .
I am glad that , with this maximum harmonisation , all European consumers will be given the same rights .
Indeed , I take the view that the European consumers , from whichever country they may hail , should have the same rights when they purchase goods , services or whatever else within the internal market .
This will be guaranteed with this directive .
I hope that the Member States will regulate adherence and their monitoring procedures in the same way , so that consumer confidence can remain high .
After all , an internal market , and this is why I believe in Europe , can only function well on the basis of trust on the part of industry , the government and the consumer .
If we manage to pull this off , then this is a precursor to my mind , and an important indicator that the horizontal instrument for consumer protection should be fully harmonised for all consumer purchases .
This then , in my opinion , is a huge step forward , for we have already optimised many areas of the internal market , but not yet consumer confidence .
I think that this directive is an important step in that direction .
I should like to thank everyone who has made a positive contribution .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place at noon today .
Written statements ( Rule 142 )
Timeshare is a form of holiday product .
Many consumers decide to buy such services while they are captivated by the charms of the place they are holidaying in , which unfortunately is used by unscrupulous traders who fail to give them the full information about the services being offered .
The changes the directive introduces will increase the scope of consumer protection against these practices .
In particular , consumers will be given a 14 day cooling-off period during which they can withdraw from the agreement without any consequences , which will help them to think over their decision .
The information that traders will have to provide to potential service buyers will also be expanded .
The consumer will have the right to full information , regardless of the Member State in which they are buying the services and , more importantly , this information will have to be in writing and in the consumer 's mother tongue or language of their country of origin .
If consumers are not informed of their right to a 14 day cooling off period , the cooling-off period will be extended to one year and 14 days .
These solutions are all very beneficial for the consumer , particularly at a time when foreign travel has become so widespread and , as a result , consumers are increasingly exposed to the unfair practices of some operators .
The European Parliament has always been very concerned about consumer rights in the area of tourism and , consequently , in its resolutions on new perspectives and new calls for long-term sustainable tourism in Europe , it has accepted the need to revise Directive 94 / 47 / EC .
Irresponsible agencies find it easy to circumvent this directive and therefore , in the interests of achieving an optimal level of consumer protection in this area , the IMCO Committee has been pressing for the adoption of harmonised rules across a number of key areas .
These will help consumers to make the right decisions , regardless of which country they come from or where they go on holiday .
Timeshare comprises the time-limited use of properties or other assets under contracts covering a period of more than one year , through which the consumer acquires , on payment of a fee , the right to use one or more accommodation facilities on more than one occasion .
Contracts will have to contain checklists designed to attract the attention of consumers and to make it easy for them to understand their right to withdraw from the contract .
I welcome the code of ethics for entrepreneurs in this area , the quality mark , the trans-boundary campaigns and the use of standardised forms .
One important aspect is that advertisements should inform consumers and not mislead them .
The directive sets out a legal framework for long-term holiday products .
Consumers will have time to consider their decisions in an environment where no one can put them under pressure .
I believe that this directive can resolve the serious problems which consumers have encountered with long-term holiday products .
Mr President , I am delighted to express my approval of this report and to thank the rapporteur , Mr Manders , and my colleague , Mr Harbour , for their excellent work , as also the shadow rapporteurs .
This has been an excellent piece of teamwork .
This package of measures is the result of significant efforts made by both the Commission and also Parliament and the Council .
The Spanish delegation always argues for understanding , clarity and legal certainty which , together with full harmonisation , guarantee optimum consumer protection .
We wanted clear rules and better market regulation for two reasons : firstly , for businesspeople , so that they can carry out their activities with a high level of quality and security , and , secondly , for consumers , so that they can feel confident when accessing this market , so that they have the necessary information before signing any contracts as well as the necessary safeguards protecting their rights .
Good regulation stimulates market activity and benefits both consumers and businesspeople .
That is what we wanted and what we have managed to achieve with this agreement .
( The sitting was suspended at 10.55 a.m. for the award of the LUX Prize and resumed at 11.30 a.m. )
1 .
Approval of the nomination of Baroness Catherine Ashton as a member of the European Commission ( vote )
2 .
European Council meeting ( 15-16 October 2008 ) ( vote )
- Before the vote :
Mr President , in managing this crisis , Parliament has demonstrated its sense of responsibility .
It is in this spirit that the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs met on Monday evening to approach the revision of the Capital Requirements Directive , known as ' CRD ' , which has been presented by the Commission as one of the cornerstones of its response to the serious financial crisis in the European Union .
I would like to inform this plenary assembly that the Commission did not consider it useful to participate in the work done by the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs on Monday evening for this exchange of views .
- Before the vote on paragraph 6 :
( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , you have received this in writing .
I am in favour of our adding a phrase with the following wording in English :
' Deplores the expected spillover effects to other sectors of the economy , therefore ... '
( DE ) This insertion would make clear that the financial crisis has a negative impact on the overall economy .
( The oral amendment was not accepted )
( DE ) Mr President , I should just like to point out that we are voting on a joint motion for a resolution by four political groups , who have agreed not to table any amendments to the joint text .
Oral amendments are also amendments , and the Group of the Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe has signed the joint resolution .
For this reason , to our regret , we must oppose further amendments , including oral amendments .
- After the vote on Amendment 6 :
Mr President , were we not required to vote on paragraph 6 ?
I will be advised by you .
No , there has been no request for a separate vote on that paragraph .
- Before the vote on paragraph 9 :
( LT ) I just wanted to add the words which are next to paragraph 9 , and then the text would sound like this :
' and their conformity with the Treaty provisions ' , for the purpose of clarification .
The text would therefore read as follows : ' state aid rules to measures taken and their conformity with the Treaty provisions ' .
( The oral amendment was not accepted )
- Before the vote on paragraph 29 :
Mr President , I believe the colleagues from the PPE-DE Group will be standing up to speak shortly , but , before they do , I would ask them to consider whether it would harm their principles to support my oral amendment by adding two words which highlight the isolation of the Baltic region in the energy sector and its 100 % dependence on Russia .
We would like to highlight and to welcome the Commission 's , and specifically the Council 's , initiative to help put an end to the Baltic region 's isolation in the energy sector .
Therefore , in paragraph 29 , where we talk about Eastern Europe , I would like to mention the Baltic region .
I ask for your support .
( Applause from the centre and the left )
( DE ) Mr President , I would suggest that our fellow Members from the Group of the Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe raise their legitimate objections during the negotiations intended for that purpose .
It is an impertinence to make such proposals in plenary , as we cannot hold a serious debate on them here .
That is unparliamentary , and therefore should be dropped .
( Applause )
( The oral amendment was not accepted )
- After the vote on Amendment 1 :

( SV ) Mr President , I think there is no excuse for us not having received the amendments until ten o 'clock this morning , and then only in English , Latvian and Finnish .
That is not how things should happen .
We note your complaint , Mrs Goudin .
- After the vote :
Mr President , I just wanted to point out to the House that we voted on a resolution of a European Council meeting , and it is a disgrace that nobody from the Council is present to take into account what we have been working on and what we have to say .
This is not the way we work together .
( Applause )

Mr President , it may be true that the Council is not here , but I would like to ask the House to welcome our new Commissioner who , immediately after her endorsement , has taken the trouble to be present for the vote .
I welcome Baroness Ashton to the Chamber .
( Loud applause )
Indeed , Mr Martin .
You are absolutely on the ball .
3 .
Temporary workers (
4 .
Multiannual Community programme on protecting children using the Internet and other communication technologies (
5 .
Promotion of clean road transport vehicles (
6 .
Variations to the terms of marketing authorisations for medicinal products (
7 .
Protection of consumers in respect of certain aspects of timeshares (
- Before the vote :
rapporteur . - ( NL ) Mr President , I should once again like to thank everyone , including the shadow rapporteurs from the various committees and the Commissioner .
I hope we will approve the text , because it represents a huge step forward for consumer rights in Europe and will give the European tourism industry an enormous boost .
I therefore hope that my fellow Members will approve the compromise , and that we will take this important step towards optimising the internal market in one reading .
I declare voting suspended to make way for the formal sitting .
Voting time
The next item is the vote .
( For results and other details of the vote : see Minutes )

Mr President , I rise under Rule 166 , on a point of order , to draw the attention of the President to a failure to respect Parliament 's Rules of Procedure , specifically in relation to Question Time yesterday .
I think this has become a moveable feast , as has voting time in this Parliament .
Questions are put in an order to suit the Commission and the Council , not Members ; then questions are amalgamated , and supplementary questions are taken together .
Yesterday , only 12 questions were reached .
For those of us who have few opportunities to speak , this makes participating in plenary almost impossible .
We elect a President , Vice-Presidents and group leaders to look after the interests of Parliament and Members .
This is not happening .
I would ask that it be revisited and that the role of Members in plenary - who stand in place of the public - be defended and not sacrificed to every whim of anybody else who wants to come into this Chamber .
The rights of Members must be defended by the Chair , not abrogated by the Chair at every hand 's turn .
I protest very strongly that that is what is happening in this plenary .
( Applause )
Thank you very much , Mr Mitchell .
Your comments and your complaint will be duly considered at the next meeting of the Bureau .

( DE ) Mr President , I should just like to warn Mr Mitchell : for years I have been told each time that it will be discussed at the next meeting of the Bureau , but nothing ever changes .
( Applause )
Mr Posselt , your comment will also be conveyed to the Bureau .
( Laughter )
Formal sitting - UN High Representative for the Alliance of Civilisations
Mr Sampaio , UN High Representative for the Alliance of Civilisations , ladies and gentlemen .
Mr Sampaio , it is my great honour and pleasure to be able to welcome you to the European Parliament .
You visited the European Parliament back in 1998 as the president of Portugal .
Since then , not only has the number of members of the European Union increased , but also its ambition and responsibilities .
I particularly welcome your presence here today as High Representative for the Alliance of Civilisations , an initiative of the United Nations , as the current European Year of Intercultural Dialogue means that your visit is very important to us all .
In your work with the United Nations Alliance of Civilisations , you are making a valuable contribution to improving mutual respect and understanding among nations .
I am convinced that your enthusiasm and long experience will benefit the numerous initiatives promoted by your organisation in the fields of youth , education , media and migration .
Education and also the media and entertainment field are particularly important to intercultural dialogue .
The Final Report of the High-Level Group on the Alliance of Civilisations contains detailed , useful proposals on both subjects .
For example , it calls for the development of additional , new teaching materials , such as school books that are better suited to the promotion of mutual understanding .
After all , the successful development of intercultural dialogue should not be limited to high-profile individual measures such as symposia , joint declarations or symbolic gestures .
As part of the European Year of Intercultural Dialogue , the European Union and the European Parliament have endeavoured to go beyond mere declarations of intent and to contribute to better understanding between various cultures by means of very specific initiatives .
Many leading figures have been invited to plenary , and you are one such leading figure .
The important thing now is that we do not limit this intercultural dialogue to 2008 , but continue it in the next few years and beyond .
Mr Sampaio , we are grateful that you could make it to Parliament today , which represents 27 countries and almost 500 million citizens .
It is a great pleasure to now invite you to take the floor .
Ladies and gentlemen , Mr Sampaio .
Mr President , Mr Secretary-General , Members of Parliament , ladies and gentlemen , I really wanted to give this initial address in my mother tongue , Portuguese , but you will all understand that , in my current capacity , I must use another language .
Your Excellencies , let me express at the very outset my heartfelt thanks to Mr Pöttering for his kind words of welcome .
Let me also add that it is an honour and a great pleasure to address this prominent audience both on behalf of His Excellency , the Secretary-General of the United Nations , and in my capacity as High Representative for the Alliance of Civilisations .
The Secretary-General was invited to address this parliamentary session but was unable to be here today with us .
He asked me to deliver the following message to the European Parliament on the European Year of Intercultural Dialogue , and I quote :
' It is a great pleasure to send greetings to all the distinguished participants in this important session of the European Parliament on intercultural dialogue .
' Throughout its history , Europe has seen terrible outbreaks of armed conflict often rooted in prejudice and hatred .
Yet the continent has also been fertile soil for some of the world 's most remarkable innovations , artistic creations and scientific progress .
Europe 's tremendous diversity and its strategic geographic position , at the centre of the old and new migration routes , have made it a significant venue for cross-cultural interaction and interfaith dialogue .
In particular , its close relationship with its neighbours across the Mediterranean makes Europe an important bridge between civilisations .
' Like many other regions of the world , Europe faces multiple challenges in promoting intercultural dialogue .
Migration , economic uncertainty and political tensions are putting strains on relations between different cultural , ethnic and religious groups .
However , it is precisely in your region , where constructive contacts over the centuries have allowed humanity to take major leaps forward , that opportunities for reconciliation and cooperation exist .
' This special session today holds great promise .
I urge you to make the most of this opportunity , and to pursue joint economic projects , educational exchanges , and other initiatives that will improve people 's lives and create a bulwark against intolerance , religious fundamentalism and extremism .
' The United Nations will do its part to support and complement your efforts , both in and beyond Europe .
' The Alliance of Civilisations is one of our main vehicles for this work .
It aims to address the growing divisions between societies by reaffirming a paradigm of mutual respect between peoples .
It also seeks to mobilise joint action for this purpose .
Among the Alliance 's major initiatives are a Youth Solidarity Fund to promote dialogue , and a Global Expert Finder to provide a source of commentators who can shed light on potentially divisive issues .
' " If I were to do it all over again , I would begin with culture . ”
These famous words , most often attributed to Jean Monnet , who worked so tirelessly for European unity , remain strikingly relevant today .
' Cross-cultural tolerance , dialogue , respect and understanding must be pillars of the better world we are trying to build .
It is very encouraging to know of your strong commitment to this quest .
' For the sake of countless people living between the extremes and yearning for dignity and peace , let us work together so that intercultural dialogue can bear fruit .
In that spirit , please accept my best wishes for the success of your discussions ' .
This is the end of His Excellency 's message .
( Applause )
As a former Member of Parliament , I know that Parliament is , and always will be , the home of democracy .
Its Members have the sometimes thankless task of guaranteeing a sustainable view of the future for the people they represent .
As far as Europe is concerned , we all know how slow has been the evolution of the parliamentary institution , and how great the challenges are to enforce a specific European model of democracy .
I can only praise the work already carried out and its contribution to build a more participative , pluralist Europe that is closer to citizens , closer , after all , to all citizens .
These are the results of your labour and I therefore wish to extend a warm greeting to all members of this Assembly , the legitimate representatives of a community of nations committed to achieve an original and unique project , in which the last century placed so many hopes and which in this one faces so many expectations .
I come today to speak to you of the Alliance of Civilisations , an issue that , although it may seem remote and distant from our day-to-day life , is in fact deeply embedded here .
In fact , it started with an academic dispute between scholars who predicted the end of history and the clash of civilisations , but that turned into a major hot social topic , a challenge to democracy and a core issue of international policy because of globalisation , increased migrations and 9 / 11 .
An issue , finally , that the United Nations managed to put high on the global agenda .
What am I talking about ?
I refer to the huge - ethnic , cultural and religious - diversity of our societies and of the increasing difficulties we experience in living together .
I speak of the worsening divides of all types , the erosion of social cohesion and the widening rifts between societies .
I speak , too , of a widespread malaise that has been expressed in increased tensions intra- and inter-communities , in mutual distrust , in polarised perceptions and world views , in intractable identity-based conflicts and , of course , in the rise of extremism .
Furthermore , I speak of religion being employed as a tool by all and sundry , and used and abused for various purposes and effects .
I also speak of some disorientation of political powers , confronted with the deficiencies of a purely security-based and / or repressive approach , and the absence of suitable policies and instruments for proper governance of cultural diversity .
All this serves to underline what to me is irrefutable evidence : cultural diversity has become a major political issue challenging modern democracies , pluralism , citizenship and social cohesion , as well as peace and stability among nations .
For me , this is crystal clear and , even if serious difficulties , such as the current financial and economic turmoil , take up all attentions , in my view , we simply cannot allow the present emergencies to deflect us from handling the in-depth problems of today and guard against the crises of tomorrow .
To put it harshly , to us , to the European Union , stripped down to its bare essentials , what does this mean ?
It means : how to integrate minorities , all minorities , but the Muslims of Europe in particular ?
How to develop our relationship with the Mediterranean ?
Where to draw the lines of the European project ?
How to enhance European foreign policy to project what we consider universal values to the world ?
In my view , this is all about fundamental questions concerning values , beliefs , attitudes and behaviours .
This is about democracy , rule of law , human rights and respect for cultural diversity ; about justice , social cohesion and inclusive societies ; about states , secularisation and secularism or laicité ; about the public sphere , private acts and religious revival .
This is all about European identity and values .
That is how I see it .
( Applause )
As time is obviously very short , I will not be able to discuss all these points , so I will focus on the issue of the Muslim minorities in Europe .
Why is there growing anxiety about the integration of Muslims in Europe ?
On account of the fact that it is a demographic issue ?
Yes , of course !
Given that it is an integration issue ?
No doubt about that !
In my view , the presence of Muslims in Europe is not a question of Islam and the West , but an acute problem of integration .
To my mind , however , there is another thing : there is an identity issue .
Indeed , the arrival of immigrants in any society has an impact on the host country 's sense of self .
The point here , however , is that , as someone has put it , ' the dam separating Christian Europe from Muslim East has sprung a leak , altering Europe 's culture ' .
Why , for instance , did past discussions on the preamble of the former European Constitution end in such vocal acrimony ?
Why does Turkey 's accession to the European Union trigger such passionate and combative debates ?
All these questions are interrelated and they all point to the so-called European values and identity .
In order to reinforce it , European identity should encompass individual allegiances and adopt cultural legacies .
( Applause )
Europe as a place where we can live together as equals requires more and more inclusive citizenship and better governance of cultural diversities .
To cope with the integration of Muslims in Europe and in our European societies , we need new policies at all levels .
We need European action , but also national governmental initiatives as well as local measures .
We need democratic governance of cultural diversity .
We need integrated perspectives and policies on education , youth , and the integration of migrants .
In order to develop appropriate cultural policies , we need to build cultural statistics and indicators to enlighten decision makers and the decision-making process and to monitor and assess the implementation of those policies .
We need to develop democratic citizenship and participation .
We need education for human rights , education for citizenship and respect for others , education for intercultural understanding and dialogue , education on media literacy , education about religions and beliefs and both intra- and inter-religious dialogue .
We need to learn about and to teach intercultural competences to our citizens .
We need to create urban strategies and policies for intercultural dialogue .
We need youth policies based on equal opportunities .
We need to engage civil society at large , youth , religious leaders and the media .
However , we also need to expand and develop the intercultural dialogue agenda in international relations and , of course , give it priority .
How can we live together in our globalising world , where clashes anywhere are clashes everywhere and where cultural and religious fault lines divide our societies ?
This is the global challenge the Alliance of Civilisations is facing and which it has to address in concrete terms .
Turning this global challenge into ' glocal ' deliverables is therefore the Alliance 's main task .
By ' glocal ' I mean that deliverables have to be extensively underpinned by a global approach , but have to be implemented at a local level .
This means that the Alliance relies greatly on the European Union to implement an agenda of good governance of cultural diversity in the European region , meaning by that not only the members of the European Union , but also its neighbouring countries , particularly the Mediterranean ones .
This is why I am so happy that an action plan on cooperation between the European Union and the Alliance of Civilisations has been agreed and will provide a solid base for the pursuit of concrete objectives and the implementation of practical projects .
In this regard , let me stress how important and significant it will be if the European Year of Intercultural Dialogue could be expanded into a long-term , sustainable framework for promoting good governance of intercultural diversity , and I praise His Excellency the President 's words in this respect .
I am sure that it would have a terrific impact on boosting national strategies for intercultural dialogue comprising measures and programmes on education , media , migration and youth that I have asked countries to design and implement .
This is a suggestion that I put forward last April and to which I would like to draw your attention , asking honourable Members of Parliament kindly to back it up .
Another area in which the Alliance is eager to collaborate is the Union for the Mediterranean in order to help improve and manage intercultural diversity and intercultural dialogue , including inter-faith issues , within and among European and Muslim societies and communities .
To put it bluntly : the current international difficulties and the increasing anxiety we all feel in living together in mutual respect have encouraged the misguided view that cultures are set on an unavoidable collision course leading to a clash of civilisations .
We face increased polarisations that come up against a backdrop of growing tensions over a series of political issues and of growing cultural stereotypes .
It goes without saying that political conflicts can only be solved through political negotiations .
The long-term resolution of tensions between Muslim and Western societies , for example , cannot be achieved as long as some of the well-known sources of hostility are not successfully addressed .
It is equally true , however , that peace agreements rarely hold if they are not strongly backed by the communities involved .
Many peace deals in the past have floundered because deep-seated suspicion and hostility remained , dividing people along cultural and religious lines .
Now the point precisely is that all findings are unanimous and show a great divide in the way Westerners and Muslims view each other , with Westerners seen by Muslims as patronising and domineering , and Muslims seen by Westerners as fanatical and intolerant .
Moreover , socioeconomic marginalisation and discrimination generate disaffection and intolerance , and aggravate the chasm between Muslim and Western publics .
This so-called divide , opposing two fictional monolithic blocks , Islam and the West , fuels further stereotypes and polarisation , and gives rise to extremism .
Let me stress , however , that the vast majority of peoples reject extremism in any society and support respect for religious and cultural diversity .
Both Muslims and non-Muslims are concerned by the challenges of security and the threat of social polarisation .
Millions of Muslim families worry about losing their young to religious and political extremism .
In order to tackle this problem , we should develop new strategies to manage and promote inter-faith dialogue as part of cultural diversity , based on universal human rights .
In other words , creating the necessary conditions for sustainable peace requires efforts of a different kind , aimed at generating a mind shift among divided communities .
This is my first concluding point .
My second point regards the need to give political priority to the development of democratic governance of cultural diversity .
In the European Union this implies creating a collective identity between its citizens - regardless of their origins and their ethnicities , languages , philosophical beliefs , political and religious affiliations - to share values , attitudes and projects , and make room for a common future to build on together .
This is why cultural diversity should go hand in hand with the protection of human rights and fundamental freedoms , equal opportunities for all , economic solidarity and social cohesion .
These issues will not be sorted out in the short term - unfortunately it is like that - and long-term efforts are needed .
Indeed , the temptation to give up is likely to be with us all the time , but we must never resign ourselves because , after all , small changes in circumstances can produce big shifts in behaviour .
This is exactly what we need to generate the will to live together in mutual respect and appreciation of our ethnic , linguistic , cultural and religious differences .
The urgency of the task cannot be underestimated .
I am sure , however , that through your work and your commitment , we will manage to live together in integrated communities . Thank you very much for your attention .
( The House accorded the speaker a standing ovation . )
President Sampaio , on behalf of the European Parliament , I thank you for this great speech , and I thank you for your great commitment , as the UN High Representative , to the alliance of civilisations and to intercultural dialogue .
As you mentioned the Union for the Mediterranean , I take this opportunity to inform you that , at its extraordinary plenary session of 12 and 13 October in Jordan , the Euro-Mediterranean Parliamentary Assembly - including representatives from Israel , Palestine , the Arab countries , the European Parliament and the national parliaments of the European Union - adopted a declaration on the peace process in the Middle East .
In November , several hundred young people from all the countries that are building the Union for the Mediterranean will meet here , in the Chamber of the European Parliament in Strasbourg , and engage in a dialogue of civilisations - a dialogue of cultures .
We are committed to your goals , Mr President , and we wish you well in your great commitment to the alliance of civilisations .
The European Parliament supports you .
Your ambition is our ambition .
Thank you , President Sampaio , for your visit to the European Parliament .
Obrigado .
( Applause )
1 .
Evaluation of the Australia-EU PNR agreement (
- Before the vote on paragraph 1 ( g ) :
rapporteur . - Mr President , in agreement with the shadows of the PPE-DE , PSE and Verts / ALE Groups , I would like to propose an oral amendment to paragraph 1 ( g ) .
It consists of two small changes .
The first change is that we replace the words ' fails to meet ' in the second sentence with ' may not conform to ' so that the second sentence will read ' and that as a result , the agreement may not conform to EU and international data protection standards ' .
The second small change is in the last sentence , where I would like to replace the word ' leaves ' by ' might leave ' so that it reads ' considers that this might leave the agreement open to legal challenge ' .
Mrs in ' t Veld , I have a question .
Am I right in thinking that , if your oral amendment is accepted , this will replace the split vote ?
In other words , if your oral amendment is accepted , we can vote on the paragraph as a whole .
Is that right ?
rapporteur . - Mr President , yes , as far as I am concerned , because the request for a split vote was made by the PSE Group because it did not agree with the middle section .
If my oral amendment is adopted - and I am looking at the shadow of the PSE Group : yes , she agrees with me - then they agree with the paragraph as a whole , so we could vote on the paragraph as a whole .
( Parliament accepted the oral amendment )
2 .
Challenges to collective agreements in the EU (
- Before the vote :
Mr President , I would like to inform you that after a debate yesterday during our PPE-DE Group meeting , we as a group are withdrawing three amendments : Amendment 6 to paragraph 9 ; Amendment 8 to paragraph 15 and Amendment 10 to paragraph 24 .
I inform you with pleasure , on behalf of the PPE-DE Group , that those three amendments are withdrawn .
- After the vote :
( ES ) Mr President , with all due respect , I must make the following comment .
Following the very proper and sensible address made on the Alliance of Civilisations by the UN High Representative , you resumed the sitting with these words - perhaps you have them handy - which were more or less as follows :
' Well , and now , following the Alliance of Civilisations , we must return to earth ' .
Mr President , I regret to say that your comment was not in line with parliamentary courtesy and was inappropriate in your position as President .
You must be aware that one of the President 's powers - and my Vice-President colleagues frequently do this - is to make innocuous comments about incidents in the House .
These comments must be taken in the context of their content and intention .
I can assure you , dear Member , that my intention was absolutely positive .
However , if you or any other Member has found something disturbing in this innocent and benevolent comment , you must regard it as having been withdrawn .
3 .
Democracy , human rights and the new EU-Vietnam Partnership and Cooperation Agreement ( vote )
- Before the vote :
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to make a purely factual correction .
Reference is made to the Unified Buddhist Church of Vietnam , saying that it was once the largest organisation of Buddhists in southern and central Vietnam .
This is , in reality , referring to the fact that free and reliable information no longer exists , but it should be corrected to read : ' which is the largest organisation of Buddhists in Vietnam ' .
( Parliament accepted the oral amendment )
Voting time ( continuation )
Ladies and gentlemen , following the Alliance of Civilisations , we must come down to earth and continue voting .
Explanations of vote
Oral explanations of vote
Mr President , I welcome the appointment of Baroness Ashton as a member of the Commission , and I would like to point out that the very fact that she has been awarded a life peerage speaks for her excellent work for the United Kingdom .
I have a firm belief that she will be as worthy a Commissioner as another peer before her .
Lord Cockfield was appointed as the United Kingdom Commissioner in 1984 by Margaret Thatcher 's government .
He had a distinguished career in Brussels , laying the foundation for the single market .
Baroness Ashton would guarantee a place for herself in the history of the European Union by giving momentum to the Doha negotiations .
It is a great challenge , but the successful finalisation of the negotiations would help the developing countries immensely .
Mr President , I voted against the joint motion on the European Council summit because of its duplicity over the Irish referendum and its foolish clinging to economically damaging climate-change targets .
The communiqué makes a hypocritical affirmation of respect for the Irish rejection of Lisbon , and then immediately sets about insisting , through the coded language of these documents , that the Irish fall into line .
The so-called respect for the democratic decision of the voters is patently false .
Now here we all are facing a deep economic crisis , the worst most of us can remember , and the EU is worried about keeping the deck chairs of climate targets in place .
Industry and our economies cannot now afford this ever-higher green taxation burden .
All we will succeed in doing is expelling more and more of our manufacturing industry to the Far East .
Mr President , I want to mention Amendment 3 , where we criticised a number of Commissioners for having downplayed long-standing requests by the European Parliament to propose legislation for better supervision of the financial market .
This is the reality of the situation , but I think it is important also to state that Member States must take their share of the blame .
Even if the Commission had tried to move I think it would have met with a great deal of resistance .
Still , the Commission has a responsibility , and while we have principles-based regulation as opposed to rules-based , it still needs to be rigorous , and light-touch regulation has not worked .
I also want to mention paragraph 20 , where Parliament reiterates its respect for the result of the Irish referendum and for the results of the ratification procedures in the other Member States .
During the debate on the Irish referendum , it was claimed time and time again that Parliament would not respect the result .
Apart from anything else , Parliament has no competence here , and no power to act one way or the other .
Still , I welcome the statement , unlike my colleague Mr Allister .
Finally in paragraph 20 I think it is possible to meet the concerns of the Irish people before the European election , but we should not underestimate what is needed here .
It also states that Parliament stands ready to offer assistance to forge a broader , more informed consensus .
I believe this really should be worded ' to forge a better-informed consensus ' .
Mr President , the most dangerous phrase in contemporary politics is ' something must be done ' .
Politicians have an unreasonable and disproportionate fear of appearing inactive and what that ' something ' is , is secondary , as we have seen during the financial crisis .
It does not matter what the ' something ' is - GBP 500 billion in Britain , EUR 500 billion in Europe , USD 850 billion in the US - alright , that is ' something ' , let us do it .
Never mind what its practical consequences are .
The truth is that you cannot legislate against recessions , any more than you can legislate to order the course of the sun or the moon .
What we are seeing now is an inexorable correction to the years of easy credit created by these same governments which kept interest rates too low for too long .
That was a political decision and not a market one , and the air that was puffed into the balloon is now rushing out .
The only practical change being made by the nationalisation of our banks and by these huge bail-outs is that , instead of cutting taxes to help people through the tough times , we are loading an enormous new additional burden on them .
Our taxpayers will pay a heavy price for our conceit .
Mr President , concerning Amendment 9 , which my group voted against , it was crucial for the PPE-DE Group that the democratic process should be completed without any short cuts that create a democratic deficit , especially now that , in the case of emission trading , the parliamentary process cannot be described in a flattering manner .
We have seen misleading tricks , manipulation and , finally , the rapporteur ignoring the political will of her own group .
This has become even more relevant given the deadlock in the Council last week .
The PPE-DE Group has offered a solution to the problem of damaging industry whilst advancing the climate change mitigation .
Therefore , not only EU industry but also the trade unions are supporting our benchmarking proposal to replace the costly auctioning system .
We are all united in the attempt to reduce harmful emissions .
There is no doubt about that .
The question is how to do it .
Our first concern must be our planet , but I contend that the measures needed to stop climate change will not be helped by the economic decline of the leading climate-friendly economies leading to unemployment in the EU .
Mr President , the EPLP welcomes the content of this joint resolution and motion regarding the financial climate and the broader economy .
As to what we might do next , it is true that Parliament has set out a series of demands - which have been a kind of a wish list , to some degree - and also concrete proposals about what needs to be done .
At times we have gone further than the Commission .
Indeed , at times - maybe for national reasons or for political interests - we have seen Parliament both water down text and propose good text .
But those calls are quite relevant today and are germane to the condition that we are in .
Supervisory structures need , more than ever , to be strengthened , but at the global level , not just at a European level .
We have to look outside the European Union .
For that , we also need to consider what is happening in terms of development aid around the world .
We need to deepen our reserves in terms of dealing with development issues , not walk away from them , and it is hoped that , by doing this , we will reach the kinds of economic equilibrium that is needed around the world .
It is our role to draw attention to these issues .
It is also our role to do something more about this , and I will submit more on this issue in writing .
Mr President , I should like to summarise the reasons why I voted against the resolution .
First , strengthening the state 's role is the wrong answer in looking for a way out from the financial turmoil .
Second , higher regulation and the creation of a new pan-European supervisory authority without clarification of competences are not a remedy to the crisis .
Third , having been rejected by the people of Ireland , the Lisbon Treaty cannot enter into force .
That is why the European Council should respect the outcome of the Irish referendum .
Fourth , the European Council is not willing to go back on its own unrealistic and extremely expensive targets concerning climate change .
This will ultimately harm the living standards of ordinary people .
Mr President , let me begin by saying that it is correct to say that the Lisbon Treaty cannot enter into force until all 27 Member States approve it , but that does not mean that Europe cannot move ahead , and I , for one , do not want to see Europe moving ahead without Ireland .
As the Director of Elections for Fine Gael in the recent referendum campaign , I want to make it absolutely clear that the Irish position is , and should be , that we want to be at the centre of Europe .
We no longer want to be an island behind an island , dominated by British interests .
We respect Britain for having its interests - it is entitled to have them .
Our interests lie elsewhere and I do not want any British Member of Parliament standing up here and speaking for my constituents or for Irish interests .
I wish to say that the Fine Gael MEPs in the PPE-DE Group support the general thrust of the report on the European Council meeting , but do not accept that Parliament should consider ' that it is possible to meet the concerns that have been expressed by the Irish people in order to secure a solution acceptable to all before the European elections ' , as this is a matter for the Irish people to consider , at their discretion and timing .
That is the point we need to put on the record .
( CS ) I am not very pleased with the content of our joint resolution , nor am I very pleased with the performance of Council President Sarkozy .
Despite this , I consider an agreement or at least the ability to agree on some sort of joint approach as a highly important step , since the worst message we could communicate to the people of Europe would be that we are incapable of agreeing on anything .
Nevertheless , I would also like to call for a bit of common sense .
There are three factors here .
One is the financial crisis , of course , the second is the recession and the third applies in essence to the influence of globalisation on our internal market .
I have been talking about this for many , many months and even for a number of years .
We seem unable to halt the rate of growth in the demands that are made on European industry and we are not even capable of discussing this growth at a WTO level .
This incompatibility is a major problem for us .
( DE ) Mr President , as we all know , temporary agency work in the European Union is undergoing an enormous increase .
This is a good thing on the one hand , as it creates many jobs , but the widely varying national rules have meant that , as a rule , the effects to date have tended to be negative , especially on workers , as it leads to wage dumping as a result of low wages , and thus also to the displacement of local workers .
Ultimately , it also leads to distortions of competition , particularly for small and medium-sized enterprises , and has advantages for those taking on as many temporary workers as possible on the cheap .
Therefore , our aim with the directives must be to regulate temporary agency work for the European Union as a whole , and particularly to stipulate that temporary workers be treated as equal to the employees of the user undertakings in terms of working and employment conditions .
This would be in the interests of Europe as a business location , and particularly of workers , and would prevent distortion of competition for undertakings .
( PL ) Mr President , any amendment to this directive , no matter how relevant , would mean significantly protracting the legislative process , and leave temporary workers without legal protection for a considerable period more .
This is a directive which is many years overdue .
It is also an expression of the agreements between the social partners .
That was why I voted to reject any amendments .
Mr President , I voted for this report because the safety of children who are online is a real concern for me .
It is also an issue that is raised by many of my West Midlands constituents .
I know that many parents and teachers are increasingly anxious about children accessing material which is inappropriate and potentially dangerous .
The growth of the internet into a powerful worldwide medium has increased the dangers to youngsters throughout the world .
Recent research in the UK has revealed that as many as 1 in 10 children who use computer chatrooms have been approached over the internet by paedophiles .
In acknowledging that the internet offers a world of entertainment , opportunity and knowledge to children , we must , however , also put in place measures to keep them safe on the internet .
I believe it is our responsibility to protect children from harmful material and some of those who conduct online lines .
The European Parliament has a vital role to play in reducing the availability of inappropriate and illegal materials and increasing public awareness of online dangers .
I therefore welcome this report and EU efforts to safeguard our children .
Children should be able to benefit from all the opportunities this technology offers without fear of those who would cause them harm .
( DE ) Mr President , in itself , the Internet is a very positive invention , but it is increasingly being used by criminals , and this has led to an exponential increase in one of the most abominable crimes of all , the trade in child pornography .
If you imagine that last year alone saw a 16 % increase in dealing in such material via the Internet - and add to this the fact that over 20 000 children are abused for this purpose , to produce these pictures , in a single year - you have an idea of the dimensions .
Our aims must be as follows : zero tolerance in cases of child abuse , tough penalties for the culprits , and maximum protection for children using the Internet .
I welcome the package of measures supported by the European Parliament , which ranges from hotlines to the installation of blocking systems and education to police reinforcement and traceability of financial movements .
This European Parliament report is very important as it sends a very strong signal concerning the protection of the weakest members of our society , our children .
( SK ) The internet is a great help but , at the same time , a great danger , especially for children .
Children are much more computer-savvy than their parents and therefore adults are often unaware of the huge number of snares which children in particular may encounter in several hours of surfing the internet .
I welcome this report and I have voted in favour of it .
I believe that the safe internet programme will help to eliminate the enormous generation gap which exists in respect of internet awareness .
We need an information campaign aimed at parents and teachers .
I support the establishment of contact points in the individual EU countries , where it will be possible to report illegal activities relating to internet safety .
Matti Juhani Saari in Finland placed on the internet , including the YouTube website , videos which showed him shooting a pistol on a firing range .
Ten young people were later murdered by this gun-toting lunatic in a school in the Finnish town of Kauhajoki .
Ladies and gentlemen , I believe that through this programme , we will manage to reduce risk levels and to ensure that young people will not have access to such videos on the internet .
( CS ) I have supported the Angelilli report because I believe that it will help in the fight against child abuse on the internet .
I would like the emphasis to be placed on improving the instruments that are available to police forces .
In specific terms , this involves the creation of a European database on child pornography combined with the announcement of the crisis lines which should be available to police forces .
This will be a very useful instrument for cases involving the purchase of images through peer-to-peer group communications , as it will allow verification of whether or not a given image has already appeared on the internet and whether investigations have already been carried out in respect of that image , thereby avoiding unnecessary duplications of investigative efforts .
One effective measure would also be to monitor traces of payments made on websites containing child pornography , while fully complying with rules on the protection of privacy and banking secrecy .
Experience to date shows that the safety of children on the internet can only be ensured on the basis of a multi-layered approach which includes the involvement of children , families , schools , all telecommunications operators , internet service providers and government bodies .
There is a need to raise levels of awareness and prevention which , from a technical standpoint , would assist and facilitate the reporting of cases and would improve the chances of their being investigated by police forces .
I firmly believe that the programme on internet safety can contribute towards this .
( CS ) Allow me to add to Monday 's debate on protecting children using the Internet and other communication technologies .
I backed the report , of course , and I warmly welcome it .
Nevertheless , in the programme which we approved , there is no emphasis on the standardisation of terminology in relation to dangerous content .
The Member States also vary in their views as to what is merely not permitted and what has already been criminalised .
This obviously hampers the fight against internet crime , which does not recognise the borders either of states or of continents .
For the sake of our children , harmonisation in this area should be our priority , whether we like it or not .
( NL ) Mr President , I emphatically voted in favour of this report .
It is to be welcomed that Europe wishes to do something to safeguard children from the many dangers which the Internet poses these days .
Young people become familiar with the Internet from a very young age , but are also , of course , faced with its dangers .
It is estimated that 9 out of 10 children between the ages of 8 and 16 come into contact with pornographic material on the Internet .
Online traders in porn are becoming ever more reckless .
Quite apart from the risk of Internet paedophiles and porn traders , there are also online casinos with their aggressive marketing techniques . Particularly young children are not always aware of the dangers involved .
It is therefore up to the parents , schools and teachers , but also politicians , to protect children from all this .
They need to both monitor and raise awareness , especially among the youngest members of society , because they are the most impressionable and vulnerable .
( BG ) Thank you , Mr President .
I voted for the report because I believe it to be exceptionally important .
Resolving the wide variety of problems that arise when children use communications technologies in a single document is difficult .
This programme is necessary on organisational grounds , however .
When debating the impact of the new technologies , we tend to speak of the social , educational , cultural and other benefits and only become aware of the negative effects too late in the day .
The existing mechanisms for restricting products which have a negative influence are very important in minimising the risk , but we need to have preventive programmes running alongside these .
The point , now that we have a common European Programme , is for each Member State to have its own national programme in this regard .
We need to increase society 's awareness of the problem , and teach children to use ICT intelligently .
Another thing we need to address is the danger of " computer dependence ” .
Integrated efforts are needed , and that is another role that national governments have to play .
( SK ) Mr President , I would like to thank you for giving me the floor and I would also like to thank Mrs Grossetête for the report on the proposed directive , which deals with variations to the terms of marketing authorisations for medicinal products .
I supported it in the vote .
It represents progress in the harmonisation of laws and in consumer protection , reducing bureaucracy , increasing flexibility and bringing benefits in terms of the safety and awareness of patients .
At the same time , it simplifies operations and reduces costs for medium-sized pharmaceutical firms .
I appreciate the clear stand taken by Commissioner Verheugen over counterfeit drugs , low-quality generic drugs that often have no more effect than a placebo and illicit drugs and vaccines , which find their way to European citizens via the black market .
Such activities are criminal .
In the near future , the Commission will draw up measures to strengthen existing laws in this area so that none of these drugs may be distributed .
It will also introduce sanctions against persons operating in this area .
The Commissioner has also ensured that effective drugs must be produced on the basis of recognised European standards and manufacturing processes .
( CS ) I must respond to today 's debate , in which I stated , naturally , that I warmly welcome this report .
A requirement was included , however , for all drugs containing the same active ingredient to bear the same company name , in order to avoid patients becoming confused and taking excessively high doses .
This may sound sensible to non-specialists , but drugs are constantly being innovated and , moreover , drugs which share the same or similar active ingredients may differ in a range of other constituents .
To reproach the Commission for not ordering a standardisation of company names would be absurd , suggesting a failure to understand how the system works , regardless of what powers the European Union may have in general .
Mr President , I am really pleased that the gaps in the 1994 Timeshare Directive are finally being addressed by this Parliament so that consumers can look forward to better protection for their investments .
It will also , in the long run , protect up to 40 000 European jobs .
I have taken a particular interest in this report as it covers an issue that directly affects many of my constituents .
We have more timeshare owners in the UK than any other European country .
Therefore , this will reassure many of them that Europe is acting to protect them from scam traders .
The UK timeshare industry is worth approximately EUR 157 million per year , and this directive constitutes an important move forward in eliminating unscrupulous agents who cause problems for consumers and bring legitimate operators into disrepute .
These new simplified rules will ensure that consumers are equally well protected across the EU , while creating a level playing field in the market for timeshare and other popular holiday-related products .
( CS ) I am delighted that , despite the spectre of politics , agreement has been reached on the harmonisation of legislation protecting all Europeans who are planning a holiday abroad and who wish to rent accommodation abroad without risk .
The revision of the timeshare directive excludes the registration of unreliable service providers and thereby increases the chances that people will not fall victim to fraud as is all too often the case today .
Consumers will also have a fourteen day time period in which to withdraw from contracts without having to make any down payments in advance and they will even get contracts in a language they can understand , which is good news for Czech citizens as well .
Mr President , I share in the delight of my friend and colleague , Ms Gill , that we are closing loopholes in this directive .
Timeshare is a big industry , but it also can be a big scam .
For example , I have been dealing with a company called the European Timeshare Owners Organisation , which operates in Spain - but conveniently from an address in Gibraltar - and constituents have told me that they were approached by this company which offered to resell their timeshare .
When they went to Spain at great expense , they found there was nobody to buy their timeshare , but this company wanting to sell them other timeshares .
I have been trying to get in touch with this company for several weeks and only finally this week managed to do so , because , miraculously , the phone numbers they give do not have people at the other end to answer - and they do not seem to respond to letters either .
I hope that we will start now to crack down on organisations like the European Timeshare Owners Organisation , because they give timeshare a bad name and , frankly , they damage the image of the Spanish holiday industry , which I know you care so much about .
( CS ) I was unable to vote for the Andersson report .
I do not like the fact that those who were not satisfied with the judgement from the Court of Justice are today attempting through this report to undermine the verdict of the court in the case of Laval in Sweden .
The free movement of services is one of the benefits of the European Union and Member States must pay rather more attention to ensuring that both employees and entrepreneurs are better informed concerning the principles of the posted workers directive as it exists today .
That is the right way to confront illegal employment and also dumping on the EU labour market , and not by undermining jurisdictions .
In democratic societies , rights must be clamoured for unstintingly and not undermined .
Mr President , the first part of Amendment 24 acknowledges that social dumping was a contributory factor in the Irish ' no ' to Lisbon .
I agree with that and also with the phrase that asks the Council to take action to ensure equal pay for equal work .
The amendment calls for all Member States to respect the result of the referendum in Ireland .
That goes without saying , apart from which this is a legal imperative on all Member States anyway .
However , juxtaposed with all of that is a demand that we must embark on a profound revision of the existing Treaties in order to open the road towards a social Europe .
Talk about using a sledgehammer to crack a nut !
A ' profound revision of the existing Treaties ' sounds like tearing up the rule book to me .
We already have very positive legislation on anti-discrimination and we are currently improving that legislation .
We have reached a common position on the Temporary Agency Workers Directive .
This will underpin the rights of workers and shows that the social heart of Europe is still beating .
Amendment 16 calls on Member States to challenge the judgments of the European Court of Justice .
That is not the way to do business .
We do need to examine the Posting of Workers Directive and ensure its correct transposition in all Member States and , if it needs to be changed , then we must do so , but a profound revision of the Treaties is not necessary .
Mr President , on the vote , I would like to say that the Fine Gael Members , of whom I am one , voted in favour of the Andersson report because it addresses the important issues raised in the Court of Justice judgments in the Viking , Laval and Rüffert cases , enshrining the fundamental principle of equal treatment and equal pay for equal work .
The report is very clear in stating that the legislation is not sufficient and we need to provide better balance between the rights of workers and the freedom to provide services , but the answer is not a profound revision of existing EU Treaties , as was called for in Amendment 24 .
The answer is to improve the legislation , which is why we voted against Amendment 24 and Amendment 16 , which was both unhelpful and unnecessary because it does not deal with the legislative imperative .
( NL ) Mr President , I voted against the Andersson report , not only because the text pertains to labour law - which falls within the remit of the Member States - but also because it makes reference to the Charter of Fundamental Rights and the Treaty of Lisbon again and again .
It is , of course , not the first report to commit this crime , but it shows a deep contempt for the Irish voters who have nullified the Treaty and , in fact , for all voters in Europe who have not had the opportunity to express their views about the Treaty of Lisbon in a democratic way .
Time and time again , it is promised that Europe will take the will of the people into consideration , that something will be done to remove the democratic deficit and , time and time again , it transpires here in Parliament that Europe fails to deliver .
The European Union has a problem of credibility that is at least as big as the problem of the democratic deficit .

( PL ) Mr President , I worked with Mr Andersson as shadow rapporteur for the Union for Europe of the Nations Group , fully aware of the importance of the issues covered by the report for my own trade union , Solidarity , and other trade unions , as well as for my political group , which is sensitive to social issues .
I have in my hand the letter from Janusz Śniadek , the head of the Solidarity Trade Union , on this .
The report focuses attention on the need to respect trade union rights and the importance of dialogue between the social partners , the results of such dialogue , in particular collective agreements , and respecting the principle of ' equal work for equal pay ' .
That is why I voted in favour of this report , even though , as some colleagues said earlier in this House , the references to the Lisbon Treaty are , at the moment , unjustified .
( ET ) I would like to explain why I did not vote in favour of Mr Andersson 's report .
Although this report is now much more balanced than the original version , I and many of the members of my group from Eastern Europe have abstained .
Of course we support the principle of equal treatment , but we perceived the danger that this slogan would be used to attempt to prevent the implementation of one of the fundamental freedoms of the European Union - the free movement of labour .
This is especially important for Eastern Europe : our labour wants to obtain access to the Western European labour market , even if temporarily , in order to earn more , but I think that this is also important for the economic development of the European Union as a whole .
It is my opinion that instead of changing the regulation at the European Union level , as has been requested , more attention should be devoted to the implementation of the directive and to regulations in Member States .
Written explanations of vote
in writing . - ( FR ) I voted in favour of the legislative resolution approving , subject to amendments , the proposal for a Council regulation amending the regulation of 2003 as regards jurisdiction and introducing rules concerning applicable law in matrimonial matters , based on the report by my German fellow Member , Mrs Gebhardt .
In view of the heightened mobility of citizens within the European Union which has led to an increased number of ' international ' couples , in other words couples where the spouses are of different nationalities or reside in different Member States or in a Member State of which at least one spouse is not a national , and owing to the high divorce rate in the European Union , it was essential to regulate the applicable law and jurisdiction in matrimonial matters which affects a growing number of citizens each year .
We should constantly point out that the treaties lay down the progressive establishment of a common area of freedom , security and justice , with measures seeking to promote ' the compatibility of the rules applicable in the Member States concerning the conflict of laws and of jurisdiction ' .
in writing . - I support Catherine Ashton as the new Trade Commissioner .
I am very pleased that we have finally got a female Trade Commissioner and the first female British Commissioner .
I believe that she will be a very receptive and open Commissioner who will work closely with Parliament .
in writing . - We wish to say that the Fine Gael MEPs in the PPE-DE Group support the general thrust of the report on the European Council meeting , but do not accept that Parliament should consider ' that it is possible to meet the concerns that have been expressed by the Irish people in order to secure a solution acceptable to all before the European elections ' , as this is a matter for the Irish people at their discretion and timing to consider .
in writing . - I and my British Conservative colleagues support the elements of this resolution dealing with co-operation between countries on the current financial crisis , and the expression of support for SMEs in this context .
We also support the EU maintaining its commitments regarding climate change .
We welcome the strong support for Georgia in this resolution , following the recent Russian intervention in that country .
However , as we oppose the Treaty of Lisbon strongly , we cannot support the text on this matter .
Also , we oppose an EU Common Immigration policy .
For these reasons , we have abstained on the final vote .
Today I voted against the resolution of the Council of Europe meeting in Brussels , because I do not agree with the position of the majority of Members on at least two of the issues discussed at the EU Summit .
In my opinion , the process of ratifying the Lisbon Treaty was definitively ended with the results of the Irish referendum That means that any attempts to press on with the constitutional process in the European Union are futile .
I also disagree with the position held by the majority on energy and climate change .
I would like to point out that forced solutions are a threat to industries and consumers in many countries , including Poland .
in writing . - I and all my colleagues in the Irish political party to which we belong , Fine Gael , voted for and want , as soon as possible , a clear , unambiguous ratification of the Lisbon Treaty by the Irish Government .
However , we treat the Irish electorate as lemmings at our peril .
Clear blue political water is needed between the outcome of the vote of 12 June and any decision on a second attempt at ratification .
We will get to that point quicker , with an increased chance of success , without any perceived diktats from colleagues on the timing of our ratification process , viz . ' before the European election ' , as in paragraph 20 , against which I voted today .
in writing . - ( PT ) I voted in favour of the joint motion for a resolution on the conclusions of the European Council ( 15 and 16 October 2008 ) because I agree with the decision to intervene in the financial markets .
This was understandable due to the urgent need to respond to the fears of European citizens and to provide the market with liquidity and certainty , with all the corresponding benefits for families and SMEs .
However , it must not be forgotten that this resolution also advocates adopting fundamental measures aimed at restructuring the international financial system , particularly by strengthening cooperation and coordination among regulators at Community level and providing the European Union with a fair and effective system of supervision .
More regulation of the financial market is essential , but we firstly need better regulation .
This resolution is heading in that direction .
in writing . - ( FR ) I am delighted by Parliament 's support for the European Pact on Immigration and Asylum in the context of the vote on the resolution on the European Council of 15-16 October 2008 , for which I voted in favour .
The Members have welcomed this initiative of the French Presidency of the EU which proposes a coherent and balanced approach to immigration and which reaffirms the responsible decision of the European Union to promote legal immigration and to seriously combat illegal immigration .
This success regarding the global framework for action has been consolidated by the efforts of the French Presidency with a view to the rapid adoption of the proposals for directives currently being negotiated , thereby translating these ambitious statements into tangible actions .
In particular , there is the directive on the single procedure and common set of rights , the so-called ' blue card ' directive on the conditions of entry for highly qualified nationals , and the directive on sanctions against employers of illegally residing nationals .
This pact forms an integral part of the path towards a true common immigration and asylum policy which upholds fundamental rights and human dignity , as defended by the European Parliament .
in writing . - ( SV ) With regard to Amendment 7 , tabled by the Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance , we wish to point out that we want Member States to be able to pursue their own approach in the work on reforming the Bretton Woods institutions .
Since the documents concerning the compromise resolution and the amendments to this arrived late , we abstained from participating in the votes as from point 19 ; ( however , none of these were roll-call votes ) .
in writing . - ( PT ) The PPE / PSE / ALDE / UEN resolution reveals the limits and real objectives of the measures adopted to date by the EU .
By ignoring the real causes of the current financial crisis - which lie in the increasing accumulation and concentration of capital , in the financialisation of the economy , and in speculation and the free and easy movement of capital , and by reducing these to a ' lack of transparency ' and ' deficient supervision ' of financial markets , the majority of this House is seeking to square the circle .
In other words , they want to rescue the system from a crisis which is intrinsic to it , by ( momentarily ) restoring ' confidence to the markets ' and injecting public funds without any genuine safeguards , as is the case in Portugal where a truly ' blank cheque ' has just been written for an amount equivalent to all the structural funds that the country can use in the current Community financial framework .
However , all these measures that Parliament so values are simply a way of avoiding acting on the fundamental elements , such as creating a strong , effective public bank in each country to serve its development needs , putting an end to ' tax havens ' , imposing conditions on the movement of capital and ending financial speculation , altering the EU 's monetary policy and the Stability Pact , ending privatisation and the liberalisation of the economy , and so on .
Instead , the majority of this House wants to reaffirm its neoliberal agenda .
in writing . - The resolution on the European Council held on 15-16 October 2008 addresses a number of important issues , such as the impact of the global financial crisis on the economic exit strategy from the financial crisis , the improvement of regulations to strengthen the EU regulatory and supervisory framework , energy and climate change and energy security issues .
However , I believe that we failed to comprehensively address energy security issues in the light of the latest commitments made by the Commission and the conclusions of the French Presidency .
The European Commission has undertaken to elaborate the Baltic Interconnection Plan and to present it to the EU energy ministers in December .
The Council considers it a priority to connect Lithuania , Latvia and Estonia to the wider European electricity grid and to diversify gas sources to reduce dependency on Russian gas .
I proposed incorporating those suggestions into the resolution , but they were not taken on board during negotiations between political groups , and neither was my oral amendment .
I believe that the European Parliament has failed to demonstrate solidarity with the Baltic States , which are already the most isolated energy islands in the Community and are at the mercy of Russia in terms of gas .
For the reasons stated above , I abstained in the vote on the joint resolution .
in writing . - ( DE ) The EU has taken Priština 's side on Kosovo whilst insisting on Georgia 's territorial integrity in the conflict in the Caucasus .
Brussels must clarify once and for all whether it is for or against the right of peoples to self-determination .
If the EU is serious about the lofty aims it is always upholding , it must stop applying double standards and , instead of always representing only the interests of the United States , should assume a neutral mediation role .
The financial crisis also calls the EU 's understanding of itself into question , however .
After all , in past decades , the Union has shown itself to be the tool of unbridled liberalism .
It is not citizens but the merciless implementation of a neoliberal viewpoint that have been central .
Now , not only must strict minimum standards apply throughout the EU in the field of financial market supervision , but also a solidarity contribution must be demanded from the beneficiaries of the international financial system .
This could feed into a security fund , for example , to support banks in times of crisis .
While the centre right and centre left governments of its Member States refuse to satisfy even the smallest wage or other claims of workers on the grounds that the economy cannot support them , the European Council is insultingly funding the banks and monopolies to the tune of trillions of euros , again forcing workers to bear the cost of the crisis .
Faster capitalist restructurings , the dismantling of industrial relations , the demolition of social protection and insurance systems , productivity-based wages and unemployment are at the heart of the new storm signalled by the decisions taken at the EU Summit .
This savage attack is complemented by the European agreement on immigration and asylum which raises inhumane barriers to immigrants in the EU while , at the same time , ensuring monopolies can meet their need for cheap manpower .
At the same time , Council decisions conceal the EU 's hypocritical interest in the climate , given that the cost of energy is now to be based on the vagaries of the stock exchange , regardless of production costs , thereby increasing the profits of the monopolies at the expense of the environment .
There can be no solutions which benefit people within the framework of competitiveness and the deregulated action of capital , which the EU and the governments are strengthening even further with measures to provide state support for monopolies , while stepping up their anti-grassroots attack to get the capitalist system out of its crisis .
in writing . - ( PT ) The European Council on 15 and 16 October was notable for its response to the financial crisis .
Although other issues deserve attention and could be discussed , it is the financial crisis on which our attention is necessarily focused .
Faced with the emergence of a financial crisis in which the lack of credit , in the truest etymological sense of the word , resulted in new problems and new threats day after day , the European response was effective in restoring the necessary confidence to the markets .
Regardless of what you might think about the origins of the crisis and the best possible responses , the facts confirm this interpretation .
In this sense , the reaction of the European institutions should be welcomed .
In analysing the European response , there is one fact which stands out .
The decisive meetings to re-establish market confidence are not provided for in the current Treaties or in the Treaty of Lisbon .
This proves that , as the union of States that it now is and hopefully will continue to be in the future , Europe needs institutional flexibility and , above all , strong and determined political leadership .
That was what we had and that fact has clearly done more for bringing Europeans closer to the EU than any public relations strategy or institutional debate .
in writing . - The rejection of Amendment 4 is a disappointment .
The financial crisis should not mean that we abandon our international obligations to tackle climate change and fight poverty .
I welcome the report by Mr Désir of the Socialist Group in the European Parliament , which has enabled Parliament to adopt a directive that protects temporary workers by confirming their right to enjoy working conditions identical to those of full employees .
Member States must now adopt the necessary legislative , regulatory and administrative provisions to comply with the directive within three years of its publication in the Official Journal of the European Union .
The directive is also aimed at establishing a suitable framework for the use of temporary agency work with a view to contributing effectively to the creation of jobs and to the development of flexible forms of working , which I believe to be a particularly important solution in this time of crisis .
in writing . - I welcome the adoption of the Temporary Agency Workers Directive that will , finally , give equal treatment at work to some of our most vulnerable workers .
This directive has been a long time coming .
It has been six years since the Commission first brought forward proposals for a temporary agency workers directive , during which time the number of temporary agency workers in the public and private sectors of the labour market has greatly increased .
Temporary agency work contributes to a dynamic and flexible modern economy and can often be a bridge for the long-term unemployed to get back in the labour market .
But agency workers should not be treated as second-class workers , and agencies should not be able to distort the labour market by undercutting the wages and conditions of other workers .
I am therefore delighted that Parliament , in accepting the compromise deal reached among European employment ministers in the Council of Ministers in June , has now ensured that this directive will enter into law .
This is great news for the estimated 1.3 million British workers who will be protected by this legislation and serves as an excellent demonstration that our European common market is a social market that combines protection of workers ' rights with flexible labour markets .
in writing . - I warmly welcome today 's European Parliament vote to approve the Temporary Agency Workers Directive which enacts the principle of equal pay for equal work , thus protecting the pay and conditions of both agency and full time permanent workers .
The Irish and UK governments have , for many years , stymied progress on European wide protection for temporary agency workers who have suffered discrimination in their working conditions and their right to belong to a trade union .
Today 's European Parliament vote for the final stage of a new directive is a major battle won in the fight against the race to the bottom .
Agencies have been allowed to undercut the pay and conditions of full time permanent workers for far too long , to the detriment of all workers .
In order to expedite enactment of the legislation , this report adopts the common position of the Council without amendments .
Indeed , the Council had returned the proposed directive to Parliament for second reading having adopted Parliament 's first reading amendments .
Tabling amendments at this stage of the process is simply the irresponsible mischief making of those who rather play party politics than win improved working and living conditions for our citizens .
in writing . - ( PT ) We recognise that the adoption of the Council common position on temporary work and temporary employment agencies holds some importance for workers in the various EU countries where legislation is very fragile and where the biggest and most serious abuses occur in the use of this type of work .
It is therefore vital that equal treatment is recognised for workers placed by temporary employment agencies , even in terms of wages , in the user undertaking .
It is also vital that this equality is recognised from day one and that any exceptions to this principle can only be agreed by the social partners , through collective bargaining or agreements concluded between the partners at national level .
However , it would have been preferable to avoid such exceptions , as we proposed .
It would also have been useful to better clarify the concept of temporary work in order to limit its use solely to exceptional cases or , in other words , to very busy times and periods when the permanent worker is temporarily unable to work .
We regret that the majority , including the PSE Group , rejected our proposals .
in writing . - ( SV ) Many of the amendments on which the European Parliament is adopting positions in this report have much to commend them .
The amendments relate , however , to issues that should be dealt with at national level and not by the EU institutions .
We have therefore voted against these amendments .
After six years of negotiations , the European Parliament has finally approved the directive on temporary agency workers .
Today there are wide discrepancies between national legislation on temporary work in Member States .
However , temporary work is playing a growing role in all countries of the European Union , and the labour market is developing dynamically .
It is estimated that throughout the European Union , some three million people work as temporary workers for some 20 000 enterprises .
For this reason , we need a more precise definition of the scope of this form of employment .
These regulations are particularly important for the workers themselves .
Temporary workers will now have guarantees that when they are working for an employer , the conditions that employer will provide will be the same as the employer would give to temporary workers it employs directly .
Furthermore , these conditions will have to be provided from the very first day of temporary employment .
Moreover , the temporary work agencies themselves benefit from the regulation of temporary workers .
Temporary work also allows enterprises to manage their staff flexibly , particularly in seasonal situations , where an enterprise needs to increase its workforce to meet market demand .
in writing . - ( LT ) At present , there are great differences between national legal acts regulating temporary work .
The vague coordination of the activities of temporary employment agencies creates conditions for the exploitation of temporary workers .
In meetings with Lithuanians working abroad , I have heard on several occasions how they are paid less , are often not paid at all for work carried out , or have transport and living costs illegally deducted from their wages .
In addition , temporary workers face working conditions which are harder and often damaging to their health .
At the same time , they are often required to work at a greater intensity and speed than other workers .
People doing temporary work also lack real social guarantees .
Temporary work is on the increase in all of the countries of the European Union , although this group of workers varies greatly from country to country .
I agree with the general position of the European Parliament and the Council and believe that this directive will help to improve working conditions for the majority of people and will offer them social guarantees .
Temporary employment agencies will be treated as employers and will have to ensure that employees receive all the rights they are entitled to .
General employment law will be applied to temporary workers .
They will have to be paid the same wage as other workers and will be granted the same conditions of social security .
On the Parliament 's initiative , these rights will be valid from the first day of their employment .
At the time of voting , I did not support the amendments submitted by the GUE Group , which aimed to make Member States ban or limit work opportunities through temporary employment agencies .
in writing . - I support the Directive on temporary agency work .
Britain 's 1.3 million agency workers will now have rights on a par with those of their permanent colleagues .
I am fully supportive of agency staff having the same rights in these areas such as sick leave , pension contribution , equal pay and access to vocational training .
in writing . - I welcome the adoption of this report at second reading .
The Member States must now act to put in place the improved protection which will be provided for those in temporary work .
Temporary employment agencies employ some three million people in the European Union .
They are estimated to provide services valued at EUR 75 billion .
The draft directive on conditions for temporary agency workers aims to provide a minimum level of protection for temporary workers while , at the same time , supporting the temporary employment industry .
It has become an example of social legislation at a time of widespread anticipation of a social Europe .
The main basis of this legislative act is non-discrimination against agency workers in terms of payment , social and employee rights and applicable legislation .
There will also be no discrimination as regards working time , overtime , holidays and protection for pregnant women .
One very important aspect of the directive is that temporary agency workers are now covered right from day one .
Any derogations from this principle must always be discussed with the social partners .
There is no doubt that there are at present huge differences in working conditions and payment for temporary workers .
These differences must be ironed out as quickly as possible .
On the grounds stated above , in the voting I have opted for the adoption of the regulations to protect such workers as soon as possible .
The directive passed by the European Parliament on the pretext of safeguarding the so-called ' equal rights ' of workers allows slave-trading offices misleadingly called ' temporary employment agencies ' to open and trade .
The Member States are required to ban any obstacle to their incorporation and business and to safeguard their right to a fee for their ' services ' , in other words , the ransom for their slave trade .
In reality , it releases the real employer from any obligation towards workers who are considered to be employees of the phantom slave-trading company , which only employs staff on paper .
Thus , employers need no longer honour the obligations imposed on them under labour and insurance legislation ( such as insurance contributions ) and are absolved of any liability , such as compensation for accidents at work .
In fact , the directive does not safeguard rights for the workers / victims of the slave traders ; on the contrary , they are stripped of any rights .
The alleged protection of workers ' rights proves to be protection for the slave-trading companies , legitimisation of the unaccountability of capital and savage exploitation of the working class .
The satisfaction of modern grassroots needs and rights presupposes the overturning of the EU 's anti-grassroots policy and a counterattack by workers which will lay down the terms of the grassroots alliance so that they can claim their grassroots power .
in writing . - The EU 's Temporary Agency Work Directive adds to the mass of EU and British Government legislation making the life of employers and businessmen more complex , expensive , restrictive , less flexible and generally more problematic .
In an age of global competition , it is even more important that the UK and other European countries should retain whatever competitive advantages they may have in their economies .
Employment regulation should therefore be a matter for national authorities , not the EU .
The directive aims to establish a common legal framework across Europe to regulate the pay and working conditions of temporary workers supplied by agencies .
This would have a significant negative impact on the UK labour market , with its estimated 1.4 million temporary workers .
It will also encourage migrant workers who may benefit from the directive .
As we enter a period of recession , it is even more important that flexible employment opportunities are increased for our own citizens and that small businesses , in particular , are helped and not burdened .
in writing . - I would like to express my support for the Commission and Council proposal regarding the use of the Internet and communication .
Whilst , on the one hand , online technologies such as mobile phones offer a number of opportunities , risks to children and abuse of these technologies continue to exist .
Among the risks faced by children is the risk of being exposed to child-abuse material or being contacted by people who will befriend them in order to commit sexual abuse ( grooming ) , or becoming victims of bullying in the online environment ( cyber bullying ) .
Given that the challenges in this area have been further aggravated by the emergence of new technologies and services , the proposed new programme by the Commission to better protect children from the new risks to which they are exposed is essential , and I agree to the proposed actions and measures in full .
I am well aware of the gravity and danger of offensive exposure to children , because my own daughter - who is barely an adolescent - has been a target .
Most young adolescents are curious and think that having reached puberty they are now grown up .
It is a very sensitive stage of their life and we have to do our utmost to provide some form of security and protection for their own good .
I have voted in favour of the Commission 's proposal on the Safer Internet programme which , from 1 January , for five years , thanks to EUR 55 million in funding , aims to protect children using the Internet and other communication technologies , such as mobile phones .
This commitment will support public awareness activities and the fight against illicit content and harmful behaviour , in order to promote a safer environment .
My compliments to the rapporteur , Mrs Angelilli , for the care with which serious topics such as child pornography and online grooming have been handled , and for the various proposals for safeguarding against the potential danger to ' little surfers ' .
The fact is that as new technologies spread and computer literacy grows , children are more and more exposed to the dangers of illegal content and harmful behaviour .
For this reason , we are duty-bound to guarantee them safe access to the new media .
in writing . - ( SV ) Initiatives and measures to prevent children from being exposed to crime when using the Internet are extremely important and necessary .
For that reason , we have voted in favour of Mrs Angelilli 's report on establishing a multiannual Community programme on protecting children using the Internet and other communication technologies .
We wish to emphasise , however , that a number of the measures proposed in the report would be better initiated and paid for by the Member States themselves .
Other measures aimed at combating , for example , child pornography should , however , be devised through cooperation between the Member States because of the global character of the problem .
in writing . - We agree that children should be protected from sex predators , cyber bullying and other dangers on the internet .
However , we have two objections to this legislation - firstly , the fact that it allows the EU to gain more control over the internet , and we feel the EU already has a near monopoly on media channels .
Secondly , we do not feel that the shadowy Europol agency should be involved in any kind of law enforcement .
We feel that the appropriate vehicles for child protection are national parliaments and national law enforcement agencies , who can devise appropriate internet child protection .
This will have the democratic legitimacy only national level assemblies can confer and the operational effectiveness only national law enforcement can deliver .
in writing . - ( PT ) I welcome the establishment of a multiannual Community programme ( 2009-2013 ) which aims to increase public awareness as well as educate children about safer use of the Internet , particularly in terms of access to illegal content , grooming and cyber bullying .
According to the most recent statistics from Eurobarometer , nearly 74 % of young people ( between the ages of 12 and 15 ) use the Internet for at least three hours each day .
The vast majority of these children acknowledged that they have already accidentally accessed pornographic images .
It is vital that we adopt , as quickly as possible , all the measures that seem necessary to protect our children from the growing dangers to which they are exposed on the increasing number of sites containing content harmful to children , particularly child pornography .
We have to halt the rise - around 16 % in the last year - that has been recorded in cases of child abuse on the Internet , which is worsened by the worrying trend towards ever younger children being involved .
For this reason , I support the establishment of this programme and the provision of contact points and emergency telephone lines for reporting the existence of this kind of content and also the development of common ' child safe ' labelling for web pages .
in writing . - ( RO ) The report on the need for the European Parliament and the Council to draft a decision in favour of establishing a Community programme for protecting children against the torrent of websites depicting pornography and violence and other communication technologies is more than welcome , although too much has been expected of it .
Have we really needed to wait to see children killing children or children assaulting children for us to take this sort of decision ?
It was difficult to imagine this kind of reality in European society a few years ago .
All this has happened because globalisation , which also means communicating across borders , has created a situation where information has become a commodity which has the single , clear aim of achieving a profit at any price and ratings , instead of being a vehicle for truth , education and beauty .
This is why the report needs to be taken completely seriously by the Council and Commission as we do not want to reach a situation where our own children are leading the society of the future towards crime , violence and pornography .
I voted in favour of this report in the hope that it will be able to trigger the process for drafting a directive which will block children having access to information with inappropriate content , while respecting citizens ' right to information .
in writing . - ( SV ) There are now hundreds of simple , accessible and inexpensive computer programs that efficiently prevent children stumbling on unsuitable Internet sites .
Moreover , most standard Web readers have various ' child functions ' installed - something that makes it simple for parents to monitor the sites their children may visit .
The rapporteur is very unclear in the way she proposes that the entire EUR 55 million of European taxpayers money should be appropriated to an EU propaganda programme which , in our view , would be unnecessary , expensive and ineffective .
in writing . - ( PL ) The ability to use computers and internet access is growing with the spread of the new technologies .
One of the largest groups of internet users is children and adolescents .
Although the internet gives access to information , it unfortunately also has many dangers .
Children and young people are one of the most widely affected groups .
Studies carried out indicate that almost all children have come across pornographic images .
What is very worrying is the downward trend in the age of children who are victims of this procedure .
In my opinion , combating this phenomenon must be made a priority .
It means taking a multi-level approach involving parents , schools , telecoms operators , ISPs , NGOs and self-regulating bodies .
In particular , there is a need for an increased level of awareness avoidance of harmful practices , an effective system for reporting abuse and improving the resources of the police and investigating authorities .
I also believe that a wide-reaching educational campaign would increase the awareness among children of the risks of using the new technologies .
That is why I am pleased to vote in favour of providing funding totalling EUR 55 million for 2009-2013 for the Safe Internet Programme , which was part of the proposal that was put to the vote .
In believe that these resources will allow the programme to achieve its aims .
in writing . - ( LT ) With the rapid expansion of new technologies and the growth of computer literacy , more and more children and young people are using the internet .
Minors are often exposed to websites on the internet , which encourage harmful conduct , child pornography , foster underage prostitution , advertise diets causing anorexia or incite suicide .
According to Interpol data , the number of new images of child pornography on the internet grows every year .
We must solve the problem of child safety on the internet at all levels , involving children , their families , schools and the whole of society .
We must inform children of the dangers they face , which arise with the use of new technologies .
We have to help children to recognise instances of possible child abuse , harassment , violence or other risks , the forms these take and teach children how to protect themselves .
The European Commission 's new Safer Internet Programme proposes allocating EUR 55 million to the fight against conduct on the internet which is harmful to children and young people .
It aims to create a safe internet environment and foster means for crime prevention .
It contains plans for the creation of a shared database and the exchange of good practice at an international level .
in writing . - Abuse and exploitation of children , via the internet , mobile phones and other technologies , is abhorrent and unacceptable , but measures to protect them - and to punish those who harm or seek to harm them - need to be taken at national level and between national governments on a co-operative basis .
As always , we believe that action at EU level is not the answer .
in writing . - ( FI ) I voted in favour of Mrs Angelilli 's report because one of the most fundamental and durable structures in the European values base is our duty to protect innocent souls , that is to say , children .
Children 's rights and their protection are at the heart of human values .
The internet poses numerous threats , which children need to be shielded against more effectively than is the case now .
Measures at Community level are justified in this area .
We still need to remind one another of the ' millstone ' and the ' deepness of the sea ' .
We also have to be aware of our own responsibilities as parents .
I supported all the amendments that stressed the importance of information and education for parents , teachers and any other people who have dealings with children .
It is very important to enlighten parents in this way and thus promote the use of responsible communication technologies .
Furthermore , Amendment 23 , which also deals with the problems of ' grooming ' and electronic harassment , and various forms of violent content , is important .
The proposals in Amendment 26 to introduce different technical tools and firm up the responsibility that service providers have are only right and proper .
in writing . - ( FR ) According to the Internet Watch Foundation , an English organisation which fights the possession and dissemination of child pornography images , the online sexual exploitation of children for commercial purposes is a growing sector which is low-risk and highly profitable .
Indeed , the sale of these images on the Internet constitutes a vile trade worth billions of euros .
We endorse the approach of the Commission and our fellow Member in wanting to put a stop to this kind of activity , in particular , by establishing a blocking mechanism for credit card or electronic payments when child pornography images are bought on the Internet .
Unfortunately , there is currently a serious technical limitation to all the national and European protection mechanisms being developed .
In fact , most commercial servers offering these images are not located in Europe , but in the United States , Russia and Asia .
Therefore , their illegal content can easily be uploaded in one country and viewed in another .
It is therefore understandable that effective means to counter the development of Internet paedophilia , while necessary , are problematical .
in writing . - We welcome the report aimed at creating a safer online environment for children .
It is our responsibility to protect our children from dangerous material containing child pornography and violence .
However , the report should not be used as a pretext for the harmonisation of criminal law in the EU .
First and foremost , we need better co-ordination between national legal systems .
in writing . - I fully support the need for the EUR 55 million budget to ensure that children , many of whom spend at least three hours a day on the internet , are better protected from unsafe user content .
I support the need to better inform parents and carers through information packs about the dangers of the internet .
The Internet is not monitored , yet children and young people are rarely aware of the dangers lying in wait for them there .
The fact that , according to a British study , three quarters of children have now stumbled on pornographic or violent photographs on the Web , is alarming .
We must protect our young people against this , and also against expensive Internet rackets such as ' cyber bullying ' and ' cyber-grooming ' .
The latter is particularly important to ensuring that the Internet ceases to be a paradise for criminal paedophiles by virtue of its anonymity .
We shall only succeed in this by means of a combination of various measures , which should also cover Internet cafés .
In my opinion , this report takes us a step in the right direction , albeit not far enough , and so I voted in favour of it .
in writing . - ( PT ) Children 's safety in relation to online communications systems is fundamental given that , as new technologies become more widespread and computer literacy increases , children are increasingly being exposed to the risks of illegal content and harmful behaviour such as harassment , child pornography , online grooming with a view to sexual abuse , cyber bullying , and incitement to self-harm , anorexia and suicide .
The measures to be taken must involve children , families and schools , together with all other stakeholders .
A joint effort is required , aimed at increasing knowledge and prevention , in order to make children aware .
A major computer literacy campaign will therefore need to be carried out among parents and school teachers in order to narrow the technological generation gap .
Measures involving information , development of new technological tools and exchange of good practice must be promoted .
These proposals are equally valid for Portugal , where the government is providing the Magalhães computer to children from 6 years of age .
I wonder whether all the concerns expressed in this report will be taken into account in the actions of the Portuguese Government .
in writing . - ( FR ) The Internet is an integral part of our children 's everyday lives .
As they get older , they use the Internet more .
From the age of 11 , youngsters surf the Internet daily , and by the age of 15 , they go online and interact on the web several times a day .
Nevertheless , use of this formidable tool , which is a gateway to knowledge and a springboard to the learning society , is not without risk .
Countless children are thus unwittingly exposed to harmful images or content , such as commercial scams , harassment , pornography and incitement to racism and suicide .
These abuses result in particular from a lack of adequate international regulation and cooperation .
The European Safer Internet Programme , with a budget of EUR 55 million , aims to raise awareness of the dangers of the Internet , not just among children but also among their parents and teachers .
It also seeks to promote the development of filtering systems and to encourage the labelling of Internet sites deemed safe for children .
I therefore naturally voted in favour of the report by the Italian Member , Roberta Angelilli , which advocates the use of the Internet in a secure environment , ensuring the full protection of children 's physical and moral integrity .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I am in favour of Mrs Angelilli 's report on protecting children using the Internet and other communication technologies .
With the massive expansion of new technologies , which are gradually becoming more accessible , children are ever more exposed to risks of illegal content such as harassment , child pornography , bullying , incitement to anorexia , and so on .
Common measures are therefore needed to prevent and to combat such abuse .
I firmly support this report because it brings an issue to the fore that is often undervalued by the Community institutions .
Finally , I applaud the proposal to make a European child pornography images database with a real-time link to hotline reports available to the police , so that they have the best possible tools at their disposal to combat such aberrant behaviour .
in writing . - This directive proposes new measures to promote carbon conscious driving .
With a commitment to reducing 18 % of emissions in Greenhouse gases , Ireland faces an enormous challenge .
With regard to transport , we need to focus on this sector for reduction and to raise awareness amongst the public .
This EU proposal sets out to develop a new methodology aimed at calculating costs of energy consumption and emissions of vehicles which will encourage people to purchase energy-efficient cars .
Such methodology concerns all road transport except emergency , rescue and military vehicles .
We support the introduction of an integrated approach involving vehicle manufacturers , fuel suppliers , repairers , customers , drivers as well as authorities .
The initiative to stimulate the market for more energy-efficient cars at competitive prices will provide Irish citizens with a means of cutting down on emissions as well as economic benefits .
This is beneficial at all levels : private costs in addition to national costs . Less fuel consumption means less import of fuel required .
It will encourage the development of energy-efficient vehicle technology globally , and this is an extremely positive step .
in writing . - ( PT ) Broad market introduction of technologies with better performance is often hampered by high initial cost and therefore insufficient customer demand .
Action at Community level is therefore needed in order to encourage the investment needed for the manufacture of vehicles that are more energy-efficient and less polluting not least because , in the long term , the cost of this type of alternative will be lower .
I agree with the objective of this directive : to promote the market introduction of clean and energy-efficient vehicles and thereby contribute to energy efficiency in transport by reducing fuel consumption , to climate protection by reducing CO2 emissions , and to improving air quality by reducing pollutant emissions .
The European Parliament must set an example by adopting sustainability criteria , particularly in public procurement .
I support the compromise reached on this report .
It is more flexible and less bureaucratic than the initial proposal presented by the Commission and rapporteur .
Above all , I agree with the compromise because it respects the subsidiarity principle and is less burdensome for local authorities .
The promotion of ' clean and energy efficient road transport vehicles ' is , from a technical point of view , an essential environmental protection measure , because emissions from conventional vehicles contribute to climate change and atmospheric pollution in town centres , with serious repercussions on public health .
Despite demonstrations by workers demanding action to tackle these serious problems , the automotive industry is refusing , within the framework of competition , to manufacture ' clean vehicles ' , unless greater profitability for it is guaranteed beforehand , demanding that research and development costs for clean vehicles be financed , together with their increased profits , by the public sector .
This is precisely what the proposed directive does , by requiring the operational cost of energy consumption , CO2 emissions and pollutants throughout the lifetime of the vehicle to be included in the criteria for public procurement of vehicles , thereby insultingly using public money to subsidise the manufacture of cleaner vehicles by the automotive industry .
The workers are fighting for public transport companies which meet their needs with a high standard of environmentally-friendly services .
They are against any form of regulation designed to enrich the automotive industry which , with its unaccountable social and environmental stand intended to increase its profits , is contributing to climate change , to the over consumption of energy resources and to atmospheric pollution .
in writing . - ( PT ) I voted in favour of Dan Jørgensen 's report on the promotion of clean and energy-efficient road transport vehicles because I feel that industry must be encouraged to invest in the development of vehicles with low energy consumption and low greenhouse gas emissions .
Public authorities should help to stimulate this market and improve the contribution of the transport sector to EU policies in the areas of the environment , climate and energy , by taking into account energy and environmental impacts when purchasing road transport vehicles .
in writing . - ( PL ) Environmentally friendly , low-energy public vehicles are a self-evident benefit .
They are a necessity for our cities and for the environment .
We should also remember to incorporate the use of ' clean ' vehicles in our activities related to the climate change package .
As a member of the Committee on the Environment , I therefore support the majority of the actions proposed by the rapporteur ( and , in particular , the technical and organisational measures ) which will contribute to achieving the fundamental aim , which is reducing pollution by investing in environmentally friendly technologies with lower CO2 emissions .
The vehicles in question include , in particular , service vehicles ( special trucks and buses for operational support , infrastructure maintenance , road sweeping vehicles , etc . )
However , the proposal to introduce mandatory criteria for CO2 emissions levels when issuing public procurement tenders for public service vehicles seems to me rather dubious .
In my view , it would be preferable , at least during the initial phase of the new regulation , to give the procuring organisations in individual Member States ( which more often than not are local authorities ) the right to choose their own environmental criteria when procuring vehicle fleets .
I agree with the assessment that public procurement , as a highly important part of the European market , should remain a tool for promoting environmentally friendly vehicles , but this should not be done in a mechanical way .
in writing . - ( DE ) I voted in favour of the promotion of environmentally friendly , energy-efficient vehicles in public invitations to tender .
It is to be welcomed that , when procuring road transport vehicles , authorities and certain companies have to take account of not only the procurement price but also the lifetime energy and environmental impacts - that is , including energy consumption , CO2 emissions and further pollutant emissions .
in writing . - Being in the midst of the financial markets crises , it is easy for us policy makers to concentrate fully on the current problem and forget or disregard the aims and other initiatives of the European Union .
Thus , I welcome this report which emphasises the real need for progress in clean and efficient vehicles .
The most important aspect of this report , in my opinion , is that it not only concentrates on the vehicles themselves and consumer transport , but it also deals with supporting and encouraging the public sector .
It is fitting for the public sector to show an example to the people of Europe in promoting clean vehicles .
It is commendable that the rapporteur is seeking to establish a link between public procurement and fostering and promoting clean efficient vehicles , and I hope that this will lead to growth in investment and research of vehicles with low CO2 emissions .
in writing . - ( RO ) This directive introduces a harmonised methodology for clean and energy-efficient vehicle procurement for a sustainable public transport service .
It will also help to establish the priorities set out as part of the Lisbon strategy .
The explicit requirement is for energy consumption , carbon dioxide and pollutant emissions to be taken into consideration when road transport vehicles are purchased by public authorities and by operators providing services as part of a contract with a public authority , as well as for purchases of road transport vehicles for providing public passenger transport services .
The biggest economic benefit would be achieved by having to include external costs as award criteria in all procurement decisions .
Vehicle owners would then benefit directly from the energy savings in the long run , which would far exceed the vehicle 's possibly higher price .
Promoting clean , energy-efficient vehicles through public procurement for providing public transport services , boosted by this initiative , will accelerate the development of these technologies on the market and will contribute to energy savings , as well as to the protection of the environment and public health .
in writing . - ( RO ) I voted for the Jørgensen report promoting the use of green vehicles for public transport .
The initial proposal submitted by the Commission in 2005 was rejected by Parliament as it involved a great deal of bureaucracy without , however , reducing the level of pollution .
The old proposal 's demand was for 25 % of motor vehicles to be green .
The new proposal only refers to motor vehicles intended for public transport and the public authorities responsible for providing these services .
I believe that the new proposal will help instil greater awareness among local decision makers and make them take more robust action to protect the environment .
At a European level , the costs resulting from road traffic congestion in large urban agglomerations are estimated at 1 % of Europe 's GDP .
Pollution in large cities can also be reduced both through promoting public transport and , in particular , by having a clean public transport system .
Apart from promoting metro systems , trams , trolleybuses and trains regionally or transport by ship , pollution can also be reduced in large European cities by introducing green buses .
The new directive introduces the obligation on local authorities to calculate and take into account the cost of using a bus or minibus for its entire operational life .
I would like to congratulate the local authorities in Prague for purchasing a fleet of green buses using state aid , thereby setting us an example to follow .
in writing . - This directive deals with regulations on marketing authorisations for medicinal products .
We welcome the EU 's initiative to simplify and harmonise the current regulations .
This is a time- and money-saving matter which will satisfy both manufacturers and consumers in Ireland .
The proposed revisions will be beneficial for the Irish pharmaceutical market which has a substantial presence in Europe .
We are grateful that in this sector , 13 of the top 15 companies in the world currently operate in Ireland .
There are currently over 140 med-tech companies in Ireland , which accommodate 26 000 jobs .
Moreover , the annual export of medical devices amounts to approx EUR 6.2 billion , which is 10 % of Ireland 's total exports .
We support the creation of single criteria for evaluation , approval and administration of pharmaceutical products that undergo changes such as manufacturing methods , product labelling or patient information brochures .
We also recognise the need for further harmonisation of Member States ' national provisions and European regulations to reduce administrative burden and to simplify the system regulating changes , such as allowing a single application for one or more identical changes .
We agree to the revision of the Commission 's control over ' listings of substances ' , ' withdrawal periods ' and ' principles and guidelines ' .
in writing . - ( PT ) The current way of managing variations is proving increasingly inefficient and is no longer satisfactory either for the authorities or for the pharmaceutical industry as a whole .
Any one change to products authorised under purely national procedures in different Member States is treated in a number of different ways in terms of the dossier to be submitted and the evaluation procedure .
This situation causes problems in various areas : public health , the internal market , legal and practical applications .
The report proposes certain improvements .
For reasons of harmonisation and simplification , it is important that changes to marketing authorisations should be governed by the same regulatory requirements , whatever licensing procedure was initially used .
This will bring benefits for all concerned : patients , authorities and pharmaceutical companies .
I agree with the amendments proposed in the compromise position as they emphasise the need to simplify and reconcile administrative procedures , allow the possibility of submitting a single application for one or more identical changes and highlight the need to apply the subsidiarity principle .
in writing . - ( PT ) I voted in favour of Françoise Grossetête 's report on variations to the terms of marketing authorisations for medicinal products because I support a single licensing procedure for placing medicinal products on the Community market , as this will guarantee safety for European citizens .
I must particularly highlight the proposal by the Socialist Group in the European Parliament on using the subsidiarity principle when applying the European variation system to medicinal products sold exclusively on the national market , thereby protecting small and medium-sized enterprises producing herbal medicines and homeopathic products .
in writing . - ( PL ) Given the lack of harmonisation at Community level , variations to purely domestic marketing authorisations are subject to national legislation .
In some Member States , the requirements relating to national marketing authorisations are analogous to those relating to variations in marketing authorisations .
However , in the majority of countries , there is no such coordination , which means that legislative discrepancies exist between the Member States .
This situation has a negative impact in terms of public health , the administrative burden and the general operation of the internal market for pharmaceutical products .
All medicinal products , regardless of the marketing authorisation criteria , should be subject to the same evaluation criteria and to the same administrative measures when their marketing authorisation differs .
in writing . - At the core of this report is the crucial issue of consumer protection .
There is obviously a demand for timeshare and similar products and we cannot hinder responsible companies from responding to this demand .
I do not think anyone is by any means suggesting that all companies operating in this field are involved in bad practice or exploitation .
We are nonetheless aware that there are companies that have unscrupulously taken advantage of European consumers and that European consumers have suffered in dealing with badly-managed companies let off the hook as a result of inadequate regulation in this area .
A number of Irish holidaymakers have suffered considerable financial and legal difficulties following agreements entered into with a badly managed timeshare company in continental Europe .
The new directive includes some vital consumer protection safeguards , relating to areas such as advertising and contracts .
I particularly welcome the provision on right of withdrawal , or the cooling-off period , which allows consumers - carried away by a sharp advertising pitch or while on holidays - time for sober reflection , so that they can be sure that they are happy with the medium- and long-term consequences of a timeshare agreement .
The right of workers to rest and a holiday has been turned into a commodity to enrich capital .
The purpose of timeshares and the new products being promoted within these frameworks is to exploit perpetual cutbacks in holiday time , shrinking incomes and workers ' efforts to secure cheaper holidays in the long term , creating turnover which exceeds EUR 11 billion .
The trickery and aggressive methods used by what are often phantom companies to persuade and dupe buyers range , in the best case scenario , from the small print in contracts to misleading advertising , tiresome presentations , promises of gifts and so forth , and almost always end in the immediate signature , under pressure , of binding documents .
The complaints which reach consumer organisations about fraud , excessive maintenance charges , associated credit cards , huge drops in price on resale due to marketing expenses , and so on , are countless .
The inclusion of other products in the timeshare directive , such as holidays on ships or in clubs or caravans , guarantees legal cover and new sources of profit for capital .
The cooling off period , which is limited to 10 days and carries a fine in the order of 3 % of the total amount , does not resolve the problem .
On the contrary , the ΕU is shifting the burden of responsibility to the workers , as it does with all consumer products .
in writing . - ( PT ) I voted in favour of the Manders report on the protection of consumers in respect of timeshare , as the compromise reached with the Council on this subject offers greater protection for the rights and interests of European consumers .
I feel that better regulation of the sector will benefit not only consumers but also European tourism .
in writing . - ( PT ) This report sets out a series of proposals which we accept in the main , bearing in mind the need to reinforce the consumers ' right to information on holiday products .
It lays down that operators have an obligation to provide a range of important information so that consumers can make better-informed decisions about concluding contracts .
Furthermore , the period during which consumers may withdraw from contracts without any charge is extended , particularly where they have not been provided with the necessary information .
Preventing abuses and repeated cases of fraud is vital .
We hope that the ban on the advance payment of any sums during the withdrawal period and the imposition of staggered payments where long-term holiday products are sold will be positive contributions .
in writing . - I fully support the report on increasing consumer protection in this area .
As British consumers make up one third of the total European timeshare owners , this is a law which has responded to the concerns of UK consumers .
I fully approve of the need for timeshare retailers to increase the cooling-off period for buyers , as well as the obligation to provide full details of the purchase before the contract is signed .
in writing . - ( PT ) Many consumer complaints have confirmed the serious problems encountered with timeshares , which create imbalances in the market .
The development of the market in terms of demand and the significant development of new products , marketed in a similar way , have created substantial problems for consumers and businesses .
The text voted on today basically amends the definitions and scope of the Directive so that they cover new holiday products .
It also clarifies and updates the provisions on requirements applying to the content and language of information and contracts provided to consumers .
The business activities affected by the Directive are of fundamental importance to the European tourism sector , including the Portuguese sector , and more specifically to operators and consumers .
The central idea is therefore to reinforce the consumer 's position in any negotiations to purchase rights of use .
In this way , the uncertainties existing in the market can be better combated and a more stable and transparent environment created , thus providing consumers with more and better information .
I voted in favour of the proposal for a European Parliament recommendation to the Council concerning the conclusion of the Agreement between the European Union and Australia on the processing and transfer of European Union-sourced Passenger Name Records ( PNR ) data by air carriers to the Australian customs service .
I recently visited Australia and , speaking to government representatives there , I understood that this vote would signify an important step , strengthening the cooperation already existing between Europe and Australia in the field of the security of passenger and freight transport .
in writing . - ( PT ) Despite being a backward step , the European Parliament 's position has the merit of drawing attention to the unacceptable agreements between the EU and third countries with regard to the processing and transfer of data contained in the Passenger Name Records ( PNR ) of air carriers , on the pretext of the ' fight against terrorism ' .
Among other important aspects , the proposal :
denounces the frequent lack of any parliamentary scrutiny over the negotiation and approval of these agreements , with national parliamentary approval only being required in seven Member States ;
warns that the agreement may not comply with international data protection laws ;
deplores the quantity of data requested , which is the same as in the US Agreement , and which includes , in addition to hotel and vehicle reservations , telephone numbers , e-mail addresses , personal and business addresses , dietary preferences , credit card numbers , personal data revealing racial or ethnic origin , political opinions , religious or philosophical beliefs and trade union membership , as well as other data on health or sexual activity .
This is yet another unacceptable situation , resulting from the current security drift , which is jeopardising the rights , freedoms and guarantees of citizens .
Looking at the situation with the Passenger Name Records Agreement with the United States , a worrying development becomes apparent in the name of combating terrorism .
Under this agreement , personal data such as the telephone numbers and e-mail addresses of air passengers are transferred and stored for years .
Data protection is by no means ensured in the process .
Further data-protection infringements of this kind must be prevented .
The report reveals the hypocrisy of the European Parliament regarding the people 's personal rights and democratic freedoms .
Any criticism by the European Parliament is limited to procedural questions and to the fact that European citizens are not being afforded the protection which they are allegedly afforded under EU legislation .
It is , however , precisely this legislation that crudely infringes all forms of personal data protection and introduces general personal records and the collection and exchange of the most sensitive personal data between the repressive mechanisms of the Member States and even the secret services of third countries .
The fact that the report does not dare to demand the revocation of the agreement or its reciprocity is proof of the fact that any superficial protests about it are for the sake of appearances only .
As with the similar , unacceptable agreement between the EU and the USA , the discreet reservations on the part of the European Parliament do not prevent the personal data of EU workers from being made available to every secret service and every repressive mechanism within the framework of their ' anti-terrorist cooperation ' .
It is clear once again that the European Parliament and the EU are not only failing to defend democratic rights and grassroots freedom ; on the contrary , they are restricting them to the point of extinction through a web of reactionary legislative measures and agreements .
in writing . - The European Court of Justice ruling in the Laval , Ruffert and Luxembourg cases has demonstrated that it is necessary to clarify that economic freedoms , as established in the Treaties , should be interpreted in such a way as not to infringe upon the exercising of fundamental social rights as recognised in the Member States and by Community law .
This includes the right to negotiate , conclude and enforce collective agreements and to take collective action , and must not infringe upon the autonomy of social partners when exercising these fundamental rights in pursuit of social interests and the protection of workers .
There is certainly a need for the revision of the current legislation .
The situation might lead to workers in host countries feeling pressured by low wage competition .
I want to join my colleagues in their initiative to introduce consistent implementation of the Posting of Workers Directive in all Member States .
I fully agree that the Commission and the Member States should adopt measures to combat abuses , particularly regarding activities of companies not really engaged in any genuine and effective business in the country where they are registered .
The establishment of a legal framework for transnational collective agreements will certainly be a step forward and , needless to say , an important one to take .
in writing . - British Conservatives support the right of workers to strike , but also the right of workers not to strike should they so choose .
We are supportive of the ECJ judgments and do not believe that the rights of workers have been put into question by them .
A revision of the Posting of Workers Directive is unnecessary , as is the widening of its legal base , because of problems that certain Member States have experienced due to the organisation of their individual labour markets .
1 million workers are posted successfully each year .
in writing . - ( SV ) I have today chosen to abstain in the final vote on Mr Andersson 's report on challenges to collective agreements in the EU .
Collective agreements , union rights and the right to take industrial action are inscribed in the Treaty of Lisbon , which I want to see legally binding .
The treaty also contains the right to work , the right to run businesses and the right to move across EU borders .
Exceptions cannot , as the proposal would have happen , be made for union representatives when it comes to respect for fundamental EC legal principles , for example the principle of proportionality .
It applies , and must of course apply , to all EU citizens .
EC law and the treaties should have their strongest representatives in the European Parliament .
The position adopted by Parliament concerning the legal basis is in danger of becoming a threat towards future freedom of movement .
I am very pleased , however , that the European Parliament has adopted a position in favour of the Swedish model and our collective agreements .
in writing . - ( PT ) The resolution adopted by a majority of the European Parliament on the unacceptable decisions of the European Court of Justice in the Laval , Rüffert and Viking cases is wholly inadequate .
It is not enough to recognise that the freedom to provide services is not superior to fundamental rights , in particular , the right of trade unions to take industrial action , especially since this is a constitutional right in several Member States .
Although the resolution emphasises that economic freedoms , as established in the Treaties , should be interpreted in such a way as not to infringe upon the exercising of fundamental social rights , including the right to negotiate , conclude and enforce collective agreements and the right to take collective action , the truth is that , while the principles used by the Court of Justice remain in the European Treaties , bearing in mind that they are also contained in the draft Lisbon Treaty , no one can guarantee that the same decisions will not be taken again .
We therefore voted against the report given that it does not go to the heart of the matter and instead insists on supporting the draft Lisbon Treaty , despite this having already been rejected by the people of Ireland .
in writing . - I supported the Andersson report on the challenges posed to collective agreements in the Union by the series of recent decisions of the European Court of Justice .
I do not dispute the legal validity of the decisions made , but I do dispute that they reflect the intention of Parliament , Commission and Council when the Posted Workers Directive was approved .
The conclusion is clear : that the Directive must be reviewed to amend its provisions to restore our original intention .
It must be a priority for the European Commission .
It needs to be urgently addressed .
If this Commission does not rectify the situation , the next Commission after the 2009 European elections must .
I for one will not vote to ratify any new commission that fails to have the issue within its work programme for its first 12 months .
in writing . - ( FR ) Mr Andersson 's report claims to have learned lessons from the scandalous rulings of the Court of Justice in Luxembourg , in particular the Laval and Viking cases .
These rulings give precedence to the freedom to provide services and the freedom to establish businesses over the defence of national workers ' interests and rights against social dumping .
To an unacceptable degree , they make the exercising of social rights subject to a ' proportionality principle ' which far exceeds lawful restrictions ( public order and health , for example ) recognised in national laws and ILO conventions .
They represent a backdoor reinstatement of the first version of the Bolkenstein Directive , where the law of the country of origin ( social law , labour law , salaries and so on ) applied to workers going to provide a service in another Member State , regardless of the legislation or collective agreements in force in the latter .
Now , this version was rejected by the European legislator and it is intolerable that the judges are able to set themselves up as lawmakers under the pretext of interpreting the law .
Although at times he does well , Mr Andersson is too attached to the ultra-liberal principles which gave rise to this situation for his report to secure our support .
This is why we will be abstaining .
in writing . - ( SV ) The Socialist Group in the European Parliament and the right of centre parties have wholeheartedly supported all of the EU 's treaty changes .
They have thus contributed to giving the EU institutions , including the European Court of Justice , ever more power over the Swedish labour market .
In this way , the EU has become a threat to labour market regulations developed through negotiations and legislation that are firmly anchored in Swedish society .
The report mainly recommends changes to the Posting of Workers Directive .
It is thus unable to prevent continued interference by the European Court of Justice in the regulations governing the Swedish labour market .
Firstly , the outcome is a compromise between conservatives and socialists - a situation that has led to feeble and contradictory wordings .
Secondly , the EU 's primary law concerning the internal market ( Article 49 ) takes precedence over the provisions of the Posting of Workers Directive .
The European Court of Justice can therefore still come to the same conclusion as in the Laval case .
The EU must not be given tasks that the Member States can take care of themselves , and the labour market really is a matter that should fall to them .
The June List therefore recommends a Swedish exemption from EU labour market legislation in order to guarantee that the European Court of Justice cannot , in future , control the Swedish labour market .
We have nonetheless voted in favour of the report because its aim is still the valid one of , as far as possible , preventing the European Court of Justice from interfering in Swedish collective agreements in the future .
We have also supported the amendments recommending more national self-determination on labour market issues but have , of course , voted against the rapporteur 's panegyric to the Treaty of Lisbon .
in writing . - ( PL ) I have decided to vote against Mr Andersson 's report on the challenges posed to collective agreements in the European Union .
The rapporteur is critical of the decisions of the European Court of Justice on the Posting of Workers Directive , and calls for a revision of the directive .
I am decidedly against the rapporteur 's approach , and also believe that to call for a change in the directive without the requisite analysis at Member State level , particularly in those Member States affected by the judgment of the European Court of Justice , is an unreasonable step taken for political ends .
In particular , the formulation used by the rapporteur is an attack on the free provision of services , one of the basic freedoms of the European Union , and is a threat to liberalisation in the provision of services provided by the Services Directive , and to the country of origin principle .
In my view , proper implementation of the Posting of Workers Directive by all Member States , and increased administrative cooperation among them would provide adequate means of guaranteeing , on the one hand , the protection of workers ' rights , and , on the other , the freedom to provide services .
I deplore the fact that this House has rejected the amendments , which aimed to give the report some balance .
in writing . - ( LT ) The Temporary Agency Workers Directive is important in our drive to legalise the free movement of services and workers throughout the Community .
Not all Member States are adhering to the requirements of the directive .
Sometimes more is being demanded of service providers than was stated in the directive .
By distorting the regulations of the directive , services between Member States are being blocked and , in this way , protectionist policies are being concealed .
The European Court of Justice ( ECJ ) investigated the case of the Latvian construction company " Laval ” , which was prohibited from providing construction services in Sweden .
A collective contract was required according to Swedish law , although the contract was signed in Latvia .
The ECJ decided that it is prohibited to make requirements which are additional to or greater than those set out in the directive .
The decisions made by the ECJ in the " Laval ” and other similar cases are criticised and even questioned in the report and amendments .
I voted against as I believe that the European Parliament is exceeding its remit by interpreting or questioning decisions taken by the ECJ .
I do not agree with the statements , which cast doubt on the justice of the ECJ 's decisions , and propose that the ECJ 's resolutions should not be applied in certain EU countries .
With such statements we not only question the competence of the ECJ , we express doubt in its impartiality , risk distorting the EU 's institutional system and encourage people 's lack of confidence in it .
I also disagree with the aim of reviewing and revising the directive .
If the directive is not working in some countries as it should , then the Community Members are responsible for this , as they are failing to put the directive 's regulations into practice or are applying them inappropriately in national law .
The European Commission should observe whether EU directives are transferred to national law correctly and whether national laws are in keeping with the essence and spirit of the directives .
in writing . - ( FR ) The goal , set by the European Union , of a social Europe is an illusion , the Lisbon Strategy is a failure , and the various magic potions dreamt up by the pro-Europeans to improve living and working conditions are rendered ineffective by the simple fact that Brussels ' true vision is ultra-liberal and in the service of globalisation .
We want , on the one hand , to prevent social dumping in order to protect workers , whether they are posted or not , and thereby have a balanced internal market , and , on the other , to do everything we can to open up our economic borders a little more through the massive immigration of job seekers and people .
This is just a never-ending illustration of true pro-European schizophrenia .
By way of example , we need only note the references to the defunct Treaty of Lisbon made several times in this hotchpotch report .
Consequently , we do not see how it could provide a clear vision seeking a balance between the free movement of services and the rights of workers .
The aim of the European Community is to secure the fundamental rights of all citizens , both as regards public life , and on the labour market .
Our ideal is to do away with discrimination and uncertainty about the future .
The rapporteur Jan Andersson points out that some judgments of the European Court of Justice may offend some citizens ' sense of equality and respect for the labour market .
To prevent such situations from arising in the future , Mr Andersson suggests that prompt action is needed to enshrine in legislation amendments which will avert any potential social , economic and political repercussions of the ECJ 's judgments .
This includes a review of the Posting of Workers Directive and the immediate adoption of the Temporary Agency Workers Directive .
To sum up , I believe that we should adopt the report in the interests of a vision of a united Europe
in writing . - ( NL ) For many entrepreneurs , there is the temptation to pay their employees as little as possible for the work that they do .
Other work-related costs , such as safety and facilities , are also in the balance .
Employees , however , can only protect themselves by ensuring that their pay is based on a universally binding collective labour agreement and by adequate legal protection in the country where they work and live .
Both the original objectives of the Services Directive and the recent judgments from the European Court of Justice affect this protection .
If these allow less beneficial foreign collective labour agreements or less beneficial foreign legislation to apply , an increasing number of employers will start to go for those cost-saving options , and the income of the employees will fall dramatically .
Some labour under the illusion that the draft EU constitution or the Treaty of Lisbon offer sufficient guarantees against this .
Those documents would need to be modified before they could be approved in order to achieve this .
There was also the expectation that the Andersson report would offer said guarantees .
With the compromises that have been struck in respect of this text , though , this is even less likely than was originally the case .
This is why we cannot vote in favour .
It is unacceptable that , on the one hand , public contracts have to be tendered for EU-wide and , on the other , the obligation to pay the agreed minimum wages that are linked to the award has been annulled by the European Court of Justice on grounds that it is incompatible with the Posting of Workers Directive and the Services Directive .
The EU is showing its true colours here as a purely economic community that fobs off the socially disadvantaged with peanuts and empty words .
It is high time the EU responded to the cries for help by citizens it has been ignoring for too long and attempted to close loopholes and resolve inconsistencies .
This report should at least begin to attempt this , but it still leaves too much scope for abuse , which is why I abstained .
I , like the European left , support full recognition of the fundamental rights of the workers .
I refused to vote for the Andersson report because , individual positive elements notwithstanding , it still falls short .
I feel that this report is a lost opportunity to effectively address the question of workers ' rights under primary European law .
The exercising of fundamental rights , as acknowledged by the Member States , in the ILO conventions and in the European Social Charter , including the right of negotiation , cannot depend on the uncontrolled discretion of the judge and always come second , because it is based on a legislative source lower down the hierarchy .
The right of trade union action must not be jeopardised .
A ' social protection clause ' needs to be included in the Treaties .
in writing . - ( SV ) In the course of the day , Mr Andersson 's report on the future of collective agreements in Europe following , for example , the Laval judgment , was voted through .
The Socialist Group in the European Parliament demanded that current EU legislation - what is known as the Posting of Workers Directive - be torn up in order to guarantee that Sweden is able to retain its collective agreements .
I have , on the other hand , been active both in the Committee on Internal Market and Consumer Protection and before plenary with a view to ensuring that the issue is , in the first place , debated at the right level : national level .
The reason is that I believe that the strategy on the part of the PSE Group is badly thought out .
By again and again trying to bring the Laval judgment up to European level instead of resolving it by means of Swedish legislation , pressure is created for more joint labour market legislation - which is what caused our current problems right from the start .
When 27 Member States are in agreement , it goes without saying that it is inconceivable that Sweden alone should pass legislation that is precisely to our own liking .
After all , our model is unique in a European context .
Since Mr Andersson and Parliament accepted my proposal not to tear up the Posting of Workers Directive until national investigations had clarified that this really was necessary , I considered that I could nonetheless vote in favour of the report .
in writing . - I thank our rapporteur , Jan Andersson , for his report on this very important subject .
Recent cases before the ECJ , and indeed that Court 's judgments , mean that workers ' rights and workers ' solidarity through collective agreements are being threatened by companies whose only priority is profit , and if that means undermining workers ' rights , then so be it : they are prepared to do just that .
The European social model that we are rightly proud of is under attack and seriously under threat from profiteers .
The threat of imported cheap labour is a reality , brought in through the back door by unscrupulous employers under the guise of free movement .
The free movement principle was never intended to be a tool for cheap labour or as a principle by which workers ' social conditions can be diluted .
What Jacques Delors would have made of this would be of great interest .
The Viking and Laval judgments are an attack on trade unions and workers ' rights .
That is why Mr Andersson 's report is badly needed and why I will support it .
It restores the balance so clearly abandoned by the ECJ in its recent judgments .
in writing . - ( DA ) The rulings of the European Court of Justice in the Vaxholm / Viking Line / Rüffert / Luxembourg cases have clearly taken the side of the internal market and the right of establishment at the cost of the rights of workers , including the right to strike to avoid social dumping .
The rulings of the European Court of Justice have not come out of the blue , however .
They are based on the fundamental treaties of the EU , supplemented by a vague Posting of Workers Directive .
If a majority in the European Parliament really wanted to defend the interests of workers it would require fundamental changes to the EU Treaties , in the form of a legally binding social protocol , for example , which would set the basic rights of workers above the internal market and the right of establishment .
The final version of the Andersson report , which is a result of cooperation between the socialist rapporteur and the conservatives , does not impose this crucial requirement .
The report does not even manage to demand the revision of the Posting of Workers Directive .
This means it is just a lot of hot air surrounded by a lot of nice words and wishes .
The People 's Movement has tabled a number of amendments , for example , that regulation of the right to take industrial action should remain a national matter .
All of these amendments have been rejected by the socialist-conservative alliance .
In the light of this , the People 's Movement cannot support the Andersson report in the final vote .
Instead , we will continue working to protect workers against poorer wages and working conditions , for which the judgments of the European Court of Justice have paved the way .
, in writing . - ( SV ) The report on collective agreements in the EU is an expression of opinion with no legal value .
Its intention is to strengthen employees ' positions following the Laval judgment , but the content of the report is , unfortunately , very far from being on a par with this intention .
It would be wrong to renegotiate the EU 's Posting of Workers Directive , as proposed in the report .
To do so would be to risk making things worse for employees .
It is a risk we are not prepared to take because the conservative forces dominate the whole EU system .
There are no wordings in the report about the right to strike having to take precedence over the freedom of the market and of this needing to be written in to a socially binding protocol to the Treaty of Lisbon .
The Confederal Group of the European United Left / Nordic Green Left tabled a number of amendments about this , but they were rejected by a large majority .
It falls to Sweden to include an exemption in the Treaty of Lisbon , stating that the effects of the Laval judgment have no bearing on Sweden .
However , this amendment by the GUE / NGL Group was also rejected .
The report instead praises the Treaty of Lisbon , in spite of the fact that the treaty does not in any way alter the Laval judgment but only confirms it .
The report attempts to address the reactions of the working class and workers in general to the unacceptable rulings by the Court of Justice of the European Communities ( ECJ ) finding strikes by workers to be illegal , because the framework within which and the way in which the workers fight conflict with the Maastricht Treaty and the Lisbon Treaty , which safeguard the competitiveness and the freedom of movement and action of capital in the Member States of the EU as a fundamental , incontestable principle .
It defends the grassroots policy and reactionary nature of the EU .
It attempts to persuade workers that it is allegedly possible through the EU for there to be a ' balance ' between the rights of workers and the right of movement of capital , in order to take advantage of every opportunity for greater exploitation of the working and grassroots classes , thereby safeguarding and increasing the profits of the monopolies .
It is along these lines that the European parties who only see one way forward are spreading the dangerous illusion among the workers that the EU can also acquire a ' social face ' and that the EU and capital can acquire social awareness through ' social protection clauses ' .
The anti-grassroots attack by the EU against the most fundamental rights of workers shows that the EU cannot change .
It was created and exists to loyally serve the interests of the monopoly business groups and to safeguard the exploitation of the working class .
in writing . - ( SV ) I have voted against the report .
Further regulations at EU level would , however , probably strengthen the power of the European Court of Justice .
My view is that issues in the area of labour market policy should not be decided by the European Court of Justice but by the Swedish Parliament and / or the two sides of industry .
I voted against the positive wordings concerning the Treaty of Lisbon and do not believe that the Charter of Fundamental Rights should be legally binding since there would then be a danger of legislative power in practice being shifted from the Swedish Parliament to the European Court of Justice .
I voted for the new EU-Vietnam Partnership and Cooperation Agreement , which will include a clear clause on human rights .
I would , however , like to emphasise the need in this context for set conditions to be met by the Vietnamese Government .
It must commit itself to ensuring cooperation , greater respect for human rights and religious freedom , by repealing the provisions in its law that criminalise dissent and by putting an end to censorship .
in writing . - We fully support the respect for human rights and democratic principles , as outlined in the EU-Vietnam Cooperation Agreement , and believe that there is a need for improvement by Vietnam in this regard .
Such principles are universal , and should be applied equally in relation to all countries , inside and outside the EU .
Therefore , we are voting in favour of this resolution , despite the rather unbalanced way in which it is presented .
in writing . - ( PT ) With regard to the second round of talks on a new partnership and cooperation agreement between the European Union and Vietnam , which were held yesterday and the day before that in Hanoi , a majority of this Parliament has adopted a resolution which seems more like an exercise in hypocrisy and instrumentalisation of human rights .
On reading its content , we could question why this majority in Parliament has not also proposed making the future agreement dependent on a clause ensuring respect for democracy and human rights on the part of the EU .
How useful and educational it would be for the EP , for example , to ' ask ' the Member States and the EU to refrain from collaborating with and / or whitewashing the criminal CIA flights , to respect the human rights of immigrants , flagrantly violated in the ' return directive ' , to respect the democratically and sovereignly expressed will of the French , Dutch and Irish people who rejected the proposed ' Constitutional ' / ' Lisbon ' Treaty , to respect international law , particularly with regard to Kosovo , and to stop pretending that they can give lessons to the world ...
What would happen if Vietnam were doing all this ?
Would the EP agree to negotiate under those conditions ?
Would it agree to reciprocally apply this clause ?
Obviously not , because ' dialogue ' and the ' clause ' are only for others ...
in writing . - ( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I voted in favour of the motion for a resolution on democracy , human rights and the new EU-Vietnam Partnership Agreement .
Dialogue between the European Union and Vietnam needs , in fact , to translate into concrete improvements in human rights , which are too often brutally violated .
I firmly support this motion , as Vietnam must put an end to censorship of the media and repeal legal provisions restricting freedom of worship and political and religious freedom if it wants to take an active part in the international community .
Furthermore , Vietnam must cooperate with the United Nations on the subject of these rights and freedoms .
I therefore back this motion and echo the call on the Commission to establish clear benchmarks for the evaluation of the current development projects in Vietnam in order to ensure their compliance with the human rights and democracy clause .
Corrections to votes and voting intentions : see Minutes
( The sitting was suspended at 1.35 p.m. and resumed at 3 p.m. )

Approval of the minutes of the previous sitting : see Minutes
Corrigendum to a text adopted ( Rule 204a ) : see Minutes
Draft general budget 2009 ( Section III ) - Draft general budget 2009 ( Sections I , II , IV , V , VI , VII , VIII and IX ) ( debate )
rapporteur . - ( DE ) Madam President , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the preparations for the first reading of the European budget for 2009 are pretty much complete .
I would therefore like to start today 's debate by thanking the members of the Committee on Budgets , and all the members of the specialised committees who have worked so closely with me , most sincerely for their cooperation and for all the time they have devoted to this .
As I said right at the start of the 2009 budget procedure , and I am happy to say again , a budget rapporteur is only as good as the sum of the members working with her , so I am very grateful to you .
I also need to thank the team in the secretariat of the Committee on Budgets : without the consistently excellent work of the secretariat staff , we Members would , with the best will in the world , be nothing , so thank you !
Yes , I agree , a round of applause would be quite appropriate .
( Applause )
My thanks also go to my personal assistant and to the staff of the groups : it takes many heads and many hands to do a good job .
The preparations for the first reading of our budget , during which we had to read , understand and evaluate 1 400 amendments , were greatly affected by the financial crisis .
Although our budget of around EUR 130 billion looks ridiculously small set against the hundreds upon hundreds of billions that the Member States , acting both jointly and separately , have spread out as a safety net under both the banks and the real economy , our meetings to prepare for the first reading were nevertheless much shaped by contributions on precisely this subject from all the groups involved .
In so doing , we were basically already anticipating the Council 's reaction to our budgetary requests .
What , then , are our requests ?
First of all , there are the payments .
We pointed out back in July that we could not approve a 15 % gap between commitment appropriations and payment appropriations , which the Commission proposed in the draft budget and the Council increased still further .
In our opinion , that does not fit in with the principle of budgetary accuracy and clarity .
Moreover , when we compare this gap in the third year of the current Financial Perspective with the gap in the third year of the previous Financial Perspective , which was only 3 % , we simply do not see how such an enormous gap can be justified .
We have therefore increased payments : we could not close the gap completely , but we have halved it , to leave a gaping hole of 8 % .
We did not increase payments by acclamation or at random , but in those budget lines that help to fund Parliament 's priorities : action to combat climate change , the social dimension in terms of growth for jobs , shaping globalisation and support for small and medium-sized enterprises , and also certain lines that improve the safety of citizens .
In total , we have increased payments from 0.89 % of gross national income - which was the level proposed by the Council - to 0.96 % , rounded , of gross national income .
Secondly , we decided to make full use of the options afforded us by the Financial Perspective .
Under subheadings 1a and 3b , we want to distribute all the money to the budget lines that are important to us , and not leave any margin .
We want the title of subheading 1a , ' competitiveness for growth and employment ' , not just to be purely rhetorical , but also to include specific measures .
We do not want the title of subheading 3b , ' citizenship ' , to be an empty phrase - we want to bring it to life , as , after all , this subheading brings together policies that directly affect citizens at local level , and that the European Union is particularly good at making visible .
Thirdly , we have given the package of pilot projects and preparatory measures , which was agreed between all the groups and has already been evaluated by the Commission , a range of impulses for new policy elements , new Community actions and possibly new legislation .
Fourthly , we have followed our political judgment .
Nobody can expect good administrative work , be it from the Commission or from decentralised agencies , if they do not provide a large enough budget for staff , and we therefore cannot accept the Council 's cutbacks .
We have restored the approach taken in the preliminary draft budget , and in return the Commission could not only thank us , but also be on our side in disputes with the Council .
Fifthly , I would like to turn to the biggest problem , namely Heading 4 , grandly entitled ' EU as a global partner ' .
When this heading was established back during the negotiations on the Financial Perspective , it was already hopelessly underfunded .
That is why , in each year 's budget debates , we have stressed the same thing : how are we going to fund everything that is looking for funding and , at the same time , leave ourselves enough breathing room to be able to react to unforeseen events during the financial year ?
I can say right here and now that there has been , and still is , no satisfactory solution .
For our assistance in Kosovo , Afghanistan , Palestine and now Georgia , what we really needed was long-term programmes , not this continual hand-to-mouth existence .
This is nothing new , but this year the Commission gave us a new challenge : in view of the enormous global increases in food prices , in July it proposed what it called a food aid facility for the less developed countries , with a budget of EUR 1 billion for 2008 and 2009 .

If the Commission had been diligent , it should immediately have suggested transferring the necessary resources from Heading 2 to Heading 4 .
It did not do so , though , because not only is it not diligent , it is afraid .
It was afraid of not getting approval from the Council , and now we are saddled with the problem . We need to convince the Council not just to sermonise about the need to help the poorest of the poor , but to work with us to find the resources - yes , and where from ? - so that we can provide direct food aid and buy seed and fertiliser .
It was quite clear to the Committee on Budgets that we would not be able to find the necessary money in the budget lines under Heading 4 , and so we created what is known as an ' asterisk amendment ' , containing EUR 250 million for food aid , 40 million for Kosovo , 80 million for Palestine and 20 million for Afghanistan .
This asterisk amendment , which makes it quite clear that we want to spend more than the money available according to the Financial Perspective , should be seen as an invitation to the Council .
Let us hope that the Council will actually see our note as an invitation or demand , and enter into negotiations with us without delay .
We have no time to lose - we should not leave everything to the last minute .
Mr President-in-Office of the Council , it is over to you .
( Applause )
Member of the Commission . - Madam President , I am very happy to see how quickly and efficiently Parliament has finalised its first reading and that it is ready to vote tomorrow .
This huge job was done by the Committee on Budgets , by their leaders and coordinators and , of course , by the political groups .
This largest portion of the job to be done forms the basis for our future negotiations .
We will be starting serious engagement between the two arms of the Budgetary Authority and the Commission in the next two months .
The Commission in general very much appreciates and shares the political priorities for which the European Parliament proposes budget reinforcement and restorations .
Regarding payments , the European Parliament intends to approve the level of appropriations up to the ceiling .
However , this is not convincing enough for us , because we think that the preliminary draft budget corresponds better to the actual absorption capacity , notably in Member States .
I will this week send out the information on the execution of the budget , and you will see that our calculations are based on very serious grounds .
The Commission is largely in agreement with the new process on the pilot projects and preparatory actions proposed by Parliament .
On this occasion I would like to stress my appreciation for the excellent collaboration between our institutions , which is thanks to a new and successful approach promoted by the general rapporteur , Mrs Haug .
This is the first time in our history of negotiations that we have already been able , before the summer , to receive and agree on the broad scope of these pilot projects .
I would also like to draw attention to a number of issues which still , at first reading , give rise to serious concerns for the Commission .
The first and most important concerns Heading 5 .
We appreciate that Parliament has restored the amounts requested by the Commission for staff salaries .
However , at the same time , EUR 37 million have been put in the reserve , subject to certain conditions for its release .
On top of that , an additional reserve of some EUR 16 million for two specific policy areas , namely transport and environment , has also been reserved .
It will , of course , be very difficult for the Commission to respond to this , especially the last one , because there is only one employer in the Commission - namely the Commission - and it is not possible , for example , to stop payments for one or two DGs and continue to pay the others .
These reserves - in total about EUR 50 million - would stop the recruitment of 250 posts received for enlargement and prevent the replacement of retiring staff as from next January .
But of course we understand that our negotiating and explanatory skills will come into play with your people as soon as possible after the first reading .
We will try to give all the necessary explanations and to fulfil all the conditions set on these reserves .
Regarding the administrative support for operational programmes , this year Parliament has followed the Council and confirmed the cuts .
I understand that additional technical explanations will be needed , and we will try to solve this via negotiations about these lines in general .
Another problem we see is that Parliament has not restored the appropriations requested for publication of procurement notices .
This , we think , undermines the Commission 's ability to meet its obligations stemming from the public procurement directives , especially in the current environment .
We are solving and trying to solve state aid and other problems in Member States in this fluctuating economic situation , and this can place the Commission at risk of legal challenge in the courts .
To sum up , the Commission will analyse in detail each amendment adopted by Parliament and will give its reactions in early November through the ' letter on executability ' - as it does every year - explaining all the necessary details .
Before the conciliation in November , and before the second reading , we will try to solve as far as possible anything that we still consider to be a problem in the first reading .
As usual , the Commission will try to be the honest broker between the two budgetary authorities , especially in negotiating the problems which arise in Heading 4 , in Heading 5 and in the total ceilings of payment appropriations in the budget .
We will try to be helpful by seeking favourable conditions and a good budget for the whole of Europe , especially in these difficult times that we are facing together .
draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on Foreign Affairs . - Madam President , it is an endless political bone of contention that Heading 4 is chronically underfinanced .
It prevents us from fulfilling our external commitments in crisis areas : in Kosovo , Palestine , Afghanistan and Georgia .
We are completely unable to build up a solid common foreign and security policy on a long-term basis as long as the Commission and the Council keep on adopting this budgetary strategy of under-financing external relations and just giving ad hoc responses to the latest crisis , which attracts all resources and attention , such as Georgia today .
The latest priority overshadows the previous one .
For the EU to become a global player , more money is needed in Heading 4 .
With the current financial envelope , it is impossible to satisfy the needs of the different budgetary lines .
This is the reason why the Committee on Foreign Affairs strongly supports the strategy of the Committee on Budgetary Control seeking to restore the PDB on all budget lines and thus increase the budgetary lines for Kosovo by EUR 40 million and Palestine by EUR 139 million .

We also support the asterisk amendment .
In other words , the Council and Parliament must allow utilisation of the flexibility instrument , and of all other available instruments provided for in the Interinstitutional Agreement , to allocate EUR 250 million on the food facility instrument , EUR 40 million on Kosovo , EUR 80 million for Palestine and EUR 20 million for Afghanistan .




draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on Development . - ( NL ) I am speaking as a member of the Committee on Development , and would , on behalf of my committee , like to make three comments , firstly , about the food crisis , secondly , about the system for assessing development policy and thirdly , about the lack of resources under Heading 4 - foreign expenditure that has been discussed before .
I should like to start with the food crisis , which is , of course , a huge problem , as millions of people are in danger of losing their lives , and a joint European approach is desperately needed .
We do , however , need an approach other than the one which the Commission suggested in the first instance .
The budgetary agreements will need to be respected , while the powers of the Council and the European Parliament may not be overlooked .
I am therefore pleased that the Commission is willing to review the first proposal - to use unused agricultural funds for this .
We need to achieve food security for the countries involved .
Needless to say , food aid is needed for people who are in immediate peril of death , but ultimately , it is about the long term , which is why food production should return to the EU 's development agenda as an area of attention that should be given priority .
We will , in this context , also need to talk about a re-evaluation of the thematic programme on food security , and we will need to look at how we can grant small farmers better access to crucial production factors .
This is why we are glad that the proposal has met with approval for a trial project for micro-credit , because this will probably make it easier for small farmers to fund food production .
Secondly , the system for assessing development policy needs to be improved .
The assessment is focusing too much on where the money is going and too little on results .
If we wish the public to continue to support development cooperation , we will need to gain more insight into the results of our work .
Thirdly , the lack of resources for foreign expenditure , Heading 4 , has been discussed previously .
This concerns not only resources for development cooperation , but also for Kosovo , the Middle East , and so on .
We have great ambitions .
Rightly so .
This is why this item deserves a structural increase
draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on International Trade . - ( DE ) Madam President , Commissioner , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , I would like to raise two points regarding Mrs Haug 's report .
The first is that , at Parliament 's initiative , a separate budget line has been included under the heading ' trade policy for trade-related aid ' - in other words ' aid for trade ' - amounting to EUR 1 billion per year .
Unfortunately , the Commission has not yet been able to provide us with any detailed information on how these aid commitments will be implemented and whether they are operational .
It is heartening that the Committee on Budgets has incorporated an amendment proposed by the Committee on International Trade , withdrawing the Council 's proposed 50 % reduction in the figure for aid for trade .
My second point relates to the support for developing countries in pharmaceuticals-related technology transfer and capacity-building .
Over the last year , Parliament has taken specific steps to help the poorest countries with the supply of pharmaceuticals , and corresponding financial aid is clearly a part of that .
Unfortunately , it is clear that neither the Commission nor the Council shares this view , and , if I understand it correctly , the Committee on Budgets has , regrettably , also not included an amendment in that connection .
On Mr Lewandowski 's report , my committee has raised an important aspect of the EP 's work in the field of international trade relations : its involvement in the Inter-Parliamentary Union in the World Trade Organisation in Geneva .
As our Parliament is one of the organisers of its annual meetings , and given that important ministerial conferences will undoubtedly be on the agenda in the coming year in connection with the Doha round , it would be worth boosting funding for this in order to ensure that we have appropriate infrastructure options for participation .
In addition , we are particularly keen to assist representatives of the ACP countries to pay their travel and subsistence expenses in connection with the Parliamentary Conference .
Both of these elements can , and should , help to increase transparency and strengthen dialogue between parliaments , governments and the general public , and ultimately lead to greater fairness and legitimacy in the negotiations and decisions as part of the discussions within the WTO .
draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs . - ( FR ) Madam President , Mrs Grybauskaitė , Mr Jouyet , on behalf of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs , I would like to express satisfaction , regret and hope .
My satisfaction stems from the fact that the Committee on Budgets agreed to take up our proposal , namely that supervisors , whether for banking , insurance or securities , need greater funding in order to work together better .
This goes without saying , and even those who are not members of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs will agree that it is vital .
My regret is that in the current crisis , the euro is our cornerstone , our very foundation , yet the Commission has drastically cut the resources for communication activities relating to our wonderful currency .
My hope is that tomorrow , the plenary will realise that the resources of the Eurogroup , regardless of the level it meets at from now on , should be increased .
It must not be a lightweight structure , without substance .
It has become a reality .
This is why I hope that tomorrow , Parliament will agree to vote in favour of the principle of increased resources for the Eurogroup .
draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs . - ( DE ) Madam President , I would like to start by thanking the members of the Committee on Budgets for the fact that they broadly share the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs ' approach to the budget .
Nevertheless , I would like , once again , to make the case for increasing funding for social dialogue appropriately , as we proposed .
We cannot keep talking about how social dialogue is a pillar of our European social model , and then on the other hand reduce funding in exactly this area .
At this point , I would also call on the Council to work with us to find a solution for the problem of the degressivity clause .
It has a particularly dramatic effect on the work of the trade union institutes , and , over the long term , continual funding cuts are simply no longer sustainable .
With regard the Committee 's two pilot projects , allow me to say one thing : there was a broad consensus in favour of a pilot project relating to posted workers , and I am sure that the results of this project will bring us important insights for our future political decisions on the Posting of Workers Directive .
We will therefore certainly pay close attention to ensure that the Commission , in turn , turns its attention to those aspects that are important to us in this project , to prevent wage dumping and social dumping .
The second project relates to violence against the elderly .
This project confronts a taboo subject , and this is particularly important .
Thank you very much , Madam President , as the draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety regarding the EU budget for 2009 , I wish to express my satisfaction with the material before us .
One of the most important changes is that next year , there will be 10 % more resources available for environmental purposes than in 2008 .
Thus , we will be able to allocate EUR 14 billion to environmental uses .
I welcome in particular the fact that one of next year 's priorities is climate change .
Europe must retain its leading role in the international struggle against climate change , as President Sarkozy also emphasised yesterday .
I would like to emphasise as well that the budget for LIFE + will also be increased by 9 % .
I also welcome as outstanding opportunities the launch of so-called preparatory , or pilot projects , for which three of our proposals this year on environmental and public health topics are to receive support from the European Commission to the tune of EUR 7.5 million .
Never have so many projects devoted to climate change or its effects been launched in the course of a single year .
From the perspective of the agencies , I consider the figures recommended by the Commission fundamentally acceptable , and I am pleased that the extent of support to both human resources and tools has increased ; nevertheless , I would recommend adjustments on two points .
The first has to do with the European Centre for Disease Prevention and Control , for which we would advise freeing up the 10 % in reserve , since only then will that agency be able to fulfil its mandate .
The second case is that of the European Food Safety Agency , where our initiative is the exact opposite , that is , we recommend putting 10 % in reserve until the agency can demonstrate that it is operating appropriately .
My suggestions in this regard have also received the support of Parliament 's Committee on the Environment and the Committee on Budgets .
I call on my fellow Members to likewise lend their support with their votes at the plenary sitting .
Finally , I wish to thank Jutta Haug , the rapporteur , and László Surján , the shadow rapporteur for the European People 's Party , for their valuable assistance in my work . Thank you very much .
draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on the Internal Market and Consumer Protection . - ( RO ) The budget is not a policy issue ; it is not a technical problem , but an extremely profound political problem .
Through the budget , we establish what resources are required to meet the objectives .
We also give a measure of sincerity to the commitments we are undertaking .
The provisions relating to the internal market seem to be adequate .
We would like to thank Mrs Haug for her enormous efforts in coordinating the extremely diverse requests submitted with more general political objectives .
Problems persist , however , in spite of these efforts .
The financial market is showing its limits .
We can see the shortcomings that are hidden behind rules which ordinary citizens find difficult to understand .
They are still showing a certain fragility .
The proposed amendment , which is calling for resources to be allocated to educate consumers on financial matters , has been rejected by a majority in the Budget Committee .
The reason for this is not to make savings .
A larger sum than was requested has been approved for an unspecified purpose linked to consumer protection .
We would like to ask the committee to consider the use of the sums approved for the relevant chapter on financial education programmes .
The lack of information affecting some people provides a condition for promoting speculation on the market and for making others rich .
However , this is not the time to be removing protection .
It is preferable for well-informed citizens to defend themselves on their own .
I would first like to thank both the rapporteur , Mrs Jutte Haug , and the coordinator for a highly sensitive approach to the needs of EU citizens and also for accepting the recommendations of the Regional Development Committee , of which I am a member .
The policy of cohesion must continue to be a medium-term budgetary policy of the EU .
When I , as rapporteur for the Regional Development Committee , drafted its opinion on the EP report into the aforementioned budget , I also wanted to contribute towards solving a problem which the Member States were trying to solve through their development programmes in the absence of a consolidated European approach in this area .
It concerns the problem of integrating the Roma communities within the European Union .
In proposing a pilot project which might assist in solving this problem at a European level , my aim is to encourage European awareness of the possibility of addressing the problem from a regional development perspective .
This matter is particularly apparent in the new Member States , where small enclaves of Roma communities constitute a serious developmental and social problem .
The project should also cover the development of adequate resources at European institutions , without which the problem will continue to be left to the Member States , leading to a situation where millions of European citizens of Roma nationality may become victims of patchy economic and social development and very poor integration .
draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development . - ( FI ) Madam President , Heading 2 in the Commission 's Preliminary Draft Budget , which the Council cut again , did not reflect Parliament 's priorities .
In it , direct agricultural subsidies and marketing costs were overly conservatively estimated at EUR 2 027 million below the ceiling for the multiannual financial perspective .
The Committee on Agriculture proposed that the Committee on Budgets revise the estimated expenditure , which it did .
New features of the budget are the distribution of fruit and vegetables to school children and the Structural Change Fund for the dairy industry .
For the former , the Committee set aside EUR 181 million , with EUR 600 million being set aside for the latter .
As there is a huge reserve of outstanding commitments , or RALs , in the rural development programmes , EUR 9 billion in total , and because the Commission 's proposals showed a 30 % discrepancy between commitments and payments , the Committee increased payments by EUR 898 million .

The Committee recommends providing some prompt food aid and for it to be financed under Heading 4 , depending on its nature .
This means there will have to be interinstitutional talks .
I want to start by congratulating the rapporteur , Mrs Haug , on her efforts in preparing Parliament 's position .
The overall appropriations allocated to fisheries over the years must be considered a negative development given that previous budgets already represented the minimum necessary to implement a common fisheries policy and a maritime policy with the requisite resources .
For the fishing industry , the increased external economic pressure of fuel price increases and the stagnation and reduction in fishery product prices are resulting in substantial losses for the sector and critical social problems for fishermen in general .
Although the Commission proposes restructuring the fisheries sector in line with the current macroeconomic situation , concrete measures are needed to help ensure the survival of the sector .
The draft budget and Parliament 's current position make provision for major cuts , particularly in the areas of fish stock monitoring , international cooperation , fisheries research staff and data gathering .
On the other hand , I welcome the fact that Parliament 's current position includes the pilot project that I presented for a fisheries market price observatory and continues to support the European maritime policy and all related projects by increasing the appropriations for research .
draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on Culture and Education . - ( DE ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , back in 2004 , at a major cultural conference in Berlin , President Barroso stated that European cultural policy was all about a soul for Europe .
However , the culture budget shows us that these great challenges have met with little success .
It is true that we have now managed to launch a pilot project to provide more money to promote artist mobility , and we also want to increase spending on lifelong learning and youth exchanges , but seen against the fact that we need to inspire European citizens to get to know Europe , we spend far too little in this area .
As Mr Barroso has already stated , the people of Europe are not exactly thrilled with the single market , but they do want to learn more about Europe 's cultural treasures .
We have just awarded Parliament 's prize for European cinema .
We also need to spend more on European film production , because we need to give our citizens a better understanding of the European narrative and European visions of Europe 's history and future .
draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on Legal Affairs . - ( IT ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , justice that is slow , scarcely accessible and unclear is hopeless .
We believe that the staff of the Commission , of the European Parliament and of the Court of Justice should be increased and reinforced in the areas of legal management , monitoring of the application of Community law and in better regulation in general , precisely because the current procedures are too lengthy and too opaque .
We feel that the Commission does not yet have a clear enough understanding of the need to invest in adequate staff in these sectors and it seems entirely inappropriate that the Commission continues to leave us completely in the dark over the number of people working specifically on infringement procedures and continues to claim that everything is going swimmingly .
As regards the European Parliament , I would like to point out the problem posed by the legislative quality of our texts and the need for more and better investment in the work of lawyer-linguists .
The same applies to the whole issue of internal reorganisation with regard to monitoring the application of European law .
Finally , we call on the Commission to report to us and to quantify , including from an economic point of view , the measures taken to make our institutions more green and sustainable .
Madam President , I firstly want to thank the Committee on Budgets for having supported our amendments .
Due to time constraints , I will just briefly mention two points .
The first concerns the traditional amendment of the Frontex budget .
As you all know , due to the Commission 's lack of initiative , and particularly due to the Council 's inconsistency , Parliament has had to define Frontex 's scope of action through the budgetary procedure .
This year , we have agreed to increase its budget by EUR 10 million and to try and ensure that its missions remain permanent .
To this end , not only are budget appropriations needed , but also , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , the Member States must fulfil their duties in this regard .
My second point concerns the approval of a pilot appropriation for the integration of the Roma .
The European conference organised this month by the Commission cannot mark the end , but rather the beginning , of a coherent policy on the integration of the Roma into our European society .
draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on Constitutional Affairs . - ( FR ) Madam President , I shall speak in my capacity as draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on Constitutional Affairs but also as a socialist member of the Committee on Budgets .
It is for this reason , moreover , that I have two minutes instead of one .
( EL ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , as far as the Committee on Constitutional Affairs is concerned , what we have unfortunately observed is that , in a year in which we had the referendum in Ireland on the Constitutional Treaty , which demonstrated - apart from its result - the need for politicians to communicate with the citizens of the European Union , the Irish tell us that the main reason for the ' no ' vote was precisely a lack of communication .
Obviously , therefore , we need more communication in the run-up to the forthcoming elections .
Most of our proposals were accepted .
However , the fact that the proposals to strengthen two basic new political institutions , namely the European political parties and the European political institutions , were not accepted is unsatisfactory .
Next time perhaps .
I have a few political comments to make on the actual budget which we are voting on this year and I say political , because the political role of the budget should ultimately be to allow us , through the budget , to play our part as the European Union .
As Commissioner Almunia said yesterday , and I quote him in French because he spoke in French , ' Il faut commencer à imaginer le budget de l 'Europe ' .
We have barely started to imagine the budget and we need to do so .
So what do we see this year ?
We see a budget of low payments , with a huge gap between commitments and payments and with an unsatisfactory answer to the actual political priorities of the European Union .
Yes , there are problems and yes , as Minister Jouyet said , we must leave a margin so that we can respond to the crisis .
However , the actual political choices of the European Union are important .
For example , I do not believe that , in an election year , so little money should be earmarked for communication and that , in a year of geopolitical crisis , so little money should be earmarked for foreign policy .
In view of the ambitious aims the European Union has set itself , the further reduction in the already low budget for 2009 by the Council is surprising .
These cuts will lead to a greater imbalance between the level of undertakings and paying for them , which is contrary to the principle of a balanced budget .
The amount approved by the Council - a mere 0.89 % of GDP - for appropriations for payments , does not tally with the many political priorities and commitments of the European Union .
The result will be that only some of the important pilot projects which will benefit citizens will be implemented in practice .
As draftsman of the opinion on the 2009 budget for the Committee on Women 's Rights and Gender Equality , I am concerned by the unsatisfactory use of the budget for the needs of existing programmes such as the Progress or Daphne programmes .
The European Commission should also make considerable steps towards implementing the principles of equality in planning its budget , while the Member States must effectively promote these when using structural funds and the European Social Fund .
draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on Petitions . - Madam President , I would also like to thank the rapporteurs for their diligent and very efficient work in what is a difficult task , and speak specifically on the issue of the Ombudsman 's Office , where there will be an increase of almost 6 % in the budget .
This , we believe , is appropriate , recognising that half of this may not be required if there is no actual change in the Office after the elections in 2009 .
I think we should also recognise that there has been some work within the Office of the Ombudsman to reorganise staff and resources in a more efficient way .
While I am on my feet , as a member of the Committee on Agriculture I should just like to say that the issue of food aid - and I say this also to the public who are gathered here - is something which touches people really deeply .
I think that the public would like us to help in a generous way with food aid .
I can understand that there are budgetary concerns , rightly so , about the rules .
Perhaps this says something about the work we do in the background , before we pronounce , so that we do this in a good way and send out the proper message to the public that we are supporting the developing world and the hungry and the needy .
But it is also worth pointing out that our development aid in the past did focus on agriculture and food production , as other speakers have mentioned , and , tragically , in latter years we have drawn away from looking at the importance of production agriculture in the developing world .
Perhaps we are missing that point here too in the European Union .
If this food crisis has done one thing , it has alerted us to the fragility of food production and the need to nurture it within the developing world .
Finally , on this particular point , a colleague of mine , Esther De Lange , and I are supporting a pilot project to link up young farmers in Europe and the developing world .
I think out of this we might see some good results because they need help and we need to understand their plight .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , first of all , on behalf of my group , I would like to thank the rapporteur for his work and his cooperation .
The budget is a joint task , and the result meets with the demands of several political groups .
The message of the People 's Party is as follows : let the lives of EU citizens be more secure .
Security means many things , not only the protection of the borders of the Schengen zone , the prevention of illegal immigration , the struggle against terrorism , but , in particular , the preservation of jobs by means of increased support to small and medium-sized enterprises along with research and development , as well as food safety and food security .
In the interests of security , we need several mutually independent sources of energy .
All this requires more money than has provisionally been set aside by the Council .
In order to secure banking operations , a few days was enough to come up with EUR 2 000 billion .
Fine .
However , we should realise that it takes the EU 20 years to spend that sum of money .
Parliament is planning on less than EUR 10 billion additional funds for next year 's programmes , all of which serve the real economy , and that is still 1.5 billion below the amount we provided for in the seven year framework budget .
It is not inappropriate therefore if , in the current situation , instead of budgetary restraint , we spend 10 billion more on growth , job creation and the safety of our citizens .
The crisis is not only a financial , but also an economic issue .
The Council should be our partner in more vigorous economic development .
Members States , for their part , should abolish those obstacles - such as excessive demands for their own share - with which they artificially render more difficult the use of support for European development .
The EU must help our citizens who are in trouble as a result of the worldwide crisis .
Let us demonstrate that the European Union can not only prevent wars from breaking out in Europe , but can also overcome the financial and economic crisis affecting Europe . Thank you for your respectful attention .
Mr President , Commissioner , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , I should like to begin by thanking all of the rapporteurs , and especially Mrs Haug and Mr Lewandowski , as well as the entire budget team , elected representatives and administrators alike , for this traditional financial exercise for the year 2009 .
This is the third financial perspective , and it demonstrates just how much the annual budget procedure has become an unnatural and somewhat surreal exercise faced with the situation in Europe .
It is an exercise in juggling the accounts , making it impossible to provide a genuine Community-wide solution to the problems of our society .
After the Commission 's very modest draft , the Council did what it invariably does and sent us a limited proposal that does not enable any of the promises it made during the year to be fulfilled .
You are right , Mr Jouyet , the European budget has been under-utilised since 1988 .
As in sport , regular training leads to better performances , and , as an athlete , the EU budget , by becoming smaller , becomes more inefficient and more under-used .
This is the vicious circle that leads to political disasters .
Admittedly , we cannot spend without calculating such expenditure , but , in view of these continued promises , it is commitment appropriations , not payment appropriations , that are being recorded .
This is the beginning of budget fraud !
We ought therefore to know whether the European Union wants to achieve its objectives and whether the Member States are willing or not to contribute to common policies .
Faced with this impossible task , Parliament , through the work of our rapporteur , is assuming its authority .
The budgetary framework is very tight , and the Commission 's lack of initiative has led the European Parliament to create new PPs and APs that will underpin future innovations .
However , it is vital that , at a time when Europe is deciding to inject EUR 1 700 billion to help the euro zone 's banking sector , we manage to find EUR 250 million for the food facility for 2009 .
Parliament is very attached to this food aid fund .
Thus , on 21 November , the ball will be in the Council 's court .
Parliament has respected the authorised procedures in all their forms : respect for the Financial Perspective , the call for flexibility under the EUR 530 million ceiling and the call for an emergency aid reserve that features in the financial perspective .
We are acting within the scope of our prerogatives and we therefore expect the Council to adopt a responsible political attitude that is similar to our own .
This is crucial when it comes to ensuring the credibility of Europe 's work in the eyes of each and every citizen .
Mr Jouyet , I appeal to you : politics is about anticipating ; Parliament 's position enables us to anticipate while respecting the rules to which the three institutions have chosen to submit .
Prove that you are equal to your commitments !
Mr President , I would like to begin by thanking Mrs Haug for her sterling efforts in keeping all the different aspects of this budget procedure together .
The Group of the Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe support the result of the vote in the Committee on Budgets .
For the ALDE Group , energy and climate policy , as well as research and innovation , were important priorities for the 2009 budget .
We share Mrs Haug 's view that climate and energy policy are not adequately reflected in the budget , and we look forward to the Commission coming up with a clear proposal in the spring as to how this area can be given budgetary support at EU level .
In view of Russia 's invasion of Georgia , it was important to the ALDE Group both to secure reconstruction aid for Georgia and to support the development of the Nabucco gas pipeline , which is intended to ensure a supply of gas to Europe outside Russian control .
We are pleased that a majority has supported these priorities .
The present draft budget eliminates a number of the Council 's savings and gives a more realistic assessment of the needs for payment over the coming years .
We will hit the ceiling in the multi-annual agreement for the budget in three headings , namely 1a for research , education and transport and Heading 3b for legal policy , and we will go beyond the ceiling in Heading 4 , foreign policy .
The budgetary ceilings for foreign policy go on being too restrictive , and every year we have to fight to fund new priorities .
It is strange to see heads of state writing out bills for the EU budget that their own finance ministers will not honour .
The Commission has proposed funding the food facility for developing countries using the money saved from the EU 's export refunds .
The money has , of course , been saved as a result of the high food prices which , in turn , create problems of starvation in poor countries .
The idea is right , but in terms of the budget we must do things differently so that we comply with the agreements entered into between the institutions .
Therefore , we are now proposing that the food facility and extra appropriations to Palestine , Kosovo and Afghanistan be found by using reserves , for example , the flexibility reserve .
It is not fair to obtain this money by cutting down on important programmes for poor countries .
The ALDE Group has tabled a proposal to place 12 % of the funds from the Structural Funds programmes in reserve .
The background to this proposal was that we wanted to pressure the Commission into doing more to avoid the errors in the region of 12 % that emerged during the debate for the discharge of the 2006 budget .
It was our intention for this reserve to be used as an instrument to follow up on the 2006 discharge , but we could not get sufficient support to take this path , and so we will have to take note of this , but I hope the Commission will take action .
Mr Lewandowski had an interesting task in preparing Parliament 's and the other institutions ' budget .
I think he has managed to obtain a good compromise in which Parliament 's budget stays below 20 % of the administrative expenditure .
on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the European Union 's budget for 2009 can only yield minor successes , because we are working within the straitjacket of the Financial Perspective .
The Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance made it quite clear , when we voted on it , that the Financial Perspective bore no relation to the new challenges and tasks with which we were faced .
We have just from heard from all the speakers that the European budget for foreign policy is underfunded .
However , with regard to the challenges of global climate change as well , our European budget does not even begin to allow us to respond appropriately .
I would like to remind you all of President Sarkozy 's great speech yesterday , in which he pointed out how much needed to change in the European Union in view of the economic crisis and the climate change disaster .
The 2009 budget reflects all of this to only a very limited extent , and that is our shared problem : our European budget is simply not up to the challenges of the present time .
In agricultural policy , too , it is high time for energy generation to be linked to environmental targets , and we must also - as Mr Barroso said yesterday - do more for research and development and , above all , in educational policy .
After all , those are Europe 's assets .
We need to get away from a reactive budget , towards a proactive budget and a new political concept .
Finally , we need to do more to combat hunger : in Africa , in the sub-Saharan region , famine is once again on the rise , and that is unacceptable .
We also need to do more to promote fair trade , so that the developing and emerging countries finally get a fair chance .
I now come to the political result .
As Mr Sarkozy said yesterday , we need to relaunch capitalism in green form ; we need a Green Deal .
Only then will we also be able to relaunch the European budget .
Mr President , Commissioner , the draft budget for 2009 , like previous draft budgets , not only fails to meet our expectations , but more importantly , does not meet the expectations of our electorates .
Its main failing is too few appropriations for payments .
If we want to meet all expectations , it should be at least twice as much .
The Council of Europe has limited funding and made it necessary to reduce a number of items - these cuts affect Section III in particular , which includes agriculture and rural development - but also affects the European agencies and the remaining sections .
It is unlikely that there is any committee or political group in the European Parliament which will be satisfied by this budget .
Although the political priorities for 2009 have been set , it has not been possible to keep any of the priorities at such a level as to make it clear that they have been favoured financially .
Officially the budget retains all the indicators set out in the multi-annual financial framework , but we all expected it to be higher .
That is why the draft budget proposes returning to the original draft , and removing the reductions made by the European Council .
In voting for the proposed draft , we are counting on pushing through an increase in the reduced budgetary expenditure .
We may succeed .
Mr President , Commissioner , it can be rightly said that next year 's budget shows budgetary discipline .
The low national income it proposes will bring law and order to the EU .
The expenditure under external actions in Heading 4 is inadequate by any budgeting criterion .
We all know that this is not enough money for everything the Council considers important , as Parliament has its own legitimate preferences for the use of these funds .
We in our group are not very anxious to support the growth in external expenditure in itself .
We are not in favour of Georgia 's rearmament after its attack on the civilians of South Ossetia and Russian peacekeepers , and its pitiful defeat later .
We do not support the Council 's priorities for a Common Foreign and Security Policy . We do not agree that a Common Foreign and Security Policy should be developed in the direction of a European Security and Defence Policy , as if the Treaty of Lisbon had not been rejected .
Let the Member States be satisfied with the Athena Financing Mechanism for that .
We do not support the assistance of Iraq , Afghanistan and Georgia , via international organisations , without the possibility of monitoring the use of the Union 's money .
Obviously , we are in favour of aid for oppressed nations , such as the Palestinians , but at the same time we say that the Council 's priority areas are eating into the reserves for the targets of financing that Parliament deems important .
All those who were involved in drafting the budget know that the ceiling for external actions will not hold up but collapse during the budgetary procedure , the way the ceiling in this House did last August .
Let us be able to stay under the ceiling .
If that is done by cooking the books , that goes against good budgetary practice and is a culture of governance that is not transparent for EU citizens , the people who have to foot the entire bill .
Although our group believes that there is no great sense of confidence among us in the Union 's external actions , we want the facts to be recognised .
That is now a job for the Council .
Mr President , this is , in a certain sense , a well worked-out draft budget .
The skilled and thoughtful rapporteurs deserve all credit for their work within the current framework .
All this is nonetheless completely wrong , however - for what should the EU in actual fact do ?
In this context , at least two thirds of the money goes on agriculture and on structural funds , including waste and corruption .
What the EU should invest money in , for example , large-scale research such as the fusion project in Barcelona , or common infrastructure such as Galileo , or the separation and storage of carbon dioxide etc . , are small fry in this budget .
What we find here is a Globalisation Fund that now gives EUR 2.4 million to Portugal and EUR 10 million to Spain .
In both cases , we are concerned with fractions of a per mille of these countries ' gross national products .
There is no reason why they should receive money from other countries in this connection .
We have a Solidarity Fund from which EUR 13 million is going to France following the havoc wrought by Hurricane Dean in Martinique and Guadeloupe .
Again , this is a fraction of a per mille of France 's Gross National Product .
The whole thing makes no sense .
We are talking about rich countries that would have no difficulty dealing with these matters , without receiving scraps from other Member States .
Why is this being done ?
I would maintain that it is because it is PR money designed to be used as advertising for the EU .
There is no other obvious reason for it .
Next time , funds will no doubt go on snow clearance .
I repeat : we are on completely the wrong track .
We are debating a budget that is technically well designed , but politically idiotic .
( SK ) Last year , we were similarly appalled at the low levels of expenditure in the EU budget for 2008 .
As a fraction of Gross Domestic Product , it amounted to 0.95 % .
At the time , I compared the curved line of the year-on-year decline to a falling leaf .
We thought it could not get any lower . We were wrong .
Expenditure for 2009 represents 0.89 % of GDP .
This is no longer a curved line : it is free fall .
Who cares that the level of expenditure is far out of line with the political priorities and obligations of the European Union ?
Who cares that there is a growing gap between levels of obligations and payments ?
The total volume of unpaid obligations today represents EUR 139 billion , which is more than the annual budget of the Union .
The internal discord in the policy of the European Council has been revealed for all to see .
The governments of most Member States will not manage to secure a full drawdown of EU funds in the current year .
The aforementioned gap has translated into a reduction in expenditure in the budget for next year .
The gap is widening between the financial framework for the years 2007-2013 and the actual budgets , to the detriment of citizens and the regions , which are not receiving the necessary resources , especially from the structural and cohesion funds .
This is also a matter of the weakness of the European Parliament .
We will not find in our own countries an effective way to put pressure on governments , ministries and other bodies within the public administration to direct appropriate levels of funding into these areas .
I support an increase in expenditure from the EU budget , as is proposed in the excellent report of Jutta Haug .
At the same time , however , I wonder whether we are just tilting at windmills .
( ES ) Mr President , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , Commissioner , rapporteurs , ladies and gentlemen , what is the ultimate goal , the raison d 'être , of an EU budget in a year of real and total financial crisis ?
The first goal is to ensure that this budget does not simply represent an added burden on national purses .
In other words , it must not be a superfluous expense , but must go only where the Member States cannot or must not go .
The second goal is to ensure that it is a budget which provides added value .
The programmes for which financing is approved must be adequately supported by the political authority - the Council and Parliament - and technically supported by the executive authority , which is the Commission .
The Commission 's role has never been more important than in this year of deep crisis .
Its responsibility is greater than ever , because we must squeeze every possible drop of return from every euro invested by European taxpayers .
Thirdly , at a time when liberal is becoming social democrat and social democrat is tending to become liberal , the EU budget must be effective and even contracyclical .
A study headed by the Spanish economist , Rafael Flores , has proven that the public expenditure with the greatest impact on public investment and employment is expenditure on transport infrastructures and communications .
What is good for my country should also be good for the whole of Europe .
The EU Structural and Cohesion Funds are the key Community component for reinvigorating European infrastructures and , consequently , employment .
For that reason , my Group supports , among other aspects , more funding for the trans-European networks irresponsibly forgotten by the Council , in particular , more funding for the energy networks , and also more funding for payment appropriations under the convergence heading .
( NL ) Mr President , the budgets of the other institutions boast a reasonable balance between the ever huge demand , an almost chronic demand , for more staff and the need to restrict expenditure .
The European Parliament , being the cautious budgetary authority that it is , remains within the agreed boundaries ( one fifth of the budget of the institutions ) , but invests in knowledge nevertheless , by increasing staffing levels within the groups and by increasing capacity in the library .
This is necessary , because the questions we are faced with are invariably complex and related to globalisation and worldwide issues .
The foundations are being laid for the introduction of the Members ' and Assistants ' Statutes , and this is a question of social justice that has been a long time coming .
There will be more staff to liaise between the European Parliament and national parliaments , which is essential , even though the numbers involved are small .
It is about exchange with national parliaments , which needs to improve .
In our capital cities , there is often a huge lack of knowledge about Brussels ' agendas and about issues of subsidiarity , while the European citizens , more so than before , are asking critical questions about what should be regulated at national level , and what at European level .
As for the other institutions , allow me just to say this : access for citizens should be paramount .
This is why it is important to increase the staff of the Ombudsman , just to mention one aspect .
The European Union must be open to every citizen , not least , and particularly , for citizens who have complaints .
( FR ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , firstly , many thanks to our two fellow Members from the Committee on Budgets - Mr Lewandowski and , of course , Mrs Haug - who have overseen our work passionately and effectively .
Firstly , I should like , very briefly , in the time I have available to me , to say to you that I am delighted overall with a number of guidelines that have been preserved within the framework of a budget that is very constrained , even tight , as some of our fellow Members have said .
Fundamental guidelines relating to growth , employment and climate change have been preserved , and we even have an increase in the total level of payments on these priorities , at any rate .
Moving on , secondly , I am delighted with regard to a more specific point : the fact that we have managed , through the Committee on Budget 's proposal , to make lines concerning research and innovation and all that which concerns the Structural Funds more understandable , thereby providing our fellow citizens with practical answers .
In this time of crisis , the scale and effects of which are stressful and will unfortunately be long-lasting , I should like to highlight the importance of Europe 's coordinated response .
The latter is not only more obvious now than it has ever been before , but it is also crucial when it comes to providing support for investment in major infrastructure projects , in order to stimulate our European economy .
( FR ) Mr President , it is clear that we will unfortunately not have the Treaty of Lisbon in force next year , but , for all that , we will nevertheless require regulation .
There may be no new treaty but there are new needs , all the same .
There are tasks that do not follow the institutional tempo .
We need only look at the news , with the financial crisis and the environmental crisis .
We will need resources in our flow chart .
The year 2009 is also a little bit special since we have an appointment with a very sensitive animal known as the European citizen , namely the electorate .
Thus , we should not skimp on resources for communication and cooperation .
On this subject , too , let us find the proper resources for our Web television , the electoral campaign , the visitors ' centre , the citizens ' forums , and so on .
In terms of buildings , we now own nearly all our buildings .
I am referring here to our three main work sites .
Regarding the one that we do not yet own , the Luxembourg site , we are going to start work there in the next few weeks .
This is a large , very ambitious construction site where we are going to build one of the largest buildings in the world , with a fully autonomous energy supply .
We can be proud of this , we can be proud of our property , but , as this room can testify , property requires upkeep !
Thus , as owners , we are now going to have to find the resources to have high quality property .
With regard to environmental policy , in 2008 , we were one of the first institutions to receive EMAS certification - we can be very proud of that .
We have had the result of our study on our carbon footprint for two days now .
This House consumes 200 000 tonnes of CO2 each year .
If we want to meet and achieve the objective of less than 30 % in 12 years , we will need some resources .
I shall conclude simply by commending the quality of the work done by our friend , Mr Lewandowski , because , in the new conciliation method we have put in place , we have been very , very lucky to have him as a leader .
( PL ) Mr President , Commissioner , in this debate there are four matters to which I would like to draw your attention .
Firstly , even though the expenditure in the budget of EUR 124 billion for appropriations is the highest in the history of the European Union , it is the lowest in terms of the Gross National Product of the 27 Member States .
This , incidentally , is the level proposed by the European Parliament 's Committee on Budgets , as the European Commission proposed even lower allocations , and the Council made even more cuts to this modest budget .
In the Financial Perspective for 2007-2013 the ceiling for appropriations for payments was 0.97 % of Gross National Product , in other words , we are dealing with a significant discrepancy between what we intended to fund three years back , and what the Union wants to fund now .
Fourthly , we can have neither a larger Europe , nor deeper integration , for so little money , nor can the European Union be a reliable global partner , as it is threatened by the failure to meet its own commitments in this area .
( PT ) This debate on the Community budget for 2009 should be marked by the decisions not taken by the European Council this month .
What absolutely should have been discussed was the urgent budgetary measures needed to effectively support small-scale and family-based agriculture , fisheries , the textile and clothing industry , the shipbuilding industry , and micro- , small and medium-sized enterprises .
In addition , other measures are urgently needed to defend the productive sectors of each Member State , particularly the cohesion countries , employment with rights and decent wages for workers .
What absolutely should have been discussed was the necessary break with the Community budget policy .
This policy underpins an economic policy that is one of the causes of the structural crisis which has been dragging on for so long in the European Union and which lies at the root of the downgrading of the productive sector , unemployment , precarious work , increasing social inequalities and deep differences between the Member States .
Mr President , I see that millions of euros of public money are still being allocated to social engineering and to buy popular support for the EU itself in candidate countries , Member States and elsewhere .
We still have roads and bridges that lead nowhere , we are replacing the pavements in Karínia outside the Turkish casinos no less , and EUR 400 million provide electricity in Kosovo , where the subsequent receipts simply disappear .
These are highly questionable political uses of public money .
No wonder the taxpayers in net-contributor countries like mine are increasingly objecting to EU funds being given to countries whose tax burden is lower - sometimes much lower - and which effectively replace the lack of local tax revenues .
Given the nature of these irregularities , I wrote to the Court of Auditors recently to clarify the legality of payments from public funds which are being qualified under international financial accounting standards .
( NL ) Mr President , one of the main advantages of speaking late is that you can leave out a considerable number of things that have been said before .
This is why I shall immediately cut to two points that are particularly close to my heart .
Firstly , now that there are an increasing number of obese children in Europe , we as a society will need to invest more in teaching healthy eating habits .
The increase in the budget for school milk , as proposed by us , fits in perfectly with this ambition .
With the additional EUR 13 million we should like to set aside , we should like to increase the number of schools and also extend the range with a number of healthy products .
What is unfortunate is that the Commission 's response to initiatives such as the school fruit programme is , in my view , too slow .
The European Parliament would have liked to have had money in the kitty for this programme in 2008 .
It will now be 2009 before fruit will be provided in schools free of charge , and a mere EUR 1.3 million has been earmarked for networking and the provision of information .
This is regrettable to my mind .
School fruit will not simply rain down on schools after the summer break .
A great deal of groundwork will need to be done for this programme , and money will be needed for this next year as well .
A little more dynamism would certainly not go amiss therefore .
Secondly , I should like to draw your attention to a proposed investigation into returns in the food production chain .
For example , were you aware , Commissioner , that the economic return on this apple is 22 % in your supermarket , and 23 % in the distribution trade , while the primary producer of this apple , the farmer , without whose efforts this apple would not have been here , has , over the last few years , suffered a negative return of -4 % ?
Via the study we propose , we would like the position of farmers to be monitored .
After all , if we want to retain agricultural production in Europe , we will need to monitor the positions of the primary producers and concentrations of power in the chain , such as large supermarkets .
I hope , Commissioner , that together with your colleague for Competition , you will want to get your teeth into this issue .
( SV ) Mr President , as the Committee on Industry , Research and Energy 's rapporteur for the budget , I should like to thank Mrs Haug for having listened so carefully to our priorities , which genuinely make their presence felt in the budget .
To my fellow Swedish Eurosceptic Member , Mr Lundgren , who spoke just now and who characterised the budget as idiotic , I would just say that it is not improved by the fact that he himself proposes the total discontinuation of some of the best parts of the budget , relating to , for example , the maritime safety authority and the Youth In Action programme .
Certainly , the EU budget has problems , however .
The threefold crisis we are experiencing shows what is at issue .
I am talking about the climate crisis , the food crisis and the financial crisis .
The Committee on Industry , Research and Energy proposes increases of at least 5 % in all the operational appropriations relating to climate and energy , but this is still a drop in the ocean .
As a socialist , I see the need for Food Aid , but the debate on funding shows the weaknesses in the budget system .
It shows how difficult it is to engage in more significant re-prioritising .
President Sarkozy yesterday pointed out the need for common efforts directed at European trade and industry as a result of the crisis , but there are no such resources in the EU budget .
The Committee on Industry , Research and Energy indicates the need for more funding for small and medium-sized enterprises , but this , too , is a drop in the ocean .
Instead , we are forced to invent one temporary instrument after another .
We have flexibility instruments , the Globalisation Fund , the Solidarity Fund and Food Facility , and we shall soon have a special mechanism for looking after the income from the future auctioning of emissions rights .
I think it is time to carry out a more ambitious and forward-looking review of the long-term budget .
Now that we are to carry out a mid-term review , we have the opportunity to ensure that it is better adapted to dealing with the ever more complicated reality in which we live and in which radical measures are required . ( debate )
Mr President , the most important aspect of this budget is how it aids and supports the economy of Europe in its entirety , as well as developing and strengthening the economy - something which is really needed at present .
That is why I welcome the support in the budget for research programmes and the development of new technologies , because without the development of such technologies , we cannot hope for competitiveness in our economy .
I would also like to see this support being made available to all regions throughout Europe , not only in more urban areas , but also in rural communities .
I would also like to see strong support for the CAP health check in the coming years in order to ensure a healthy food supply locally and not to have to depend on food imports from faraway lands .

( EL ) Mr President , in an election year , the budget should have two distinctive characteristics : firstly , resources that reflect the ambition of the European Union and , secondly , responses and political messages to the expectations of the average citizen , especially in the current difficult economic climate .
If we evaluate the draft budget before us against these criteria , the amount , which corresponds to payments of 0.96 % of Community GDP , is basically adequate , but only if the Council does not chop it down at second reading .
I trust that the minister will pay particular attention to this point .
Things are better in terms of political messages and political targets , where we have indeed covered society 's basic priorities .
Without going into greater detail , I should like , if I may , to mention one particular major issue which concerns my country and other countries in the south of the European Union , namely the question of illegal immigration .
At present , thousands of Iraqis , Kurds , Afghans and Georgians are collecting in Turkey and trying to enter the European Union en masse .
Greece and other countries in southern Europe have to make a huge effort with scant resources to control illegal immigration .
In 2007 alone , we had 110 000 illegal immigrants in Greece and there have been over 80 000 up to September of this year .
I am therefore delighted that , for the first time , the Community budget has a separate point for the solidarity of the European Union with its Member States in the south and I trust that we shall make a good start and maintain it over time .
( FR ) Mr President , on the very day in which the political declaration ' Communicating Europe in Partnership ' has just been signed by Parliament , the Commission and the Council , with the latter thus indicating their common will to enhance and to harmonise information on the European Union that is intended for the citizens , we are debating the 2009 budget and the ' Communication of the institutions ' budget .
For this electoral year and at a time of growing scepticism regarding the Union , raising the citizens ' awareness of European issues is crucial .
We hope , in actual fact , that there will be a very strong turnout at the elections .
For this to happen , all initiatives designed to explain Europe and its added value in terms of everyday life and of preparing for the future are important .
The forthcoming visitors ' centre in Brussels is part of this , but I fear that certain amendments adopted in committee will delay its highly anticipated opening .
On behalf of my group , I should like in fact to point out how keen we are to see substantial investment in all communication initiatives concerning the citizens and the media , especially at local level .
Parliament and the Commission must be encouraged in all policies designed to increase support among the citizens for the European project .
( DE ) Mr President , I will focus on Heading 4 , which relates to the EU 's external activities .
In current or former conflict zones such as Georgia , Kosovo , Palestine , Afghanistan or Pakistan , we want to achieve improvements for people , and peaceful and humane development .
As our financial plans have not provided sufficient funds , in 2009 we once again need to obtain additional resources from the Member States for our increased work .
In particular , there must be no cutbacks in our commitments and payments in our immediate neighbourhood : it is important for candidate countries , our east European neighbours , and our partners on the Mediterranean , to see the EU as a reliable partner that they can count on .
Looking at the implementation of the 2008 budget - for example , for Palestine alone - and the number of amending letters , I can already tell that we are going to end up in a similar situation in 2009 .
I would therefore make an appeal to the Presidency of the Council , in relation to the conciliation meeting .
On 21 November , we will , together , be mobilising the flexibility instrument in line with our proposals , which means that , next year , we will not be so easily available for amendments .
As you know , we have elections coming up , so you also do not know who may be sitting before you following the elections .
We have placed additional emphasis on the field of foreign affairs , which I think is a positive move .
We have allocated additional resources so that we can publish European news in Farsi , the language of Iran and Afghanistan .
I believe it is important to disseminate our political viewpoint in these areas , so that the people know what position Europe is taking .
On another issue , I would like to ask the Commission to change their policy .
As you know , there is now a network of political foundations covering five political groupings , and it is unfortunately our experience that these groups are effectively locked out of the implementation of our policies and of support for democracy .
I hope that this situation will change next year .
( ES ) Mr President , we have before us a draft general budget for 2009 which is attempting to reinforce the social and environmental dimension of the European Union as an area of peace and progress .
I must particularly highlight , due to their symbolic value , two parliamentary proposals incorporated during the discussion process .
The first concerns the funding earmarked for European space research , focused on global monitoring of the environment , citizen security and the International Year of Astronomy .
The second is the pilot project on social tourism which will try to find ways of meeting the requirements for new forms of leisure .
We regret that the draft budget does not include a special fund for rehabilitation and reconstruction in countries affected by hurricanes and typhoons in the Caribbean and Asia .
We do not want the current economic and financial crisis moving around the planet to adversely affect the EU budget .
( SK ) I am responsible within the socialist group for financial matters under the heading of ' Other Institutions ' .
From this standpoint , I can state that the process of drawing up the budget and ensuring the efficient use of funding is heading in a positive direction .
Here too , however , there are reservations , for example , over the policy on fixed assets .
Only a longer-term view coupled with planning measures can help us to achieve greater financial savings .
A further reservation concerns the use of studies into the energy consumption of buildings .
The most recent studies into the carbon footprint of the European Parliament mention a carbon dioxide equivalent of 114 000 tonnes a year .
We must adopt a series of measures aimed at reducing emissions by 30 % by 2020 .
The main sources of pollution are heating and electricity in the buildings themselves , as well as the transportation of people between home and the workplace and also between the three main workplaces .
Before the end of the year , I am expecting the Secretary General of the European Parliament to submit an action plan based on a number of studies , so that we can take steps as soon as possible which will lead to financial savings and a cleaner environment .
( FI ) Mr President , first of all I want to thank both rapporteurs for this excellent work , and it is interesting that this term we have been able to find consensus , perhaps even politically , and more so than in former years , even though the elections are forthcoming .
That is excellent .
I would like to raise one matter , which is that the Committee on Budgets has now presented its own budget line for the Baltic Strategy .
That is extremely important .
The Commission is preparing its own Baltic Strategy for next year , but no strategy has any significance unless it also has funding , and funding has to be organised this way .
The issue here is mainly the environment .
The Baltic is almost a dead sea .
In this sense it is a blot on the European landscape .
We have a lot of work to do .
This is about our relations with Russia , energy policy , shipping , the economy : all very important matters , and we can use this budget line to help ensure that these issues will be put right .

( DE ) Mr President , I would like to start by thanking the two rapporteurs : Mr Lewandowski , who has worked with great deliberation and composure to draft Parliament 's budget ; and Mrs Haug , who has worked with great commitment to present us with a very effective strategy for the Commission 's budget .
The broad agreement that we will , I hope , achieve in tomorrow 's vote should send a very clear political message , in particular for the conciliation on 21 November .
It is abundantly clear that , particularly in the current climate , growth , jobs , trans-European networks , lifelong learning , the fight against climate change , European transport networks and the security of external borders must be shaped as we have set out .
In foreign policy , too , a consistent neighbourhood policy and a global development , crisis management and integration concept for the European Union are more vital than ever .
Hence , Commissioner , the question concerning payments .
At the end of the process , the level of payments will be evaluated very differently depending on the category .
You mentioned the issue of the reserves , and I simply note that , apart from that , you have no objections to Parliament 's priorities and focuses .
That is a good sign for the negotiations .
We are delighted that the French Presidency is here today , Mr Jouyet , because the Presidency has not always been present for October 's debate on the budget .
This is evidence of the good cooperation we have begun .
Of course , you had to start off by speaking like a finance minister : everything is far too expensive , everything is far too high .
We are operating here , including with regard to what we are voting on , far below the ceiling of the multiannual financial plan .
Between the lines , though , it has become clear that you are prepared to negotiate , as you have said : with regard to the food aid facility , and , I would stress , not only there but also in the other foreign policy priorities - GASP , Kosovo , Palestine , Afghanistan and Georgia - it is a matter of negotiating , and finding , the optimum combination of instruments .
We are prepared to do so , using all the options open to us under the Interinstitutional Agreement and the budgetary principles .
In this connection , we are looking forward to constructive negotiations .
( PL ) Mr President , Commissioner , 2009 will be a very special period , as it will relate to the proper implementation of investments related to cohesion policy .
It will be the third year in a row based on the n + 3 principle .
This means it will be a period in which we will pin our hopes not so much on signing agreements , but in the complete realisation of very concrete undertakings , which makes any attempt to reduce financing , when it comes to cohesion policy , very dangerous .
I would also like to draw attention to the fact that there are voices in the European Parliament that associate the results of the audit of the European Court of Auditors with budgetary planning and , as a result , some very well-known comments on the dozen or so percent of unqualified expenditure are now impinging upon the budgetary debate .
I hope that neither this House , nor the Commissioner , will accept any associations and allocations to reserves of this nature .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I have already gone on for too long , but , really , this debate was quite fascinating .
I would like to say that we agree on the priorities as they have been expressed by your rapporteurs , and as they have been expressed by Mr Böge , and that it is in fact our wish to cooperate very closely .
I regret that I am unfortunately not speaking as a finance minister , Mr Böge , but , well , in this Presidency , that is how it is , in fact , and I can simply assure this House that we wish to reach an agreement within the scope of this procedure .
I wish to assure you , too , that the Council will demonstrate , within the limits that I mentioned , the constructive attitude that we are in fact aiming for , within the framework of the priorities mentioned - I am addressing the Commission and this House here .
I observed the emphasis that was placed , in particular , on external policy , on communication , and on subjects relating to financial regulation and to the euro .
I noted these various points , as well as the needs of your institution , which have been pointed out , and that we need to single out two elements at the end of this debate .
The first is the discussion on the future of the European budget .
I heard Mrs Guy-Quint and the others , but many of the observations raised need to be debated within the context of the clause for re-examining the financial framework .
It is within this context that the Commission , the European Parliament and the Member States must take a stand and design the future multiannual financial framework .
We had spoken about this with Mr Böge .
Current circumstances have meant that we , as the Presidency , have also focused on other urgent matters .
The second is the issues at stake in the 2009 budgetary procedure .
In this regard , we must work out a realistic and balanced budget and find solutions for financing the food facility - I say this on the record - as this remains an objective that we share .
This is an important political priority for all the Community institutions today and , on this matter , too , we hope to ensure an optimum combination of the various resources .
rapporteur . - ( DE ) Mr President , I am grateful to all those who have taken part in this debate .
To you , Commissioner , I would like to say that I know , as do we all , that the Commission is never particularly happy when the Parliament sets reserves .
We do understand that , because you feel the pinch , but this year we wanted - and we will see this in the vote tomorrow - to lay down conditions for releasing the reserve that you will be in a position to meet quite independently .
These conditions are not a cloud cuckoo land where you have to rely on and badger other people in order to get your money - Parliament has been very reasonable here .
In the great majority of cases , we will be able to release these reserves relatively quickly , by the second reading , because you will have met the conditions we have imposed - I am firmly convinced of this .
Mr Jouyet , I realise that you cannot make us any specific promises here and now , but I assume that you were serious about what you said about both recognising and wanting a climate of cooperation .
Allow me to make one comment regarding your plea to take account of the financial policy context in which we are operating : I think this context is one digit too large .
Our budget runs to just under EUR 130 billion ; together , we have room for manoeuvre of a few hundred million .
We can argue about that here , but it bears absolutely no relation to the larger context to which you referred .
Once again , I am much obliged to all my fellow Members .
We will , I believe , be able to bring a well-prepared debate to pass relatively quickly tomorrow .
Mr President , I would like to use the extra time to speak in support of the many voices of Members of the various political groups regarding the critical situation under Heading 4 of the budgets , which are for funding the European Union 's international ambitions .
I well remember the end of the negotiations on the Financial Perspective well , and the verdict of Parliament was clear - that this part was inadequately funded .
This happens year after year , and every time there are new sticking points in the budget negotiations .
The situation has been the same this year too , when we have huge commitments regarding food aid , Kosovo , Afghanistan , Palestine , which have been mentioned frequently in this House , as well as Georgia , where the question is not just of the country 's orientation , but also of the security of alternative energy supplies , has been raised .
The response must be an agreement to revise the Interinstitutional Agreement rather than patching up edges of the financial rules every year when our backs are to the wall .
I thank everyone who has spoken on the issue of the Parliament 's and other institutions ' budgets .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow , Thursday , 23 October .
Written statements ( Rule 142 )
in writing . - The question is whether the EU has sufficient resources and will create enough funds to adequately implement measures on mitigation , stabilisation and adaptation on emissions .
Generally speaking , the EU budget , in its present format , cannot deal efficiently and effectively with issues related to climate change .
With the exception of a number of initiatives and programs , the EU budget does not have a clear and integrated strategy to address climate change issues .
In this respect , therefore , I am arguing that the creation of a specific " Climate Change Fund " or a dedicated budget line would significantly improve the EU 's capability to effectively address climate change issues from a budgetary and financial perspective .
The main source of funding should be coming from the auctioning of emissions under the European Emissions Trading Scheme .
It is estimated that the scheme would have the potential of generating annually billions of euros in terms of revenue .
This scheme would be dealt with and coordinated by the EU , thus ensuring regional arbitrariness .
Cross border pollution is best managed at supranational level , especially when it comes to allocation of resources and support , which should be based on needs and highest impact , not pre-allocated to countries or regions .
EC-Bosnia Herzegovina Stabilisation and Association Agreement - EC-Bosnia Herzegovina Stabilisation and Association Agreement ( debate )
The next item is the joint debate on
the report by Mrs Pack , on behalf of the Committee on Foreign Affairs , on the proposal for a Council and Commission decision on the conclusion of the Stabilisation and Association Agreement between the European Communities and their Member States , of the one part , and Bosnia and Herzegovina , of the other part - C6 0255 / 2008 - ;
and the Council and Commission Statements - EC-Bosnia and Herzegovina Stabilisation and Association Agreement .
rapporteur . - ( DE ) Mr President , Commissioner , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , ladies and gentlemen , I read recently that Bosnia is a well-meaning state , but a state that is not working .
This country has to live with the Dayton Agreement which , thank God , ended the war in 1995 , but which contains too little for the state as a whole to function and too much for it to perish .
The country has a political class which is as good as useless when it comes to taking responsibility .
Two politicians in the country dominate the political scene and affect each other like interconnecting pipes .
One wants to return to the pre-1999 days ; in other words , he wants the break-up of the two entities .
The other wants to make his entity into a state within a state .
However , the state of Bosnia and Herzegovina can only function if everyone faces the facts and realises that constitutional reform is only possible with the agreement of all three ethnic groups .
Both entities must strengthen the state as a whole .
Therefore , Bosnian politicians themselves all need to set about constitutional reform through the competent institutions , especially parliament , and ensure that they involve civil society in the process .
The Muslim-Croat Federation could set an example .
The unworkable configuration of communities , ten cantons and a federal government was not its fault , but it is a nonsense .
Decision-making levels must be reduced to the absolute minimum and brought as close to the citizens as possible , if the requirements of the Stabilisation and Association Agreement and for accession to the EU are to be met .
Around 167 ministers and all that entails are the biggest drain on the state .
The rivalry between the two aforementioned politicians and their hangers-on is having fatal consequences .
They are setting the ethnic groups against each other in the tried and tested manner by fomenting anxiety and mistrust .
The ethnic divide has become wider rather than narrower .
Instead of going all out to tackle a common energy supply , create a functioning common market , improve the general education system and attract investors to the country with credible policies , party political bickering and boundless mistrust rule current politics .
Does Sarajevo still need the High Representative ?
He has not used his wide powers for a long time .
No one any longer fears his command , even if it were to come ; we can therefore ask ourselves if there is any reason why the EU Special Representative should not take over his position and take care of the EU conditions , so that Bosnian politics can finally start on the most important reforms needed to push the country forward .
The politicians could not be more inactive than they are now , even after his departure .
It only remains to hope that perhaps then they will wake up and take their fate into their own hands .
The EU has been trying for years , with funding and know-how , to release the country from its agony , but the results are not overwhelming .
The people who want to return are unable to do so and , as a result , the ethnic divide is becoming more and more entrenched .
Obscure privatisations and corruption , the lack of freedom of the press in parts of the country , the intimidation of NGOs : all this is making people lose heart and turn their back on the country .
The endless discussion about political reform ruled the political scene for over three years , until agreement was reached on a highly insubstantial bill .
Nonetheless , the EU clutched at this straw and signed the agreement , so that other important political projects in the country could finally be pushed ahead .
We here in Parliament also support this step and are waiting for the politicians to take advantage of this opportunity .
I should like to emphasise once again that only the overall state of Bosnia and Herzegovina can become a member of the EU .
Anyone who undermines its ability to function does not want to achieve this objective , whatever they may say .
I can therefore only appeal to all members of parliament in the region to come to their senses once and for all and predicate their policies on the welfare of their citizens .

Mr President , Commissioner , dear Mr Rehn , Mrs Pack , ladies and gentlemen , I should like to begin by thanking Mrs Pack very much for the quality of her report and for what she just said , as it will allow me to be more brief with regard to this difficult subject .
As you know , the Council sets great store by the European perspective on the countries of the Western Balkans , as I can confirm today .
This movement in favour of the European integration of the Balkans was moreover launched on the initiative of the French Presidency , which remains very supportive of this objective .
The movement was launched in 2000 when the European Union , for the first time , gathered together all of these countries at the Zagreb Summit and recognised their aspiration to join the Union .
Each of the Balkan countries has such a perspective today , which guarantees the stability of the region and the development , both political and economic , of each of the countries .
Moreover , this perspective has meaning , and particular meaning with regard to Bosnia and Herzegovina , which is the country of the region that - need I remind you ? - has suffered the most from the conflicts resulting from the break-up of the former Yugoslavia .
However , today - as you pointed out , Mrs Pack - this country is at a crossroads between adopting the European perspective that will take it as far as accession to the European Union and withdrawing into itself , on the basis of backward-looking nationalist rhetoric .
It follows that the remarkable progress made during the first quarter of 2008 has enabled the Union to take the historic decision to sign this Stabilisation and Association Agreement with Bosnia and Herzegovina .
This was the sign that , with will and determination , this country 's politicians were capable of reaching a consensus and of undertaking the necessary reforms .
It is this determination that the Council wished to recognise by signing this agreement in June , once the four conditions had been met .
I shall remind you of these four conditions : good overall cooperation with the International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia ; the reform of public broadcasting ; the improvement of public administration ; and the launch of a police reform .
The signing of the agreement and the interim agreement , in Luxembourg , on 16 June , was a particularly important stage in the relations between the Union and Bosnia and Herzegovina .
This should give fresh impetus to the country 's efforts to join the European Union .
It is impetus that should be capitalised on without delay .
I would remind you that the interim agreement came into force on 1 July .
This is a first step , but I would say that it is not the end of the beginning !
Much remains to be done .
This is what we and Commissioner Rehn , who is present in this House , said to the country 's officials when we met them on the fringe of the United Nations General Assembly and during the meeting of the Troika .
In key areas of the agreement and of the European partnership , we need not only to consolidate the progress made but also , as you emphasised , Mrs Pack , to accelerate the reforms .
It is extremely important that the momentum of the reforms concerning the rule of law , on compliance with democratic rules and on matters relating to the reform of the police , as well , be much stronger than it is today .
Let it not be said to us that there are problems concerning a split between the politicians and the public in Bosnia and Herzegovina , because all the surveys show that the European aspirations of Bosnia and Herzegovina 's population are extremely strong .
Over 80 % of this population genuinely want to join the European Union !
What is it that is stopping Bosnia and Herzegovina 's politicians from responding to the legitimate aspirations of the country 's people ?
For our part , within the context of the Union , we are doing what we can to support this country economically and financially , to help it to advance , to help it to progress on the road to security , and to help it to progress on the road to modernising the police force with the police missions we have put in place , together with the military missions .
The experience of the last accessions - and I shall conclude here - shows that the efforts made in relation to the European agenda do pay off .
I would like the political leaders of Bosnia and Herzegovina to understand the following : the Stabilisation and Association Agreement provides a solid foundation and a lever for a profound commitment from this country .
We will not give up helping them , but we have accomplished what it was our responsibility to accomplish .
It is up to the politicians of that country to really understand what its commitments are and to fulfil them , in order to guarantee that which is the only possible route to take , namely an unbreakable commitment to closer links with the European Union .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , I would firstly like to thank Doris Pack for her excellent report .
I welcome the opportunity to discuss Bosnia and Herzegovina with you today at a very crucial moment for the country and its European aspirations .
The signature of the Stabilisation and Association Agreement ( SAA ) last June was a significant step forward for Bosnia and Herzegovina .
Together with the start of the visa dialogue , it gave a clear signal to the people of that country that their future lies in the European Union .
The EU was able to initial the SAA last December and sign it in June because the country 's political leaders pulled together and reached consensus on the main conditions , particularly on police reform .
This proves that progress can be achieved and crises overcome when the political will exists , as Mr Jouyet rightly pointed out .
However , this consensus has since collapsed and reforms have been halted .
Nationalist rhetoric ahead of the local elections in October was one factor in this deterioration .
Yet the country 's political problems run much deeper than that .
The lack of a common vision among the country 's leaders about its future and the absence of consensus on EU reforms seriously harm its European prospects .
There is also open disagreement on most political questions , while there is no sense of urgency or responsibility to overcome this political stalemate .
I expressed my serious concern to the Presidency of the country during my visit to Sarajevo a few days ago .
I underlined that Bosnia and Herzegovina now needs to put EU-related reforms at the top of its political agenda and address the priorities of the European partnership , including state- and institution-building .
Your resolution sends a strong signal to the leaders of Bosnia and Herzegovina to get on with the reforms and to get their country back on the road to Europe .
Likewise , Bosnia and Herzegovina must be able to speak with one voice to advance in European integration .
Another litmus test of the country 's ability to deliver on EU integration is the census .
From an EU perspective - as we all know - census data are vital for social and economic planning and development and for most Community policies .
The Commission will offer its assessment on the situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina in the Progress Report on 5 November .
Like you , we shall also point out the fact that the leaders of Bosnia and Herzegovina can either continue to quarrel and fall behind their neighbours , or get on with reform and move forward towards the EU .
Your resolution underlines that closing down the Office of the High Representative ( OHR ) and strengthening the role of the European Union should remain our ultimate objective .
I agree .
The future of the OHR is a matter for the Peace Implementation Council to decide , but it is clearly in the interest of Bosnia and Herzegovina to reach a point where the OHR will no longer be needed , thus paving the way for a stronger EU presence and for realising the EU perspective of the country .
In other words , as we move into the next phase of our relations , Bosnia and Herzegovina itself must assume full ownership of the reform process that underpins its EU perspective .
The signature of the SAA this summer provided an opportunity that should not be wasted .
The challenge for Bosnia and Herzegovina 's leaders is to achieve a degree of political consensus such as has delivered progress on EU integration elsewhere in the Western Balkans region .
They have done it before so they can do it again .
I hope our messages will now be heard .
Mr President , in June of this year , Bosnia and Herzegovina signed a stabilisation and association agreement with the EU .
The country thus took a substantial step forward on its way towards membership of the EU , but the work is very far from complete .
The EU 's commitment cannot and should not decrease in the belief that everything will now arrange itself automatically .
A whole series of challenges remains .
The constitutional reform has not been implemented .
The issue of state property in the Brčko district is still unresolved .
There are clearly widely different views , both in Bosnia itself and within the international community , as to when and how the High Representative 's office should be closed .
I firmly believe that the closure of this office cannot be an objective in itself .
Rather , the objective should be that the requirements and conditions imposed on Bosnia by the Council for Peace Implementation should be fulfilled so that it is possible to transform the High Representative 's office into the office of the EU 's special representative .
In this connection , as in connection with the range of other challenges faced by Bosnia , it is very important that the international community should stand united .
To believe that the local parties in Bosnia itself will be able to agree on , for example , constitutional reforms , is naïve and , I would say , downright dangerous .
The new constitution needs to lead to a strong and common state if the country is to be able to continue to draw closer to the EU .
The political dialogue in Bosnia does not , however , indicate any interest in achieving this .
It is just as dangerous to believe that the commitment of the international community can decrease now that Bosnia has made a certain amount of progress and that the international military presence is continually being reduced .
On the contrary , it is now that the EU itself is assuming yet more responsibility .
Certain measures , such as making it easier for people to travel and study abroad , together with help in developing democracy and implementing the necessary reforms , are just a couple of examples of areas in which the EU can and should become more active .
Our commitment and the way in which we handle the situation in Bosnia over the next few months and years will be decisive , not only for the future and security of Bosnia but also for the future and security of the region as a whole .
The Stabilisation and Association Agreement is the first comprehensive international agreement between Bosnia and Herzegovina and the European Union .
The agreement should facilitate and speed up Bosnia and Herzegovina 's transition to a fully functional legal state and also to a fully functioning economy .
The fulfilment of this agreement will put in place the essential preconditions for Bosnia and Herzegovina 's full membership of the EU in future .
The speed with which this agreement comes into effect , however , will depend mainly on the common desire and willingness of the citizens of Bosnia and Herzegovina and their political leaders .
The agreement has been signed with Bosnia and Herzegovina as a whole and not with its separate entities .
If Bosnia and Herzegovina is to become a member of the European Union one day , it is in the interests of both entities and of all three groups to work together to create a united and properly-functioning state .
The combined forces of Bosnians , Serbs and Croats , through their main political parties , should therefore aim to strengthen the administration of the country at all levels .
One important part of this process is the question of future institutional arrangements .
The international community , including representatives of the EU , can offer a helping hand here .
Any institutional arrangements must , however , be the result of a voluntary agreement between the citizens of Bosnia and Herzegovina themselves .
In my view , it is also important for the association process to take account of the country 's economic performance .
Here , too , there is a need for cooperation between both entities in order to create a common internal market for the whole of Bosnia and Herzegovina .
It is an inconceivable situation for a country to be applying for membership of the common European market whilst its own market remains fragmented .
I would like to end by expressing my appreciation for the report of Doris Pack and by calling on the Member States of the EU to ratify this agreement quickly .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - ( NL ) Mr President , Commissioner , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , tomorrow , we will be voting on the resolution on the Stabilisation and Association Agreement between the EU and Bosnia and Herzegovina .
While my group endorses the agreement , we do want it to be used to ensure that that country will reform and modernise in a number of crucial areas .
Bosnia is not ready for EU membership , not by a long shot .
In terms of form of government and jurisdiction , a great deal needs to be done in Bosnia .
Also , more attention should be devoted to tracing and trying war criminals , and the fight against corruption and international crime .
More than anything , as has been said a number of times here , what really needs to be tackled is the internal structures , bureaucracy and internal cooperation .
I have to confess that , on my recent visit to Sarajevo , I was absolutely shocked at the lack of responsibility on the part of the politicians in that country .
The Commissioner touched upon this earlier , and Mrs Pack devoted much attention to this aspect in her fine report .
One is left with the impression that all the problems besetting that country are caused by the outside world and that therefore , all the solutions should come from the outside world .
It is as if the internal ping-pong game that is being played there at different levels and in different dimensions is the fault of the outside world and that we should therefore solve it .
This is not how it works , though .
It is not only in our interest to get things back on track in Bosnia and for Bosnia to meet us halfway in its European fate , it is also in Bosnia 's interest .
What I did find positive , and I should like to make a point of saying this , is the efforts on the part of all kinds of entrepreneurs , companies large and small , who try to get something off the ground economically over there - even though this is being made very hard for them due to a lack of an internal market - NGOs that pull out all the stops and do good , and particularly Europe 's contribution in that country : the European troops over there , the High Representative and , not least , the Commission 's work there .
I think the Commission is doing a fine job there and it makes me proud to be European .
on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , first my thanks to the rapporteur for the usual excellent cooperation .
This resolution should send a strong signal to our partners in Bosnia and Herzegovina , a clear cross-party ' yes ' to the continuing EU integration process , a clear recognition of the progress made , but a clear ' no ' to further nationalistic or even separatist trends with which officials defend their position and under which the people suffer .
For many years , serious return programmes have only been agreed on paper .
The actual and political will to implement them in practice is rather under-developed .
The right to and the possibility of return , reconciliation projects and the prosecution of war crimes at all levels are the basic precondition to the hoped-for peaceful , democratic development of the rule of law in this part of Europe .
The deciding basis is the replacement of the Dayton Agreement by a constitution passed by democratically elected members of parliament in Bosnia and Herzegovina , with the involvement of civil society , not hatched between party leaders .
I have a request to make of the Commission : leave the well-trodden path and be as flexible as possible , so that EU funds can be used more efficiently and in a more targeted manner .
Allow me to make one more final appeal to the Member States : ratify the Stabilisation and Association Agreement as quickly as possible , in order to prove your reliability .
Mr President , it is our duty to speed up Bosnia and Herzegovina 's accession to the European Union .
The European Union should feel some guilt and take some of the blame for keeping quiet , taking shameful or inadequate action , or failing to act at all when , in the 1990s , blood was shed in the Balkans , including Bosnia and Herzegovina , and thousands of people lost their lives .
That is why today we need to help Bosnia and Herzegovina , and make its march towards the Union easier , knowing at the same time that the road to Brussels is an uphill one that is not economically or nationally straightforward .
We should not discourage Sarajevo but , at the same time , we should keep an eye on the authorities there .
Let us show the green light to the Bosnian vehicle .
Let us hope that Bosnia does not have an accident along the way , and that we as a Union will not have to impose penalty points on it , and let us not prejudge whether the vehicle that reaches Brussels will be the same one that set out .
Let us give the peoples living there the right to decide their own future .
on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group . - ( NL ) Mr President , 16 years after the collapse of Yugoslavia , Bosnia and Herzegovina is still a protectorate with a foreign supervisor and foreign military presence .
There is no agreement among the three peoples and their main political parties about the future government structure .
Every effort by the European Union to impose a structure of this kind has failed and will do so in future .
Serbs , Croats and Bosnians will have to find their own way .
Anyone who wishes to keep this pocked-sized Yugoslavia together will need federal or confederal solutions in which all three peoples are equivalent and carry their own responsibility for government and for their areas .
My group supports the association agreement which , in our view , should have been approved much sooner and without the requirement for administrative reform .
In the Committee on Foreign Affairs , my group has submitted amendments to look for long-term solutions that are carried by each administrative unit and for protection of the domestic economy .
This will ensure a quick withdrawal of the European Union from every domestic area .
A majority rejected these solutions and wishes to stay in Bosnia .
This means , unfortunately , that my group is unable to endorse the final outcome of the Pack report .
on behalf of the IND / DEM Group . - ( NL ) Mr President , allow me to start with a general comment .
The two Dutch parties that I represent are very much in favour of a European prospect for Bosnia and Herzegovina .
I have two questions for the Council and Commission .
Last Saturday , an article appeared in the Dutch press with an alarming headline : ' Bosnia about to explode ' .
The article was an interview with an insider , a real authority on the Bosnian situation .
I would ask the Council and Commission if they agree with this alarm signal that Bosnia is actually about to explode , also on account of the widespread possession of arms in that country .
The second point I wish to make is even more serious , to my mind .
I have , for some time , been reading up on the phenomenon of Salafism and Muslim radicalism in Bosnia and Herzegovina , supported by scientific research , including in my own country .
I would ask the Council and Commission how they view Bosnia as a refuge and operating base for radical Muslims in the Balkans and in Europe .
Experts claim that the European institutions simply disregard this serious problem .
Caution is therefore called for .
What I would like to know from you is how you view this problem .
This is , after all , quite serious : Bosnia is about to join and with these radical Muslims ...
Internally , externally , also active in EU Member States , including Austria , the Netherlands , Scandinavia - we should not go over this lightly .
I would appreciate your reaction to this .
( NL ) Mr President , I believe that we should exercise extreme caution and should reconsider whether it is wise to offer Bosnia and Herzegovina the prospect of EU membership .
It was pointed out a moment ago that many of the conditions have yet to be met .
Even though it is self-evident , I should like to mention the problem of the growth of Islamic fundamentalism in Bosnia .
It is becoming more and more apparent that the Salafist networks are being developed with financial and logistical support from Saudi Arabia .
Not only do these networks form a threat to peace in the country itself , they also put the safety of the whole of Europe in the balance .
I would therefore like to endorse the questions raised by Mr Belder .
Could the Council and Commission respond to the measures that are being taken to prevent the problem of possible terrorist networks from spreading to the European Union ?
( DE ) Mr President , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , Commissioner , the conclusion of the Association Agreement is , without doubt , a good thing for both sides - for the European Union and for Bosnia and Herzegovina - but only under certain conditions ; namely if it is ratified quickly and , most importantly , if the implementation of reforms - especially of the administration in Bosnia and Herzegovina and of the political decision-making processes - takes hold quickly .
We all know that the Dayton Agreement has , on the one hand , brought peace ; on the other hand , however , it has created a very complicated structure with various governments and parliaments and has again taken account of ethnicity .
In other words , you have another ten cantons and need about 13 home secretaries to pass an asylum law in this country .
The political process would probably take some beating in terms of complexity .
These difficulties became apparent during the reform of the police .
It took years to remove the barriers and get to the point of implementing these police reforms as one of the preconditions .
For me this means that Bosnia and Herzegovina must develop the will to cooperate over and above the limits which have applied to date and implement reforms themselves at all levels .
Following the police reform , we now have the opportunity in Bosnia and Herzegovina to take real precautions in relation to border protection , to decide on a visa regulation and to coordinate the fight against organised crime and drug and people trafficking better than before .
Security and stability are vital if the citizens are to put their trust in the state of Bosnia and Herzegovina .
That is why , for me , Bosnia and Herzegovina need to overcome the internal barriers that still exist .
The European Union has shown with the Association Agreement that it was and is prepared to help , but the real progress must come from the country itself .
( DE ) Mr President , firstly I should like to offer my hearty thanks to Mrs Doris Pack for her report and , most of all , for her commitment .
I should also like to reject the charges made by some Members that Bosnia and Herzegovina are to be seen solely from the point of view of alleged or actual Islamic terrorist networks .
That is absolutely unfair and it is also telling that our fellow Member who then asked the Commission what can be done about this has already left the Chamber .
That is how seriously this problem is being taken .
Commissar Rehn has also said that 2009 could be a decisive year for the Balkans .
Macedonia will hopefully begin to negotiate , Croatia will hopefully close negotiations , Montenegro , Serbia and , possibly , even Albania , will achieve candidate status .
Then one asks oneself , what will become of Bosnia and Herzegovina ?
It would truly be a shame for the many committed people in this country if it were given no opportunity to take a leap forward here .
I would like to underscore what Mrs Pack said : the ability of the country to function must be established .
As some honourable members have already said , the country must not be taken hostage by either Mr Dodik or Mr Silajdžić or anyone else .
The starting point , including as far as the entities are concerned , must be the status quo , but reforms must be implemented .
The preconditions must be created for the country to be able to join the European Union , whereby it goes without saying that only the whole country can join the European Union .
As far as the High Representative is concerned , I can only agree with what has already been said .
It is not a question of the country no longer needing someone who effectively sees to the country 's preparations for accession , but this duty can probably no longer be performed by the High Representative , who should be replaced by the European Special Representative .
This is a task for the European Union , which must perform it with the support of this Parliament - specifically of Doris Pack and others who will continue to dedicate themselves to this country .
We shall soon see that this country too has the possibility of joining the European Union .
( SL ) The return of refugees is a matter of crucial importance for all the countries of the Western Balkans , so I offer my sincere support to the amendments proposed by the rapporteur and by Anna Ibrisagic regarding the return of refugees to the Posavina region .
This also applies to the return of refugees from all communities to all other areas of Bosnia and Herzegovina .
If our appeals and our efforts are to meet with success , we also require additional measures and , in particular , investment in job creation .
Too many times , refugees and IDPs return temporarily with only one aim : to sell their property and go elsewhere .
They leave also because they do not have adequate health protection or pensions and the political conditions are tense in their place of return .
They also leave because of the delay in depoliticising and reforming the police and the lack of general security .
Those responsible for war crimes must be removed and barred from working in the police .
Hence , the ALDE initiative to declare 11 July an international day of remembrance for the victims of genocide from Srebrenica .
The draft text was delivered last week by the President of the Mothers of Enclaves of Srebrenica and the Žepa Association .
This is something we really need for their relief .
( DA ) Mr President , Commissioner , Mr Jouyet , I see Bosnia 's future in Europe .
The creation of peace and stability in this country must , and shall , succeed where centuries of its history have combined to achieve this .
However , there is a long way to go .
Often , a good place to start is , however , with practical improvements and cooperation in connection with solutions to quite general and practical everyday problems such as trade , the structure of the police force , the energy supply and , in particular , allowing the many internally displaced people to have a home again .
It is therefore important to invest in young people .
They must be given a belief in a future in this country .
Good educational opportunities must be ensured , including opportunities for practical and educational placements , both in existing EU Member States and in neighbouring countries .
I believe that it is essential that young people in the Western Balkans see themselves as Europeans , because it is in a European context that the solution to the future of the area lies .
From the EU 's point of view , we must be prepared to encourage this process and reiterate that the perspective from which this must be viewed is membership of the European Union .
The Stabilisation and Association Agreement is a tool to be used along the way .
However , Bosnia 's population and politicians must be active and positive , fellow players if our common hope and vision are to succeed .
( DE ) Mr President , I should like to join in the thanks which numerous Members have already quite rightly extended to the rapporteur , Doris Pack .
In her , we have someone who is hopefully not wasting her time and effort and who truly is investing a great deal of time and effort in this area .
I rejoice with her and with those who have also said that there has been some progress , including in the area of police cooperation .
That is important if actual life on the ground is to be able to run along reasonable lines .
Nevertheless , I believe that we must keep pointing out to our counterparts in Bosnia and Herzegovina that they personally and their side still needs to do a great deal , even more than is already being done in numerous areas .
Internal cooperation and a willingness to enter into internal cooperation between the ethnic groups is something which we must permanently demand .
We do not want everyone trying to go their own way .
Involvement in regional cooperation in the Western Balkans is also important .
( FR ) Mr President , they all lived in one of the most cosmopolitan cities in Europe , Sarajevo .
Sarajevo was , at that time , the symbol of an open Bosnia , populated by Muslims , Serbs and Croats .
Meanwhile , nationalism struck blindly , massacring men and women , and indiscriminately destroying cultural symbols such as the library - the so very rich library - of Sarajevo , a victim of the folly of mankind .
That was a very long time ago - 16 years .
If I take the liberty of recalling these tragic events , it is in order to assess the progress made , it is to put into perspective this long road towards the Stabilisation and Association Agreement .
Everyone should therefore be delighted with this situation .
True , 2 500 Eurofor soldiers remain in that country .
True , in a country still guided by the fear of political domination by another community , the result of the municipal elections of 5 October is yet another reflection of the domination of the nationalist parties .
However , this afternoon 's gesture reflects , on the part of the European Parliament , a sense of confidence and a future in the easing of tensions , a rediscovered cultural diversity , and a willingness to accept the peoples representing such cultural diversity .
It is this message of hope that we must remember today , since let us never forget the words spoken by President Mitterrand in this House : ' nationalism is war ' .
( FR ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I welcome the signing of this agreement , as it is going to contribute to the political and economic stability , not just of this particular country , but of the Balkans as a whole .
Bosnia and Herzegovina has overcome an atrocious interethnic war , while Bulgaria has been cited as an example in the Balkans of the wisdom shown by its civil society , wisdom that has made reconciliation possible .
The role of education is not insignificant .
It is necessary , therefore , for the Bosnian authorities to focus on the teaching of peace .
Moreover , they must promote intercultural and interfaith dialogue , to prevent conflicts between refugees , people who are returning to their own country and the local population .
The unemployment rate must be reduced by means of more importance being attached to training programmes and the brain drain among young people being reversed .
Regional cooperation is extremely important when it comes to integrating the State into European structures .
Improving the infrastructure must be a priority .
I believe that the establishment of a free trade area may be beneficial and may prepare the country with regard to adopting European standards .
( LT ) Recently I spent some time in Kosovo and I would like to draw your attention to the parallels between the situation in that country and those in Bosnia and Herzegovina .
As we know , the European Union and the majority of Member States recognised Kosovo 's independence , but the situation in that country is especially difficult , particularly in the northern part .
Parallel structures have emerged there and conditions do not allow the forces of law and order to operate .
There is increasing talk of the possible division of Kosovo .
I would like to ask both the Minister and the Commissioner : does such a situation in Kosovo not echo the situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina ?
If we failed to glue together the fractured state model in Bosnia and Herzegovina , what is the European Union prepared to do in such a case ?
( DE ) Mr President , I should like to take this opportunity to ask Commissioner Rehn another question .
Could you please advise us of the state of funding for demilitarisation and disarmament and for ensuring that surplus arms are legally destroyed ?
Mr President , dear Mr McMillan-Scott , Commissioner Rehn , ladies and gentlemen , many thanks for this rich and interesting debate .
I should like once again to thank Mrs Pack , who has shown herself to be very active , who has a very sound knowledge of the region , who is also very present on the ground , who has listened the most to what the local leaders have to say - we therefore need her cooperation - and who is involved in bringing about a rapprochement with the European Union , but without any concessions being made in terms of values .
Like her , the Council is concerned - as I said before - about the political situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina as it has been described by several speakers .
This country - as you emphasised - is at a crossroads and caught up in controversy with regard to relations between the central State and the bodies and with regard to the path that will lead to the European Union , as I said .
Its leaders must assume their full responsibilities regarding the country 's development and must ensure in this way that the stabilisation of the entire region is consolidated .
For all that , I shall respond to the question put to me , and the answer is that the security situation remains calm .
Neither the independence of Kosovo nor the arrest of Mr Karadzic has caused unrest in the country .
The deadline for the municipal elections of 5 October having lapsed , the European Union must henceforth apply pressure so that Bosnia and Herzegovina focuses on its European agenda .
Mr Swoboda was entirely correct in his response concerning the superficial comparisons made between terrorist fears and the multiethnic character of Bosnia and Herzegovina .
The latter is precisely what makes this country rich and what could be its contribution to the European Union .
Looking to the future , we shall be careful to prevent any suggestion that the European Union has abandoned Bosnia and Herzegovina .
I should like to reassure Mr Czarnecki on this point : the European Union must give its verdict on the future of the Office of the High Representative , in the knowledge that we desire neither the premature closure without conditions nor the artificial extension of this Office .
On the subject of the future of the EUFOR-Althea military operation , we cannot extend it indefinitely .
The Union will have to re-engineer this operation , and the foreign affairs ministers will have to debate it at the Council of 10 November .
To conclude , and to respond to several speakers , I would say that the Bosnia and Herzegovina situation needs to be placed within a regional framework .
Our objective is to enable the entire region to progress towards a rapprochement with the European Union . A number of positive developments must be highlighted in this regard .
The fact that Croatia has entered into an active phase of negotiations is a good thing .
The fact that , in Serbia , we have for the first time a government that is committed to forming closer links with the European Union and that , with the arrest of Mr Karadzic , has pledged its commitment , is an entirely positive element and one that must be commended .
The Bosnian leaders must take care not to stay on the sidelines of this development , by thinking only of settling scores inherited from past wars .
Like Mr McMillan-Scott , I too heard the speech made by François Mitterrand in this House .
I , too , remember his words , but it is important in fact to go beyond these conflicts , in the name of the same principles as those that were emphasised by President Mitterrand at the time .
To conclude , the aim of the reforms requested by the European Union is not only to enable this country to form closer links with the European Union but , above all , to ensure that its entire population benefits from the progress that we are trying to encourage .
I agree entirely with Mr Maaten .
It is clear that we can be proud of being Europeans , proud of what the Commission and the other institutions are doing to help Bosnia and Herzegovina on the only route with any substance , that is to say the route to rapprochement , in line with the values , with the European Union !
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , firstly I would like to thank you for a very substantive and responsible debate on the political situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina .
I also want to thank you for your broad and strong support for the conclusion of the Stabilisation and Association Agreement with the country .
It is indeed essential for the economic development and political stability of Bosnia and Herzegovina , as well as for its European objectives .
There were two issues in particular which came up in the debate today that I would like to comment further on .
The first is the rule of law and its importance in underpinning the whole society and the economy .
The rule of law and legal certainty are the cornerstones of the European model .
This is , unfortunately , another Achilles heel of Bosnia and Herzegovina today .
Despite some progress which we recognise , organised crime and corruption remain a serious concern in the country and it should address these challenges as a matter of urgency .
Secondly , on constitutional reform , we all know that it is both necessary and delicate .
From the Commission side , I can say that we envisage constitutional evolution rather than revolution , which can be done and should be done in respect of the Dayton-Paris Peace Agreement .
The Commission does not have a blueprint for a certain kind of constitutional reform in Bosnia and Herzegovina but , at the same time , we are certainly stakeholders as the European Union .
We are all stakeholders in this constitutional reform in the sense that it is absolutely essential that Bosnia and Herzegovina be able to speak with one voice as a future Member State , as a candidate country , with the European Union and in the European Union , and that the country needs to have an effective and functional state structure , institutional structure , which is capable of implementing and enforcing European laws and rules throughout the country .
This is what its citizens want and what they deserve .
It is up to the political leaders and citizens of the country to decide what kind of constitution they want , but I can assure you that the Commission is willing to assist a constitutional reform with both legal and constitutional expertise and with financial assistance .
In a nutshell , Bosnia and Herzegovina today needs urgently to overcome the current political stalemate , to move seriously towards the European Union .
We cannot do this for them , but we can make the point to the citizens and leaders of the country that we want and expect them to succeed and we support them in this interval .
The Commission , and I , will therefore continue to work with the presidency , with Javier Solana , with the European Parliament and all other partners and stakeholders to reinforce our engagement so that next year , 2009 , could still , after all , be a year for the Western Balkans , and also a year for Bosnia and Herzegovina to make progress towards the European Union .
rapporteur . - ( DE ) Mr President , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , Commissioner , I should like to say to our fellow Member , who is no longer here , and perhaps also to Mr Belder , that we should be cautious here : we should not localise the terrorist threat to Bosnia and Herzegovina .
One can also go over the top , but this exaggeration only plays into the hands of the extremists and nationalists .
I remember that it was precisely this sort of exaggeration that Mr Milosevic took in the same direction as he took everything else .
We need to bear that in mind .
The path to the EU requires , among other things , a decisive fight against corruption , against organised crime , for transparency during privatisation and the creation of a common market , including an energy market .
Only politicians who really want this and act accordingly deserve the trust of their citizens and the trust of the European Union .
We should give the others a red card now and then .
That is the only thing they understand there .
I sometimes see with horror that Bosnia and Herzegovina are choosing , at the crossroads described by Commissioner Rehn , to take the path towards isolation .
The countries neighbouring Bosnia and Herzegovina - as Hannes Swoboda said - will most probably reach the target more quickly , which is why it is our job to keep helping Bosnia and Herzegovina to find the right path and to then join the European Union once the conditions have been met .
The stability of Bosnia and Herzegovina , which lies in the middle of the European Union , is also our stability .
I sometimes wish that the politicians in Bosnia and Herzegovina had as many sleepless nights as I do when they think of their country .
Perhaps then they would do a better job .
I have received one motion for a resolution tabled in accordance with Rule 103 ( 2 ) of the Rules of Procedure .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place on Thursday 23 October 2008 .
Written statements ( Rule 142 )
I would first of all like to congratulate Mrs Pack for her efforts in carrying out the far from easy task of producing this draft resolution .
The Stabilisation and Association Agreement between the European Communities and their Member States , of the one part , and Bosnia and Herzegovina , of the other part , demonstrates the EU 's determination to continue to play an important role in the Balkan region , contributing to the region 's political , economic and social stability .
This agreement offers Bosnia and Herzegovina a new prospect for economic development and especially , new opportunities for European integration , providing the region not only with stability but also opening up economic exchanges , marking a major step towards integration in the European market .
in writing . - I welcome the recent signing of the Stabilisation and Association Agreement with Bosnia and Herzegovina .
EU enlargement to the Western Balkans is another crucial step in uniting Europe and ensuring that past escalations of violence will not be repeated in the region .
Therefore , I also urge the authorities of Bosnia and Herzegovina to pursue the reforms in a consistent and transparent way to ensure fast integration with the EU .
I note with concern attempts by some regional politicians to destabilise the country , and call upon the EU to demonstrate its political will and commitment towards Bosnia and Herzegovina to prevent any conflicts based on ethnicity or religion .
Considering that obtaining a visa for the EU still poses a great problem for the citizens of Bosnia and Herzegovina , I call upon the Commission to continue with the dialogue and to do its utmost to implement the road maps with the objective of establishing a visa-free regime with Bosnia and Herzegovina as soon as possible .
I suggest that the Member States reduce the bureaucratic obstacles to a minimum when applying for a visa and set up a simplified system for granting visas to students and to civil society actors .
When you mention Bosnia , you are actually talking about another page in the history of the long-suffering Balkan peninsula .
The war in Bosnia destroyed more than 75 % of the country , caused the death of more than 200 000 people and resulted in 1.8 million refugees .
The signing of the Association and Stabilisation Agreement with the EU has taken place 13 years after the end of the war .
' The agreement offers an open door to a prosperous future for the citizens of Bosnia and Herzegovina while , at the same time , it calls on Bosnian politicians to leave the past behind them and move on , ' stated Sven Alkalaj , the country 's foreign minister , at one time .
They certainly have something to move on for .
Just think of Sarajevo , the one-time host of the 1984 Winter Olympic Games , the old Mostar Bridge , included on UNESCO 's World Heritage List , the Kravica waterfalls , Sutjesk National Park or the mountains of Jahorina and Bjeslanica , where some of the Olympic competitions took place - so many places inviting you to travel to Bosnia and Herzegovina .
This is a country , however , which needs , inter alia , to speed up its reform of the state and non-discriminatory access .
Question Time ( Commission )
The next item is Question Time ( B6-0475 / 2008 ) .
The following questions are addressed to the Commission .
Part I
Subject : Anti-drugs strategy
The implementation of the strategic anti-drugs campaign is grounded in two action plans , for two distinct periods , i.e. 2005-2008 and 2009-2012 .
Also foreseen is an ' impact assessment ' in 2008 , to precede the action plan for 2009-2012 , on the basis of a clear timetable .
The current state of affairs regarding drugs in the EU is disturbing , and the specific means chosen to fight the problem need to be extremely rigorous , firm , persistent and consistent .
What is the Commission 's diagnosis , on the basis of the reports for 2005 , 2006 and 2007 , of the current situation , and what has been the level of execution of actions between 2005 and the present ?
What is the state of play as regards the impact assessment which is to be concluded in 2008 ?
What is the Commission 's forecast for the period 2009-2013 , especially concerning new instruments for combat and cooperation in police and legal terms , and also the participation of civil society ?
Vice-President of the Commission . - Madam President , it is clear that nobody can be complacent about the issue of drugs .
The Commission adopted on 18 September 2008 a proposal for a European Union Drugs Action Plan 2009-2012 , and a report on the final evaluation of the EU Drugs Action Plan 2005-2008 was annexed .
This is the impact assessment which was mentioned in the question .
Both documents were made available to Parliament on that date .
The evaluation was conducted by the European Commission in the first half of 2008 in line with Action 45.3 of the subsequent Action Plan .
The evaluation provided important input for the new Action Plan .
Findings include the following :
Regarding the implementation of the new EU Drugs Action Plan , the conclusion can be drawn that progress has been made on nearly all specific objectives and actions with varying degrees of success .
The EU Drugs Action Plan is adequately reflected in the national policies of the Member States and has been translated into national policy and / or these objectives were already reflected in existing documents .
Member States report that the Action Plan reflects the main policy fields at national level .
The evaluation shows that the Action Plan supports a process of convergence between Member States ' drug policies , which the Commission considers quite important .
Regarding the drug situation , there has not been a significant reduction in the prevalence of drug use but the use of some of the most prevalent drugs seems to have stabilised and / or fallen slightly .
The use of cocaine is showing an upward trend in some Member States .
The long-term EU trend in the prevalence of drug-related infectious diseases , especially HIV and AIDS infections , is that these have been reduced in recent years , as have drug-related deaths .
New trends in drug use , especially poly-drug use , have emerged in recent years .
The numbers and size of cocaine seizures are rising while for herbal cannabis , heroin , ecstasy and amphetamines , seizures appear to be stabilising .
Prices for illicit substances in general have fallen , while purity levels seem to be fairly stable .
Regarding the impact of the Action Plan on the drug situation , the impact assessment to which the honourable Member refers is , I presume , the evaluation report regarding implementation .
The on-going reduction in drug-related infectious diseases and drug-related deaths , on the one hand , and the EU-wide implementation of harm-reduction measures , on the other , suggest a clear correlation with the Action Plans , even though such a link is notoriously hard to prove beyond any reasonable doubt .
Some Member States have achieved dramatic reductions in drug-related health harm after the introduction of harm-reduction measures .
Similar conclusions can be drawn in the fields of supply reduction and European coordination and cooperation in anti-drugs law enforcement .
( PT ) Thank you , Madam President . I must particularly thank the Commission representative , mainly for having answered my question , but also for the quality of the answer .
I have very carefully read the Commission documents .
Firstly , I must say that we agree with the strategy and the Action Plan which primarily addresses supply and then demand .
It is on supply that I should like to give my opinion .
In terms of supply , we are extremely concerned about the abundance of cocaine and also about the abundance of synthetic products .
In addition , we are extremely concerned about the local disputes occurring between gangs which , in some Member States , are fighting for control of the drugs market .
I would ask you to clarify for me , as far as possible , what specific actions are proposed with regard to cooperation between the Member States and between the police and judicial authorities of the Member States , on the one hand , and between the Member States and the producing countries , in particular , the cocaine-producing countries , on the other .
This is an area of the strategy that we are very concerned about and on which we should like to hear concrete answers from the Commission .
Vice-President of the Commission . - Madam President , animal- and public-health rules applying to the export of poultry meat from China ensure an equivalent level of protection to those of the EU .
These import rules guarantee that all imported products fulfil the same high standards as products from the EU Member States , not only with respect to hygiene and all aspects of consumer safety but also regarding animal health status .
The principle according to which food must be safe , irrespective of its origin , is at the core of the EU approach .
The official control system in China was verified on the spot by three Commission inspections .
The outcome was published on the website of DG SANCO .
The inspections have shown that the competent authorities , in particular in Shandong Province , are sufficiently well structured to guarantee compliance with Community legislation as regards heat-treated poultry meat products .
Furthermore , these inspection missions have also verified that the competent authorities are capable of enforcing the Community 's import requirements .
As a result of this exercise , the Chinese authorities have demonstrated to the Commission services that they can certify that consignments of heat-treated poultry meat products being exported to the European Union were produced in accordance with Community requirements and come only from Shandong Province .
All approved plants in the Community list of establishments from which imports of heat-treated poultry meat is authorised are located in Shandong Province .
This was verified by the three fact-finding missions on the spot : one in 2004 ; two in 2006 .
According to the WTO agreement on sanitary and phytosanitary measures , any third country may request authorisation for export for the totality or part of its territory to the Commission , which is considered and evaluated according to the relevant Community requirements .
If the guarantees given by a third country are deemed satisfactory and are effectively verified , such requests from third countries are accepted and authorisation for export granted .
Any risk of distortion of competition towards EU poultry producers is prevented by the fact that the measures in place provide for sufficient guarantees that the heat-treated poultry meat products from certain regions are compliant with the level of protection that the EU deems necessary .
Informed choice by consumers would be the answer to competitive pressure .
The Chinese authorities expressed interest in the approval by the Commission of the imports of heat-treated poultry meat from Jilin Province .
To get this approval , the Chinese authorities will have to guarantee that the sanitary conditions applied to the production of heat-treated poultry meat in Jilin Province meets EC requirements , and the Commission will verify these guarantees by on-the-spot inspections .
( HU ) Thank you very much , Commissioner , for your reply .
The problem is that this year , there were supposed to be six inspections conducted in China , and of these not one has been carried out to date .
Now , in October , there was supposed to be an inspection of poultry , but this did not take place either , because the Chinese had no time for it .
My question is , if we have been unable to carry out a single one of the six scheduled for this year , and yet we have planned 15 for next year , how will these 15 be carried out ?
If the Chinese do not cooperate with their European trading partner , then why are we opening our gates to imports from China , and why are we ruining European poultry breeders ?
If China does not cooperate , then we need not open our gates to their imports - that is my opinion . Thank you very much .
Vice-President of the Commission . - First of all , I want to say that China is willing to cooperate , and we have no indications that China is not willing to cooperate .
Secondly , as regards the inspections and missions , these missions have been considered satisfactory so far .
Whenever there are doubts or questions , we will have new missions .
The time between the last missions and this year was due to administrative activities in China between two ministries .
However - at least on the Commission side - we cannot say that there is any reluctance to cooperate with us concerning standards and the quality of the products .
If there are indications , the Commission is ready to organise new missions .
So far , these have not been considered necessary .
Commissioner , I hear what you say but it does have echoes of the Brazilian beef controversy when , for months , the Commission stood where you stand today and assured us that all was well , and then was finally driven to the position of having to impose a ban .
You have said that this meat will be subjected to similar tests .
Can you say , without reservation , that every piece of meat imported will be equally subjected to the same rigorous veterinary tests as are required of our own producers ?
Will the same ratio of production be tested , and how will you know if the product is truly from Shandong Province ?
Is it enough if it is merely processed there ?
Those are the issues that give rise to resentment by our producers , that they are subjected to all sorts of requirements , including the phasing-out of cages .
Will that happen in China at the same rate ?
They believe themselves undercut by cheap imports .
( PT ) Many thanks , Madam President , I will be brief .
My question is along similar lines to that of the previous Member .
I agree that there has recently been an effort to inspect and monitor products and it is essential that this inspection and monitoring effort continues .
However , surely there cannot be any relaxation of the rules ?
Rather there should be a reinforcement , with precise and clear rules being set by the European Union which should apply throughout China , and not just in some of the provinces , as the Member has just mentioned . I would appreciate clarification on this .
Many thanks , Commissioner .
Vice-President of the Commission . - So far , all products produced in this province have been labelled .
The authorities in this province are responsible for quality and also rules of origin .
Of course , there is always the question that not every chicken can be checked - this is also the case in the European Union .
But what the Commission can do in its inspections - and I was told that the next inspection will take place next year , so it has already been planned - is to verify that the administrative systems are capable of controlling how this poultry is produced and what the level of animal health protection is .
So far , the answers have been found to be satisfactory .
Of course , there will be a continuous checking of facts , but these are the World Trade Organisation 's rules , and we always have benefited from openness .
Quality is important ; standards are important .
So far , we are convinced that the quality of poultry products from China is satisfactory , and the next province is , as I have already mentioned , also willing to come .
Subject : Implementation of the European Social Fund in the Member States
The European Social Fund ( ESF ) , as one of the EU 's Structural Funds , was set up to reduce differences in prosperity and living standards across EU Member States and regions , with the aim of promoting employment as well as economic and social cohesion .
Over the period 2007-2013 , some € 75 billion will be distributed to the EU Member States and regions to achieve its goals .
Member States finance a number of different programmes , and in this regard it is important to know how the Member States , especially the new ones , are using the available funding and what results have been achieved in raising living standards and promoting employment .
Is the Commission planning to publish a communication on the implementation of the ESF in the Member States and if so , when can we expect such a communication ?
If the Commission plans to release such a communication , can we expect to see both qualitative and quantitative analyses of the use of the ESF funds ?
It is of crucial importance to know not only how much money was spent on implementing various programmes but to ensure that the EU citizens enjoy tangible and sustainable benefits as well .
If the Commission is not planning such a communication , why is this , and how can the Commission then guarantee transparent and efficient use of the ESF ?
Vice-President of the Commission . - The Commission recalls that Article 146 of the EC Treaty establishes the European Social Fund in order to improve employment opportunities for workers in the internal market and thereby to contribute to raising the standard of living .
The Social Fund also pursues actions leading to the strengthening of its economic and social cohesion .
The Commission agrees with the honourable Member on the importance of reporting on the concrete benefits of the European Social Fund .
In this context , the Commission intends to present a series of thematic reports on the European Social Fund 's support and activities , the beneficiaries reached and the results achieved .
The first set of reports should be available in early 2009 .
In addition , Article 159 of the EC Treaty provides that the Commission shall submit a report to the European Parliament , the Council , the Economic and Social Committee and the Committee of the Regions every three years on progress made towards achieving economic and social cohesion .
The last Cohesion Report was published in 2007 and paid particular attention to the issue of investment in people .
The next Cohesion Report will be presented in 2010 .
In addition , the Commission will publish a so-called ' Progress Report ' in the intervening years .
I am very satisfied with your very precise and concrete answer , so thank you very much indeed .
I do appreciate that the Commission considers that the question I raised is important , not only to parliamentarians , but to the Commission as well .
I believe , however , that this is the most important to our people .
They have to know about the transparency of use of these funds and the efficiency of use of these funds .
I will , therefore , be waiting for the report in early 2009 .
Could you please advise me which DG will prepare this report in 2009 ?
Vice-President of the Commission . - It is DG Employment , under my good colleague Mr Špidla , that is responsible for these reports .
The numbers are interesting and we give training to nine million people in Europe every year , so the benefits are there .
( SK ) Expenditure related to construction or reconstruction can be controlled .
In projects financed from the European Social Fund , the target groups obtain know-how , new skills and expertise and therefore the balance sheet is dependent on the subjective views of officials . The insolvency of NGOs and independent bodies caused by the bureaucratic practices of the Member States often prevents the recipients of funding from the European Social Fund from getting involved in other activities within the framework of this programme .
What instruments does the Commission have in its hands for ensuring that Member States do not erect excessive administrative obstacles when reimbursing the costs associated with projects financed from the European Social Fund ?
Could I ask the Commissioner if he might , in these times when recession is snapping at our heels , look at the possibility of the Social Fund cooperating with local development partnership boards where these exist in Member States like the Republic of Ireland , but in other Member States as well ?
In that regard , he might have discussions with the OECD , which has carried out a study of the effectiveness of local development in promoting training , education , micro-job creation and an improved environment for people who find themselves unemployed .
I do not expect the Commissioner to be able to answer all of that today , but what I am really asking is that he would look at this possibility and perhaps consult with the OECD to see how the Social Fund and social partnership and local development partnerships might work hand in hand to improve the community training and employment needs of our citizens , particularly in urban areas .
Vice-President of the Commission . - Firstly , about bureaucracy and the administrative burden : they exist , no doubt .
As I said , my colleague Mr Špidla is responsible for spending the money , and I am responsible for discharge : ensuring that no money is wasted .
This is always a dilemma .
We try to be as flexible as possible but , at the same time , the benefits and possible outcomes are also carefully audited by national authorities , by paying agencies and probably by the ministry responsible .
This also includes the European Court of Auditors and our DG , so there are different layers of control as well .
The result is assessed by large public participation , and projects must be seen , so now we have an obligation to have everything published on the website about the financing so that everyone can follow it .
The Social Fund , however , is mainly financing training .
In response to the next question : there is cooperation between different sources of financing structural funds , including the Social Fund and regional development funds and , in my country at least , they are in very close cooperation with each other .
This cooperation depends on national authorities .
We can only support good cooperation and the efficient use of money .
Part II
Subject : Community co-financed projects and Siemens ' slush funds
The Greek and German judicial authorities are continuing to investigate the case of the Siemens ' slush funds , which were used by the firm to bribe political parties and persons in authority in order to obtain major public sector works and supply contracts .
The German courts have already convicted a former senior executive of the company , who has admitted that slush funds also existed in Greece .
Given that these bribes may well relate to Community co-funded projects , will the Commission say whether OLAF or any other of its services is investigating the legality of the award procedures and implementation of such projects ?
Vice-President of the Commission . - These issues are always very complicated and serious .
The European Anti-Fraud Office ( OLAF ) is competent to investigate , where EU funds are involved , when there are sufficiently serious suspicions of fraud or irregularity having been committed against the financial interests of the European Union .
In cases where projects are co-funded by EU funds - such as is the situation with structural funds - the Member States and the Commission share the responsibilities in the management of these funds .
In this regard , it is the Member States that are primarily responsible for distribution of the expenditure and the necessary controls .
Moreover , resulting from such controls and investigations and the communication of possible cases of fraud or irregularity to OLAF , the honourable Member may be aware that there are regulatory arrangements in place under Regulation ( EC ) No 1681 / 94 , which provides that the Member States shall report to the Commission , at the appropriate stage , the details of their investigation into such possible cases of fraud or irregularity .
Moreover , whenever it is deemed appropriate , OLAF liaises closely with the competent national authorities on progress in such matters .
In the matters referred to by the honourable Member , the Commission has been informed by OLAF that it is aware of on-going cases in Germany and Greece but that , until now , OLAF 's direct assistance in matters involving Siemens in Germany and / or Greece in respect of structural funds has not been requested by the judicial authorities of either Member State .
In addition , the Commission would refer to the reply already given to the honourable Member 's written question , which stipulated that , according to Article 3 of Regulation ( Euratom , EC ) No 2185 / 96 , economic operators are not being controlled by both the Commission and Member States ' authorities at the same time and on the basis of the same facts , according to Community sector regulations or national legislation .
Besides , the Commission may , at any moment , start an infringement procedure against the Member States , on the basis of Article 226 of the EC Treaty , if there are sufficient elements indicating an infringement of Community public procurement law .
In respect of the particular matters referred to by the honourable Member , the Commission has no such elements that could justify the opening of an infringement procedure .
( EL ) Commissioner , that is precisely what I am asking you .
You know full well that Siemens , which is a large and historic company , has obtained contracts worth several million euros from co-funded programmes .
It is based in Germany and has obtained contracts in Greece and elsewhere .
Accusations and admissions have been made of its using bribery and corruption .
How can you be so sure that it did not use the same methods and the same slush funds for co-funded programmes ?
Commissioner , how long do you intend to hide behind the investigations being carried out in Germany and Greece ?
You can act on your own initiative .
Do you intend , as the competent Commissioner , to ask OLAF to investigate the matter or do you intend to do nothing , because you are afraid of the colossus called Siemens ?
Vice-President of the Commission . - No , I am not afraid of Siemens and I will happily send OLAF to investigate these cases , but of course there is a clear legal framework in which we can operate and can go to investigate .
We are following the situation , as I said , and we can urge Member States and we can demand that they inform us ( they have , anyway , the obligation to inform us ) and move actively .
But there must , at present , be an indication and request from Member States for OLAF assistance .
So far this has not been the case , but we will follow the situation .
We have clear and sometimes very sensitive divisions of responsibilities and obligations between Member States and Community bodies .
This is particularly the case where the investigation rules are very precisely defined .
As the author of Question 44 , Mr Heaton-Harris , is not present , that question falls .
Subject : Administrative affairs and the Lisbon Treaty
Could the Commission detail the changes to the EU competences held by DG Admin that the Lisbon Treaty would have brought in ?
Does the Commission have any plans to introduce any of those reforms ?
Vice-President of the Commission . - The Lisbon Treaty contains three main provisions of the amended Treaty on the functioning of the European Union which deal with administrative affairs : Article 197 on administrative cooperation , Article 298 on an open , efficient and independent European administration and Article 336 on the Staff Regulations .
Article 197 provides for the Union to take measures , excluding any harmonisation , to support the efforts of Member States to improve their capacity to implement Union law .
Article 336 is amended to change the procedure for adopting the Institutions ' Staff Regulations to ordinary legislative procedure - that means normal codecision - currently , the Council acts by qualified majority vote on a proposal from the Commission , after consulting the other institution .
The new Article 298 requires the adoption of regulations ensuring an ' open , efficient and independent European administration ' , which is what we are already trying to do without waiting for the final entry into force of the Lisbon Treaty .
Can I thank the Commissioner for his very clear answer and congratulate him on implementing an open and efficient way of running the Commission , in spite of the fact that the Lisbon Treaty will never see the light of day ?
But , having said that , does the Commission have any plans to introduce any of those reforms which may not need the Lisbon Treaty to be enforced - for example , on improving the capacity to implement EU law on the Staff Regulations ?
Vice-President of the Commission . - I must say , honourable Member , that we are trying to improve the work of the administration every day , and at this moment I am having intensive debates with our staff unions about the regulations concerning parliamentary assistants , which is also part of the Staff Regulations .
This definitely brings more transparency and more clarity to this - so far - problematic field .
So we are very happy that we have opened many websites which tremendously improve the transparency of our activities .
So this work is on-going .
Concerning the Staff Regulations - which is a solid document - this is a huge and complicated project if we really aim to make changes .
We will probably discuss with Parliament possible changes during next term , but small reforms are on-going .
Internally we have just changed the rules on the so-called ' career development reviews ' .
So there are on-going changes every day , practically .
( DE ) Commissioner , you referred to the fact that the Commission must , and will , make permanent changes and improvements to its Staff Regulations .
One development over recent years which is a real cause for concern is that a great deal - in fact more and more - is being outsourced to agencies and other administrative units .
Does this not breach the principle of a uniform administration , especially the uniformity of political control of the administration ?
Vice-President of the Commission . - I must first say that the Commission has no indications that there are more cases of fraud than in other organisations .
The Commission points out that the British House of Lords concluded in a special report that there was no evidence of widespread corruption within the Commission and that the level of fraud against the EU budget is no higher than in comparable public spending programmes , including in Great Britain .
On average , OLAF opens around 40 internal investigations per year involving officials from all Institutions .
In around half of these cases it concludes there is a need for follow-up , which can be administrative , disciplinary , judicial , financial or even legislative or a combination of several of these .
The Commission 's policy of zero tolerance and a formal obligation for officials to report serious wrongdoings without delay contributes to increased vigilance towards possible fraud or corruption .
It may also lead to the opening of a significant number of investigations in which the initial suspicions ultimately prove to be groundless .
As concerns the Commission , 15 members of staff were subject to disciplinary measures in 2007 , compared to an average of five staff members between 2004 and 2006 .
In 2007 , sanctions were imposed in seven cases for a variety of breaches , including for external activities not in accordance with the dignity of the function , unauthorised absences and financial irregularities .
The staff rules provide a well-developed disciplinary system , with possible sanctions ranging from a simple warning to downgrading and , in the most serious cases , dismissal with or without reduction of pension rights .
In addition , a member of staff may be held personally financially liable for the damage incurred by his or her serious personal misconduct .
( PL ) Madam President , Commissioner , you did not need to take such a defensive position .
The present Commission can clearly be proud that compared with Mr Santer 's Commission , it is on a par with St Francis .
However , there is another point I would like to make , and that is to ask whether any European Union administrative staff have been arrested and prosecuted , rather than simply dismissed from their jobs .
Vice-President of the Commission . - As I said , we have some cases running but so far we have not completed any criminal cases during the last six years .
No European Commission official has been convicted .
We have some on-going cases but these are all in national judiciaries .
In addition , since 2002 , the Commission has lifted immunity .
If an official is to be investigated , the Commission makes the decision to lift immunity .
We have lifted immunity - for criminal cases in courts - from 35 people , and so far half of them have been acquitted and the cases have been closed .
Some cases are still running and there have been no criminal convictions yet .
This is the situation regarding criminal cases against Commission officials .
We are quite convinced that there will also be some convictions , but in some national judiciaries it takes a very long time .
We are definitely cooperating with all these investigations .
( DE ) Commissioner , you just referred to the fact that , as an offence punishable through the courts , corruption too has to be followed up and prosecuted by the national judiciaries .
Are most of these cases - and I assume they are - Belgian cases or are officials in other Member States being prosecuted for corruption ?
Vice-President of the Commission . - Most , maybe all , the cases are in the Belgian courts , because the officials are located in Belgium .
Therefore most of the cases are in Belgium - and Luxembourg as well .
As they deal with the same subject , the following questions will be taken together :
Subject : CCCTB impact assessment
In his address to the ECON Committee in June of this year , Commissioner Kovacs referred to a CCCTB impact assessment , which he described as ' crucial ' for his proposed legislative proposal .
Can the Commission give us more details about this impact assessment and confirm that if it proves unfavourable to the CCCTB proposal the Commission will shelve the plans for such a legislative proposal ?
Subject : CCCTB
What is the current situation with regard to the deliberations on the introduction of a common consolidated tax base and , in light of the concerns expressed by the Irish electorate in the Lisbon vote on this matter , has the Commission modified its approach in any way ?
Member of the Commission . - An impact assessment of the Common Consolidated Corporate Tax Base ( CCCTB ) is currently being carried out .
This assessment will cover a number of possible options for an EU-level reform of the corporate income tax system .
In accordance with the current practice of the Commission , a proposal of this nature has to be accompanied by an impact assessment drafted in compliance with the key analytical steps laid down in the Impact Assessment Guidelines .
The key analytical steps are to identify the problem , to define the objectives , to develop main policy options , to analyse their impacts , to compare the options and to outline policy monitoring and evaluation .
The assessment will provide a description and evidence of the existing cross-border company tax obstacles on the internal market , and will define the objectives to be achieved by the reform .
A number of alternative policy options , including the CCCTB , that could address the obstacles will be analysed and their respective economic , environmental and social impacts assessed .
As regards the most relevant types of impacts of the various policy options , the assessment will aim to assess : ( a ) the economy-wide effects of the alternative tax reforms on the competitiveness of the EU , on growth of the EU economy and welfare ; ( b ) their respective effects on companies ' compliance costs ; and ( c ) , notably , their respective impacts on national corporate tax bases and on tax administration costs .
Significant progress has been achieved in preparing the impact assessment but the work is not yet completed .
Once the impact assessment is finalised , and the different options assessed , the Commission will draw the necessary conclusions .
The fact that the Commission carries out an impact assessment does not necessarily mean that a proposal will follow .
To say that I am disappointed in the answer is to put it mildly : that is exactly what you told us last June .
You told us that we would have this in September .
I have to say that there are very strong rumours that you have received an interim report on CCCTB .
You have not officially accepted it , but I gather that this report is not favourable towards the idea of CCCTB and the reason we cannot see it is because you have not formally accepted it .
I would like to ask you if that is the case , because it is extremely unfair since this is an issue that has been debated for some considerable time now .
There is a lot of very strong feeling on both sides on it , and I believe that you should show us that report , or interim report , so that we can have a look at it to see where exactly that report stands on this very , very important issue .
I would strongly ask you to do that .
I think it is wrong if you have received an interim report and you are not showing it to us because it does not show what the Commission wants on this issue .
I want to echo Mr Ryan 's comments .
The specific question that was asked was : if the assessment proves unfavourable , will you shelve the plans for implementing CCCTB ?
And that question was not answered .
Also , there have been a number of other assessments - not , obviously , carried out by the Commission - which have shown that , in many ways , CCCTB would collapse under its own weight .
But , given that you have not answered the question that was asked , I want to put one or two others to you .
Would you not agree that it is not simplification ?
At present , we have 27 tax bases .
With CCCTB , we would end up with 28 .
If it were to operate , would you not agree that it would damage Europe 's capacity to attract direct foreign investment , in that tax payable by multinationals in one country would no longer be determined by the law of that state but by reference to a complicated formula which can only be computed in retrospect ?
So , in other words , no policy certainty , and that will scare foreign direct investment like nothing else .
I just want your view on that , please , Commissioner .
Member of the Commission . - Yes , it is true that we have been aiming to make a proposal in the autumn of this year , but you have to understand that , in a project as ambitious as the CCCTB , it is not possible to predict exactly when we will be ready to make the proposal , as the timing of the proposal depends on the finalisation of the impact assessments and its evolution by the Commission .
As far as the correlation between the Irish referendum on the Lisbon Treaty and the CCCTB is concerned , I want to emphasise that the Commission is taking a measured approach based on wide consultation and detailed study of all aspects of the CCCTB .
The Commission is aware of the issues raised by the electorate during the referendum in Ireland relating to the Lisbon Treaty .
However , I would point out that the provisions of the Lisbon Treaty do not have any direct influence on the process whereby Member States would eventually decide on any proposal on a possible Commission proposal for CCCTB .
( Interjection from the floor by Eoin Ryan )
Member of the Commission . - Madam President , may I take the liberty of answering Mr Ryan 's comments very briefly ?
I just want to tell you that you will soon receive a full , legally based answer from the Head of my Cabinet Office .
Then you will understand our position .
Concerning the second issue , customs cooperation is an important part of the EU-China strategic partnership .
The EC-China Agreement on Customs Cooperation and Mutual Administrative Assistance with China provides the legal basis for this cooperation .
The EC-China Joint Customs Cooperation Committee meets once a year in order to manage and oversee the implementation of the Agreement .
Under the Customs Cooperation Agreement , the EC and China are developing substantial interaction in key customs areas , organised clearly to reflect the interest of the European Community .
The problem of counterfeiting is our key priority in relation to China , which is the number one source of fakes entering the EU external borders .
During my visits to Beijing in January and April 2008 , I agreed with my Chinese counterparts to develop an ambitious Action Plan for IPR enforcement with concrete objectives and measures to be adopted by the EU-China Summit in December .
It should include , among other things , an information exchange system on IPR risks , an exchange programme of operational officials , and collaboration on the development of partnerships with business communities in China and the European Union .
Securing the supply chain is another essential aspect of EC-China customs cooperation .
The joint pilot project on Safe and Secure Trade Lane has been running since November 2007 with the participation of three ports , Shenzhen in China , Rotterdam in the Netherlands and Felixstowe in the United Kingdom .
This project aims at strengthening security while facilitating trade between the EC and China through the use of modern technology and the exchange of advance information .
At the same time , it will help to better target the traffic in illicit goods .
Furthermore , the pilot project aims at preparing the ground for a future agreement on mutual recognition of security measures and the Authorised Economic Operator ( AEO ) and its Chinese opposite number .
It involves cooperation in such important fields as alignment of the Chinese security legislation , information exchange and risk analysis .
China has , in the meantime , adopted and implemented , as of 1 April 2008 , its own AEO legislation that appears very similar to the European Community concept .
The EC and China are also enhancing cooperation in other important areas .
An EU-China agreement on coordinated controls of trade in drug precursors is expected to be signed at the upcoming EU-China Summit that will allow us to combat trade in illicit drugs more effectively .
We agreed to further enhance our cooperation to fight fraud through the established mutual assistance mechanism .
The European Anti-Fraud Office ( OLAF ) has posted one of its agents in China in order to support the anti-contraband and anti-counterfeit activities of the office , in particular , in relation to cigarette smuggling .
The EU is ready to continue to assist China in customs capacity building , including through the application of the recently published customs blueprints .
While we have made considerable progress in enhancing customs cooperation with China , further steps need to be taken , particularly with regard to combating counterfeiting and piracy .
Proper implementation of the above-mentioned initiatives , in particular the proposed IPR enforcement action plan , will determine the level of effectiveness of this cooperation .
( EL ) Thank you , Commissioner , for your reply .
The trade deficit between the EU and China totalled EUR 160 million in 2007 to the detriment of the European Union .
To a large degree , this deficit is the outcome of incomplete customs cooperation between the EU and China .
Apart from the language of numbers , we are also very interested - as is only reasonable - in public health , the protection of European consumers and , of course , the competitiveness of European products .
I believe that these controls will be stepped up in the near future so that we can protect the public interests to which I referred .
Member of the Commission . - I fully agree with your concern - in my view , counterfeiting is much more than a financial problem .
First of all , it is a legal issue : the violation of intellectual property right .
Second , it is a financial or economic problem as it undermines the revenue of the Member States and it also undermines the profit of the manufacturing company of the original products and it can even result in the loss of jobs in our Member States .
But third - and this is my real concern - it is a new threat to the safety and to the health - and even to the life - of our citizens , so , as you very clearly emphasised , it is an issue of consumer protection .
When I first got the information that EU customs seized some consignments of medicines , pharmaceuticals , against cardiovascular diseases , and the capsules contained brick powder and yellow paint , I was really shocked .
So it is much more than a financial or legal issue .
It is a problem of the safety of our citizens and we have got to do our best .
May I say that I am now more optimistic : in April , I met my new counterpart , the new minister responsible for customs in China .
Even with my former counterpart , I felt some positive changes in the Chinese style , the way they negotiated .
Since 2005 , it has become more and more concrete , more and more to the point and China has made some steps .
For instance , they even changed the legislation concerning combating counterfeiting .
But , you are right that it is still not working in an optimum manner .
That was the reason why we initiated an action programme and I made it very clear to my new partner that what we expect from China is concrete measures and concrete results in the market and I think that he understood the message .
One or two more reasons about why I am optimistic : first , China , which is an emerging power , which is playing a more and more important role in the world economy and world politics , I think simply cannot afford to be related , to be judged as the number one source of fake products .
Second , China is more and more a target country .
Quite recently we heard about Chinese fake milk powder which resulted in the death of some Chinese children .
So they are not only a country of origin , but they are also a target country , a target of counterfeiters .
As a member of the European Parliament 's Delegation for relations with the People 's Republic of China , I have noted with interest your response .
Has there been any improvement at all in China 's appalling record on counterfeiting or the stealing of intellectual property since it joined the WTO , and what pressures are being put on China to improve in this area ?
You mentioned the EC-China Joint Customs Committee .
Who is on it from the EC side , and what are the qualifications to become a member ?
My final point : does this joint committee have terms of reference to handle trade of various waste products from Europe to China for dumping ?
Vice-President of the Commission . - ( IT ) Madam President , in keeping with the commitment made in Article 22 of Regulation No 300 of 2008 on common rules in the field of civil aviation security and repealing the previous regulation , in December of this year , the Commission will present a report on the financing of the costs associated with security measures in European airports .
In light of the situation , the Commission is reviewing the results of the consultation with the interested parties and with the Member States in order to determine the content of a new legislative proposal on this matter .
The Commission will present its conclusions in the report in question and , to address some of the questions raised during the consultations , the Commission may also be called on to take further action on this subject .
Madam President , I would like more information .
What exactly does the Commission intend to do to assist the airports affected by this cost ?
There are five airports in my constituency of Ireland North West and they find it very difficult to survive economically due to the pressure exerted on them .
These include two international airports , Shannon Airport and Ireland West Airport , along with three other regional airports .
What can the Commission do to assist the survival of those airports and allow them to function economically ?
Vice-President of the Commission . - ( IT ) Mr Ó Neachtain , I am afraid that I cannot give you an immediate , concrete response as you would like .
However , the Commission is reviewing the results of a consultation it held in order to examine the results and thus decide if , how , to what extent , with regard to Member States , if it is up to the Member States alone , we need to finish reviewing the consultations .
As soon as we have finished reviewing the consultations , if you would like , I will inform you straight away , and in any case we will be presenting our report on this whole sector before the end of the year , as I said earlier .
It is only a matter of waiting a few weeks for our officials ' final assessment of all the consultations .
My office and my staff are available to provide you with all the necessary information to enable you to report to your electorate .
( EL ) Commissioner , bearing in mind what you have just said , will it be possible to evaluate the security requirements of each Member State and of regional airports - because that was the question - where there is a large number of them , such as on the Greek islands and in Italy , Spain and Portugal ?
You obviously know how many islands and how many such areas there are ; as such , will funding from your overall budget be proportionate and differentiated ?
( DE ) We know that the costs are obviously passed on to passengers .
That is why we also need to differentiate .
There is not that big a difference nowadays between using the train , for example , be it the TGV or some other high-speed railway , or an aeroplane .
If you look at the security precautions at train stations and in airports , there is perhaps room for harmonisation here .
Do you think it possible to introduce identical legal provisions here ?
Commissioner ...
( Interjection from the floor by Jim Higgins )
I am very sorry , Mr Higgins , I have taken two supplementary questions , which is all I can take , and we have dealt with it as appropriately as we can .
( Interjection from the floor by Jim Higgins )
The Rules provide for two supplementary questions .
I am sorry but I cannot get into a discussion with you .
It is unfair to those who have questions waiting to be heard .
Madam President , I would like to say to those Members who cannot , due to the rules of procedure , receive answers to the questions they would like to ask , that my offices are available to provide any information they may require that it is in our power to give in response to their queries .

As regards the question from Mr Mavrommatis - in essence he asked whether the Member States can adopt more stringent security measures than those imposed by Regulation No 300 of 2008 - the Member States can , of course , choose to apply more rigorous measures than those set out in the regulatory framework .
These more rigorous measures may , however , have repercussions for the internal aviation market insofar as they often vary from one Member State to another .
In the report that will , I assure you , be published very soon , the Commission will consider whether these more rigorous measures distort competition between airlines and airports .
As regards the issue of island airports , the Commission is also reviewing this issue in the context of the answers that have been given .
Island airports are , of course , included in the study , which concerns the general airport system .
You know how much the Commission values regions , such as the islands of your own country of origin , but also in countries that I myself am more familiar with , that can only be reached by plane or boat .
The Commission therefore gives much consideration to these links .
As far as Mr Rübig 's question is concerned , the Commission is reviewing the various options .
It is possible to use public funds , which is one of the possible solutions for financing the costs of aviation security .
Therefore it has not been said that ticket prices should be raised .
Other forms of financing could also be used .
However , to be honest and to give an answer that is more than just a formal response , I would like to emphasise that the Commission is examining carefully all the information gathered and , as soon as it has all been examined , reviewed and balanced , we will try to draw up a proposal that is balanced and is in keeping with the interests of European citizens .
Mr Rübig , I would say the same thing to you that I said to the other honourable Members , that my offices are always available to all Members for any clarifications and to arrange any meetings you would like to have with me on questions relating to the transport sector .
Subject : High quality transport and small island regions of the European Union
What steps will the Commission take to ensure that the European Union has sustainable and high quality transport systems and to protect the rights of its citizens and their safety ?
How will it contribute towards establishing a reliable system of transportation ( boat-aeroplane-helicopter ) which covers the small island regions of the European Union ?
Madam President , this is , in some ways , a continuation of the question asked by Mr Mavrommatis .
In order to guarantee sustainable , high quality transport in Europe and to protect the rights of citizens and their safety , we are proposing an appropriate legal and regulatory framework to the European Parliament and to the Council and , once the legislators have adopted it , we will ensure that it is implemented .
Allow me to give three examples : passenger rights , sustainable transport and passenger safety .
You also asked me to be more specific about how these efforts will contribute towards establishing a reliable system of transport by boat , aeroplane or helicopter for the small island regions of the European Union .
The fundamental challenge in this proposal is the funding . Thus , we return to the subject of the previous question .
Honourable Members - I could almost say fellow Members , since I am always aware of having been an MEP myself for many years - we must be clear on this point .
It is up to the Member States and regional authorities to decide on the quantity and quality of connections within the small island regions and between these regions and the continent .
Our role , the role of the Commission , is secondary and consists of two very distinct tasks .
On the one hand , the Commission implements the European cohesion policy , which supports the development of regions with geographic and natural disadvantages .
Within the framework of the cohesion policy , the Community can provide cofinancing to improve the accessibility of the island regions .
On the other hand , the Commission has a duty to ensure that the financial support awarded to transport providers does not distort competition on the internal market , against the common interest .
This safeguard is guaranteed by Community legislation on the internal transport market .
State aid for quality transport to and within the island regions cannot be authorised by the Commission , in particular in the form of compensation for a public service obligation .
Legislation governing the internal market in the maritime and air transport sector leaves Member States ample scope to choose how to organise the public transport services that link the islands to the continent and to one another , provided that all potential transport providers have equal opportunity to provide the public service in question .
Commissioner Tajani , since you have spoken in Italian I am tempted to do so myself , but I will hold back and speak in Greek instead .

( EL ) Commissioner , my question did not relate so much to the question of funding , which my honourable friend Mr Mavrommatis has covered ; it related to three specific points to which you referred and on which I wish to comment specifically .
The first is the standard of transport , which is a very important matter .
The second is the special case of the small islands ; as you know , my country has an abundance of very small islands which are a special case , and the third point is the state of mind of the residents of these small islands , who feel a bit isolated , in this particular instance , from the rest of Greece and from Europe in general when we fail to attach particular importance to their problems , especially in terms of transportation .
My question is therefore a political question which goes beyond financing : do you believe that the European Union should also play a political role here ?
I would like to thank the honourable Member for having replied to me in my own language .
I am tempted myself to reply to you in ancient Greek , having studied it for many years - my mother taught ancient Greek for many years as well , but perhaps I would make some mistakes and risk not being understood by you .
Thank you all the same for the gesture .
Mr Botopoulos , I said this myself when I was a member of parliament , having been elected in a constituency that also included many small islands , and so I am well aware of the serious connection problems they face , far from terra firma , particularly during the winter .
Since many of these islands are tourist destinations , during the summer there are boats transporting visitors and also the people who live on those islands , who therefore do not have difficulties for two or three months ( June , July and August ) .
The problems start in September , and then there is a real risk of feeling isolated .
I believe that the European Commission , not being able to decide directly on the matter - I mentioned this in my speech , we are always mindful of the principle of subsidiarity - can provide support , for example , by cofinancing certain transport systems , without distorting the internal market , to enable these citizens , who are European citizens and who have the same rights to mobility as those living in big cities or on the mainland , specifically to have the right to travel and to receive deliveries , because the issue also concerns the supply of food , as well as water for some islands .
Honourable Member , I share your concern and support it .
The European Commission , with its sights set on protecting the rights of all citizens at all times , intends , wherever possible and insofar as provided for by current legislation , to work hard to support those living on the smallest islands , offering practical solutions to the needs of these citizens who do indeed experience unfavourable conditions , particularly during the winter months .
I am available to you and to all Greek MEPs - and not just Greek MEPs , of course - should you wish to discuss any initiatives you want to adopt in order to give practical answers to the citizens of small islands .
Could you elaborate further on the content of the appropriate regulatory framework which you indicated was in the pipeline , particularly in relation to economic sustainability of access transport to small island regions ?
Can I get assurances from you , Commissioner , that the present public service obligation regime will not be impacted in any way by this future regulatory framework that you have in mind ?
That is essential for the economic sustainability of these peripheral regions .
Madam President , Mr Mavrommatis is always very active and always involved in issues regarding transport .
The Commission 's proposals are always accompanied by an impact assessment .
This is true in particular of the November 2005 proposals on the third maritime safety package .
The Commission 's proposals in this sector take particular account of the relevant international conventions .
In the majority of cases , the purpose of the legislative proposals is to invite the Member States to ratify the conventions or to implement them within the Community .
They are never born out of an attempt to acquire new competences .
I would like to clear up a common misunderstanding : the Community already has the necessary competences for maritime safety within the framework of the common transport policy .
It is , however , inevitable that when the European Parliament and the Council legislate , Member States ' ability to act in isolation at international level is therefore limited .
Nonetheless , this is not to Member States ' disadvantage .
Indeed , it serves to strengthen our collective influence within the international community , thereby increasing the level of protection of the life of citizens and of the environment .
Sometimes , Europe must simply take the initiative .
This happened , for example , when we introduced the accelerated withdrawal of single-hull oil tankers and our decision was then followed by a similar one on the part of the International Maritime Organisation .
Mr Mavrommatis , you are well aware of the problems with the International Maritime Organisation : we cannot always take decisions on our own .
There are competences that do not concern Europe , and continual comparison with this organisation is therefore necessary , not least because our seas are frequented by vessels flying the flags of countries that do not belong to our Union .
With the proposed new legislation on maritime safety , the Commission hopes , though , to redress the balance of the global dimension of maritime transport , which calls for global solutions while taking account of the limitations of the global legal framework .
Mr Mavrommatis , Community action is a tangible expression of the collective effort and commitment of the Member States , not an imposition from the outside , running counter to their interests .
Thanks to our efforts and yours , the number of vessels in European waters that do not comply with current standards has dropped dramatically .
The Commission will continue to pursue a balanced but proactive policy , with the protection of the life and livelihood of our citizens as its main objective .
Commissioner , you know how much I enjoy our discussions and debates .
Moreover , you always have an answer for me .
Naturally , I would like to thank you for those points that concern all the countries of the European Union .
( EL ) At a time when European citizens are particularly sensitive about the sovereign rights of their own country , especially in a sector under great economic strain , such as shipping , do you not think that seeking to establish sole Community competence and acquire new powers for the Commission will do more harm than good overall ?
Vice-President of the Commission . - ( IT ) Mr Mavrommatis , I do not think there is a risk of inflicting damage , but the aim is to try to harmonise , within a framework , that which is always complicated in maritime law because , unfortunately , we always find ourselves faced with IMO decisions and , as I have said , thankfully Europe sometimes takes the lead and the international organisation follows us .
Our intention , I repeat , is not to limit the rights of Member States but merely to try to achieve harmonisation that can serve only to provide EU citizens with faster and more robust responses .
I was wondering if the Commissioner is satisfied that enough action is being taken by Member States in relation to implementing existing legislation and regulation .
I had my own experience in acting in a legal capacity where a very serious accident occurred , and , even 12 months after the accident , the shipping company still had not complied with the regulations that were then in place and had been in place for over three years .
Madam President , the topic of urban transport , I would like to inform the honourable Members - ' fellow Members ' always comes to my mind first , it must be force of habit ; I have only been a commissioner for a few months whereas I was an MEP for many years and evidently I still feel part of this Parliament - was one of the topics at the informal Council in La Rochelle on 1 and 2 September 2008 , and was discussed at length .
The Commission and the Member States gave the issue a great deal of attention , inviting experts , mayors of large and medium-sized cities and specialists in the sector to talk about urban transport .
I spoke on this subject myself at the Road Safety Day that took place a few days ago in Paris - the official Commission and Council day during Road Safety Week - emphasising that road safety must also mean a good urban transport system : our roads will become safer , above all in big cities , if there is a good urban transport system .
In my view , this will inevitably reduce the number of victims of accidents that occur in big cities , where there is the greatest number of accidents and the greatest number of victims .
The Commission is drawing up an action plan on urban mobility based on the consultations that followed the publication of the Green Paper .
We intend to present the plan before the end of this year .
This plan will include proposals for definite actions at European Union level for the coming years .
Clearly the European Commission does not have jurisdiction on this : these are areas that concern the Member States , but we , on the basis of the principle of subsidiarity which , as you all know , is derived from the word subsidium , want to help the Member States and the mayors of large cities .
The former mayor of Milan , Gabriele Albertini , Vice-Chairman of the Committee on Transport and Tourism , can testify to all this : through this action plan , we will ensure that all of the information we have , all of the advice , all of the ideas , all of the suggestions , can be made available to all cities , above all the big cities with traffic problems .
The action plan will also assist policy makers at local , regional and national level , in full respect - I repeat , full respect - of the principle of subsidiarity .
The actions we will propose will help to cut costs , to guarantee the proper funding of the single market and to create new markets for new technologies , developing sustainable urban mobility .
It is no coincidence that only yesterday evening , the debate was concluded and a vote taken on a directive that should encourage , that is aimed at encouraging , local authorities to purchase means of public transport with reduced harmful gas emissions .
Today , however , it is still too early to outline or be specific about the content of the action plan , but we nonetheless expect , and you can expect , it to cover the breaking up of rules on access to green areas , urban goods transport and logistics , better information on public transport systems in European cities or broad plans on sustainable urban mobility and proposals on ways to integrate urban planning and mobility .
The action plan may also include proposals on information sharing and for improved data collection and research practices , and may even tackle the issue of funding , which is an extremely delicate question .
This , I repeat , will all be based on respect for the principle of subsidiarity .
( EL ) Commissioner , we shall await the action plan you propose with great interest and then we shall have an opportunity to talk again .
However , I would like to hear your personal opinion on the following matter : there is a great deal of discussion about the congestion charges which have been introduced in cities such as London , Rome and Stockholm and which appear to have helped reduce congestion and increase the number of passengers using public transport .
In other cities , however , where there is no organized network , there is still scepticism and I should like at this point to hear your personal opinion , as an experienced Commissioner , as to if and to what extent you are or are not in favour of congestion charges .


Honourable Member , the question is an extremely delicate one : if Mr Albertini , who is always very generous , would like to buy us a coffee , we could discuss it and hear the experience of a mayor of a large European city .
There can be no easy answer to this question .
I was a municipal councillor in Rome for five years whilst I was an MEP and I dealt with these same issues .
These things have to be looked at on a city by city , case by case basis , because some cities - I am thinking of Rome - have an historic centre with very narrow streets , where it is difficult for traffic to circulate .
Other cities have a different urban environment and so it is not easy to have one rule for everyone .
I think that , always using the principle of subsidiarity , mayors should choose , with the consensus of municipal councils , to impose a congestion charge if they think it useful and if the city they administrate needs to restrict traffic because in very old cities , the centre becomes congested very easily .
Therefore the situation varies from city to city and it is difficult to find a solution .
I would definitely say that it is not an option to be disregarded , even if it can sometimes cause confusion .
You have to look at where the perimeter would be .
I would reiterate that it is a choice to be made by individual cities .
Personally , I am not against it in principle but , in certain cases , it can be unfair to impose it whilst in others , it can be entirely appropriate .
Given , therefore , the diversity of European cities , I believe that especially in this case , the final decision should always be left to local authorities , although in the action plan , we will still offer suggestions and ideas .
The important thing is that citizens are always informed and that they know what is going on and the decisions that are taken , because when it comes to paying taxes , it is always good for citizens to understand what they are paying for .
I regret that I cannot give a definitive answer of principle .
I truly believe that we have to examine the facts and the impact , including on the urban environment , and take the decisions one case at a time .
To conclude , I would like to say again that , in principle , I am not against it , but that there could be cases in which it would be pointless to impose a tax of this kind .
Commissioner , I was struck by two words that you used : that finance is a ' delicate ' issue ; and you repeated ' subsidiarity ' , which is important .
Is the Commission concerned that the economic difficulties in Member States will impede the necessary investment in effective public transport systems ?
At the same time , Member States might be imposing congestion charges in large cities on hard-pressed motorists who have no choice .

( DE ) My dear Mr Tajani , we are of course delighted to have the opportunity here of asking questions , especially on invitations to tender for urban transport .
Are there any plans to put urban transport out to tender , as has happened in numerous cases in Sweden , where there is now competition in urban transport ?
Secondly : are there really plans for uniform control systems throughout Europe ?
When you arrive in a foreign city , it is often difficult to understand how their system operates and perhaps a Commission proposal is needed here .
Madam President , thank you for the question .
First of all , I think that in the action plan we are to present , we should insist on the need to give information to European citizens when they move from one city to another , so that they know what the situation is and what they will find when they travel from Stockholm to Madrid as opposed to from Rome to Vienna ; so that they understand the set-up , what taxes they may need to pay , and can organise their trips , be they for work or as a tourist .
This is already important and I believe we have work to do .
Of course , honourable Members , I would stress the issue of the principle of subsidiarity , because it is not for the European Union to intervene in matters that fall strictly within the remit of local authorities .
The same goes for financial aspects ; the Commission has no place to intervene .
Funding is a problem .
Of course , in our action plan , we will seek to gather all the suggestions that have been put forward at the various hearings , in order to provide a service and assistance to local authorities , who are then at liberty to accept or reject them .
Our aim is to try to harmonise the system , at least in terms of information for citizens , and to provide the different local authorities with as much information as possible regarding experiences from other cities , for them to make use of if they wish .
This is important .
As regards funding , I believe that each local authority is free to do as they see fit , without , of course , disrupting the market or the free movement of citizens .
In each case , the most suitable solution must always be chosen .
As regards the last question from Mr Rübig , however , the directive on public service obligations leaves local authorities the freedom to decide whether or not to call for tenders .
I think that the European Union , from this point of view , has once again insisted on the principle of subsidiarity .
I think that this is right , because our work should not be invasive : we should not regulate everything and anything , we should be concerned with the big issues , giving big answers and , if anything , helping local bodies and Member States to solve problems , where they can , perhaps with the aid and support of the European Union , without this support being dominant or invasive .
In my opinion , in local public transport , this should be a principle that we all keep to , and I believe we want to do so .
That concludes Question Time .
Questions which have not been answered for lack of time will be answered in writing ( see Annex ) .
( The sitting was suspended at 7.45 p.m. and resumed at 9 p.m. )

Commemoration of the Holodomor , the Ukraine artificial famine ( 1932-1933 ) ( debate )
The next item is the Commission statement on the commemoration of the Holodomor famine in Ukraine ( 1932-1933 ) .
I should like to take this opportunity to welcome to the European Parliament a delegation from Ukraine headed by the Ambassador .
( Applause )
Madam President , honourable Members , I am honoured to take part in this debate to commemorate the great famine of 1932 and 1933 , which was one of the great tragedies of the 20th century .
After many years of silence , testimonies of the suffering call for our attention , together with the accounts of many survivors who found themselves caught up in that terrible event .
It is vital that the experience of the Holodomor is not forgotten .
The story of the great famine illustrates not only the tragedy of the Ukrainian people , but also reminds us again of what human beings are capable of .
The Holodomor has something important to teach us , however : the sacrifice of so many has not been in vain .
Their sacrifice reminds us never to accept that any state should subjugate individuals , whatever the cause or purpose for what takes place .
That disastrous famine has shown the superiority of a constitutional state over one in which no form of dissent is permitted .
Tragedies like the Holodomor only happen in those human societies that violate the rights of citizens , the rule of law and democratic principles .
The European Union rose from the ashes of war and numerous totalitarian regimes , those dictatorships that deeply scarred the history of Europe and of the whole world .
Out of those same tragedies and catastrophes , however , sprung forth the democracies of Europe and , in the last fifty years , a season of peace has been built on those ruins , a peace that we have a duty to defend , and to carry beyond the borders of the Union : fifty years of peace that have been the greatest achievement of a united Europe .
Today , Ukraine has also changed .
As an independent country , a member of the Council of Europe and signatory to the European Convention on Human Rights , as well as many other international instruments for the safeguard of these fundamental rights , Ukraine has an extraordinary opportunity to consolidate itself , to bolster its position as a democratic state that respects human rights and the rule of law .
It is certainly an ambitious and difficult task .
We have witnessed many troubles ; many political battles have marked recent years in the history of this country , which has become stronger in its democracy .
At this historic time , we must all lend our political support and encouragement to the independence of the judiciary .
It is important that Ukraine continues to fight corruption and to take account of the results of the recent elections so that democratic principles are complied with .
Nor must it omit to safeguard the most weak and marginalised , whatever their race , ethnicity or religion , or indeed their sexual orientation or state of health .
The European Union will continue to support Ukraine in these important efforts .
At the same time , we will continue to work together with our Ukrainian partners to raise the prosperity of all the citizens of that nation , by opening new markets and increasing the prospects for economic activity and investment , in addition to deepening relationships between our citizens .
I would like to add , as Commissioner for Transport , that as regards trans-European networks , we should remember that these can serve not only to strengthen our internal market , but also as a tool to extend the frontiers of Europe , to open Europe up to new horizons and to strengthen links with near and friendly countries which border the European Union , like Ukraine .
For the victims of the Holodomor there can be no better tribute than the creation of a prosperous , stable and democratic Ukraine , founded on solid institutions and on an engaged civil society .
Only if this goal is reached will the sacrifice of so many innocent victims not have been in vain .
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - Madam President , the European Union is founded on reconciliation : the belief that we can create a better future by acknowledging our past in all its brutality .
Germany has rightly confronted and sought to atone for the unspeakable horrors of the Nazi era and the Holocaust .
The newer Member States of our Union are finding their own ways to seek truth and reconciliation through a frank and uncompromising analysis of their Communist totalitarian past .
But some countries still seek to hide from their history .
Turkey , for example , in my view still denies the genocide perpetrated on the Armenians and the Assyrians under cover of World War I. Russia has also struggled to come to terms with the brutality of Stalin 's Communist dictatorship .
The purpose of this resolution tonight is to express our horror at the Holodomor , the period of deliberately engineered famine in 1932-1933 .
The resolution reflects our determination to remember its millions of victims , some of whom are still alive today to tell their gruesome tale .
Their evidence is vitally important , because soon they will all have gone .
Only by reminding ourselves of such heinous crimes against humanity can we try to ensure they never happen again .
This resolution does not contain the word ' genocide ' , because other political groups in this House do not think the strict definition of that term should be applied to the Holodomor .
After all , it was only after the Second World War that the Genocide Convention was actually established .
But also , perhaps - and perhaps more regrettably , in my view - because of a fear of offending modern-day Russia .
But none of us wish to belittle the unimaginable suffering inflicted upon Ukraine .
No word or words can properly describe the atrocity of the Holodomor .
What is important is not so much the text that we use but the sentiment that we are trying to express in our resolution - solidarity with Ukraine on the 75th anniversary of the massacres perpetrated on its long-suffering people .
One lesson that history teaches us is the importance of robust international law and judicial structures , which are now extant , if the authors of such misery are ever to be punished .
Nuremberg was the start of that long , drawn-out process .
The war crimes court for the former Yugoslavia , which is soon to try Radovan Karadzić , shows that these principles are as important today as ever .
Yesterday this House voiced its strong support for bringing the leader of the Lord 's Resistance Army in Uganda , Joseph Kony , before the International Criminal Court .
Tyrants , wherever they are , in this case it is Joseph Stalin we are debating tonight , bent on mass murder and destruction , should have no sanctuary anywhere .
Ukraine has borne much grief throughout its history , and I do hope now that the next stage in that glorious history involves Ukraine rightly taking its place , in the not-too-distant future , as a full member of the European Union .
After the crisis in Georgia , there can be no doubt that many Russian nationalists are not happy about , for instance , Ukrainian sovereignty over Crimea .
But I am sure that , if we all stand together in solidarity with the Ukrainian people , one day it will take its place in the European family of nations .
on behalf of the PSE Group . - Madam President , this is a very special debate .
As a political body , the European Parliament is asked to legislate and to provide executive decision-makers with political guidance for properly coping with the challenges , opportunities and dangers of our present times .
In other words , we are history-builders and not historians .
We are not asked to judge the past , but to build the present , and are supposed to be judged by the future .
Therefore , the Socialist Group reluctantly accepted to subscribe to a resolution which apparently aims to establish a historical truth about a tragic event that took place in Ukraine in the past .
We did that , however , because we understood that solidarity with the Ukrainian people and their sufferings could mobilise Ukrainians in their efforts to unite their country , to democratise it , modernise it and bring it inside its natural family which is the European Union .
At the same time , we understood that if the tragedies and crimes of the past are forgotten , the danger of their being repeated is overwhelming .
Historical condemnation of crimes cannot provide reparation for the victims thereof or their heirs , but it is moral compensation .
Moreover , it is an intellectual and political guarantee against repetition of the crimes and resurrection of the bad instincts that lay at their origin .
By condemning old totalitarian crimes , we not only shame the criminals of the past , but also those who might think to apply the same criminal methods in the future .
Awareness that impunity is impossible might very well stop them doing so .
We must proclaim today that there is no state rationale , no social objective and no ideological principle that can excuse a crime such as the Holodomor , the artificial famine which caused so much suffering for so many innocent people in a crazy attempt to destroy the moral dignity , national pride and biological existence of the great Ukrainian people .
At the same time , while condemning the crimes , expressing solidarity with the victims , and denouncing this attempt to destroy a whole people , we cannot put the blame for those crimes on another people .
The Holodomor was the product of a totalitarian political regime .
All the peoples that were subject to that regime were victims of various similar crimes and hardships .
The discussion today should not only remind us that we must always stay united against totalitarianism , but also that the present Ukrainian generation , on behalf and in the memory of the Holodomor victims , must eliminate from their country and their history all authoritarian instincts , inclinations and practices .
They have to consolidate their national unity and accomplish together their democratic ideals .
Likewise , our expression of solidarity should inspire the Ukrainians to solidarity and reconciliation , both inside and outside their country .
Inside , with their countrymen , who belong to different ethno-cultural groups , and outside with our neighbours .
That is one of the best ways in which they could become members of the European Union , and , if they choose to take that way , it means that our debate this evening has not been futile .
EU membership for Ukraine would be the best historical reparation that the Ukrainians themselves can offer to the victims of Holodomor .
Madam President , the Holodomor , or the artificial famine in Ukraine , is one of the largest-scale crimes committed in Europe during the 20th century .
In order to prove that collective economies worked , and to destroy the main threat to the communist Soviet Union , Ukraine 's independent farmers , Stalin 's regime effected an artificial famine which resulted in the deaths of several million Ukrainians .
All the food people had was confiscated .
The famine drove large numbers of peoples from the countryside to the towns , which the authorities blocked by issuing internal passports and banning rail travel .
Those who remained in the villages were forced to forage illegally for food in the fields of the collective farms , which carried a sentence of imprisonment or even execution .
They were not allowed to keep a single handful of grain for themselves .
A rule of ' five ears of grain ' was imposed , by which anyone who picked more than five ears of grain faced the death penalty .
Unfortunately , the Holodomor , or the great famine , is an event in history that is still practically unknown in many countries of Western Europe .
Until recently , these historical facts were completely denied by the USSR .
Any mention of the matter was , before the fall of the Soviet Union , treated as a crime of ' anti-Soviet propaganda ' .
Active means of disinformation were used against Western journalists .
Only recently have documents from the population registers come to light , revealing the numbers affected by the mass starvation .
The famine in Ukraine has been recognised as genocide by the governments or parliaments of 26 countries , including Poland .
I am deeply convinced that the European Parliament will not remain inactive on this issue .
We have to recognise that the Holodomor was a crime against the Ukrainian people and a crime against humanity , and firmly condemn the actions of the Stalinist regime against Ukrainian farmers .
I also believe that it is high time that all information on the famine is made public .
The countries of the former Soviet Union should open their archives on the Holodomor in Ukraine in 1932-1933 to scholars so that impartial studies can be carried out .
This year is the 75th anniversary of this shocking crime .
I would like to use this opportunity to extend my deepest sympathies to the Ukrainian people , which had to undergo this huge tragedy .
Madam President , I have chosen almost the same introduction to my speech as Mr Tannock .
That does not happen very often .
' The past is the prologue of the future ' is the maxim displayed at the entrance to the National Archives in Washington and with good reason .
This phrase encapsulates the hope that people can learn from history .
Sometimes they do , but not always .
We can but try .
I have noticed time and again - and the motion on the Holodomor was an occasion to do so once again - that not all chapters in the history of eastern and western Europe in the last century are equally common knowledge .
When the groups were debating whether or not to in fact table today 's resolution , the overriding opinion was initially one of scepticism ; when questioned , most Members admitted to having no idea as to what Holodomor actually means and what it stands for .
Perhaps this is the start of a joint learning curve about such a terrible moment in history which took place at the heart of Europe not even a century , just a little over half a century ago , and which will give us the chance to write history accurately with the help of the survivors .
For the Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance , the commemoration of the victims of this tragedy needs to be the focal point of the avowal we make in signing this resolution .
We believe that proper commemoration of the victims depends on our knowing about this tragedy , this massive crime on the part of the Soviet regime .
Secondly , we hope that this history will be processed jointly in Ukraine and Russia .
What we do not want - and I say this as a German born in the 1950s - is for this processing of history and this proper writing of history to deepen the rift between nations .
We do not want that either within Ukraine or between Ukraine and Russia .
I therefore believe that opening up the archives is an important prerequisite .
This is the demand that must be met .
The Council of Europe should also discuss this , so that Moscow opens up these archives .
I am delighted that the European Parliament has managed to find a position of unity .
I truly hope that the writing of history and commemoration of the victims is the main focus in Ukraine and that this catastrophe is not manipulated for political purposes .
Then we will have taken a big step towards making the wish that people really would learn from the past come true .
Madam President , this year we mark the 75th anniversary of the famine in Ukraine in 1932-1933 .
The famine was not a natural disaster , but the result of Joseph Stalin 's genocidal plan by which , having dealt with the Ukrainian intelligentsia , he aimed to destroy the rural population of Ukraine .
Some 10 million men , women and children died as a result of this genocide .
It was a purposeful and systematic extermination carried out by the authorities of the Soviet Union .
The criminal intentions of the communists were clear .
While Ukrainians were starving to death , the Soviets exported millions of tonnes of grain , and sealed the borders of Ukraine to prevent the devastated population from entering Russia .
They turned down offers of international humanitarian aid , claiming that the famine did not exist .
In the present Russian Federation , there is hypocrisy over the history of communist crimes , and Stalin is presented as an effective manager .
Some Western countries kept quiet during this huge tragedy for the Ukrainian people , as they were in the process of establishing diplomatic ties with the Soviet Union , which they wanted to make dependent on economic cooperation .
Today we cannot keep quiet , and it is our duty to honour the memory of the victims of the Holodomor .
on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group . - ( DE ) Madam President , Commissioner , I speak to you as someone who has spent many years of his life in Ukraine , who has lived there and who is therefore , naturally , very emotionally involved .
There is not one reason , not one excuse for qualifying or justifying the famine in 1932 and 1933 .
It affected Ukraine , Russia , especially areas along the Volga , the Don and the Kuban , Western Siberia , the Southern Urals and the northern part of Kazakhstan .
Millions of people of various nationalities , Ukrainians , Russians , Kazakhs , Jews , Germans , Belarussians , Tartars and many others , starved to death .
We must commemorate these victims and clearly state that this famine was the expression and result of an inhumane policy , of the crime of exporting cereals while allowing one 's own people to die of starvation .
Why then can I not agree with this resolution ?
Firstly , because this resolution links this catastrophe and this crime to Ukraine and people of Ukrainian nationality alone .
As I said at the beginning , this does not reflect the historical truth .
Anyone who does not consider the other socialist republics of the Soviet Union and the other various nationalities at the same time is guilty of racism and of contempt for the suffering of all those affected .
Secondly , this resolution recognises the Holodomor as genocide .
Genocide is defined as extermination according to ethnic criteria .
This applies in particular to the Holocaust .
To equate one with the other undermines the argument of the singularity of the national socialist crime of the annihilation of Jews in Europe , the recognition of which has , to date , been the subject of broad democratic consensus .
The severity needed in condemning these events in the Soviet Union requires no such equation .
I am convinced that this was the main reason for the declaration by the Israeli ambassador to Ukraine , Mrs Kalay-Kleitman , who stated in an interview with the Serkalo Nedeli that Israel cannot recognise the Holodomor as an act of ethnic genocide .
Thirdly , 10 December 2008 marks the 60th anniversary of the UN Declaration of Human Rights .
Human rights are universal and indivisible .
You cannot take a selective , circumstantial or expedient approach to them .
The 20th century saw a devastating multitude of horrendous crimes which are not comparable but which nonetheless caused the death of millions of innocent people : the First World War , the fascist invasion , the aggression of Japan towards China and Korea , the atomic bombs dropped by the USA on Hiroshima and Nagasaki , Stalin 's policy against his own people , the ravages of various colonial powers in their spheres of influence , the terror of the Khmer Rouge , the slaughter of Tutsi and Hutus .
This horrifying list is almost endless .
The European Parliament should have an interest in castigating such inhumanity in all its permutations .
Fourthly , there should never be starvation ever again - either for political or for economic reasons .
In view of the billions given to aid the banks , Ingeborg Schäuble , the outgoing chairwoman of Welthungerhilfe , has called for a rescue package against world hunger .
EUR 14 billion a year are needed for agriculture in development countries in order to achieve the Millennium Goals and halve the number of hungry people by 2015 .
In 2007 , this figure stood at 923 million people .
We must do everything so that hunger is eradicated like the plague .
on behalf of the IND / DEM Group . - ( NL ) Madam President , holodomor is an amalgamation of the Ukrainian words holod ( starvation ) and moryty ( put to death ) and therefore means ' death by starvation ' .
Holodomor refers to the death by starvation of 6 to 7 million people , 3.5 million of whom were in Ukraine , 2 million in Kazakhstan , and hundreds of thousands in the North Caucasus by the Volga and in Western Siberia in 1932 and 1933 .
Holodomor stands for the forceful despoilment of the Ukrainian farming population of their cereal harvest by Stalin and his henchmen as effective Bolshevist means of educating the people in the country in the spirit of forced collectivisation of agriculture .
Holodomor stands for the deliberate denial of the acute famine in Ukraine and elsewhere in the Soviet Union by the Stalinists , so that millions of victims remained cut off from any form of internal or external aid .
Holodomor stands for uninterrupted cereal exports by the Soviet leadership during the years of starvation 1932-1933 , even though these would have fed about one and a half million people for a whole year .
Holodomor stands for the genocide of Ukrainian villagers by adopting a starvation policy pure and simple in the form of a complete economic blockade of the Ukrainian countryside by meting out penalties in kind , and by introducing a freeze in supplies and blacklists on the basis of the Decree of 18 November 1932 , as prescribed by Molotov , Stalin 's then envoy in Charkiv .
Holodomor stands for Stalin 's paranoia about Ukrainian nationalism , which the great leader considered to be the main cause for what he saw as insufficient cereal supplies from Europe 's granary .
Holodomor stands for Stalin 's intentions of dashing all Ukrainian dreams of autonomy , or even independence , for ever .
Today , we know that he failed in his demonic plan .
( FR ) Madam President , from Lenin 's Soviet Russia to Kim Il-Sung 's present-day North Korea , via Mao 's China , Mengistu 's Ethiopia and Pol Pot 's Cambodia - and this list is , unfortunately , not exhaustive - it can be said that famine is consubstantial with communism .
However , the famine that killed almost 10 million Ukrainians between 1932 and 1933 was not only the result of the economic and social absurdity of communism , or of the hatred that it feels towards the peasant community , but was planned by the Soviet authorities who , on the one hand , requisitioned all the peasants ' food stocks , including their grain , and , on the other , used the police to prevent , by all means , the departure en masse of Ukrainians who were trying to escape death as a result of the requisition .
This is what is still happening today in North Korea .
Article 6 of the Statute of the International Criminal Court defines genocide as the intent to destroy , in whole or in part , a national , ethnic , racial or religious group , as such , and also , I quote , ' deliberately inflicting on the group conditions of life calculated to bring about its physical destruction in whole or in part ' .
The extermination by famine , the Holodomor , decided on by the Soviet communists in 1932 , fits this definition , whatever the view of our fellow Member , Mr Markov .
On 28 November 2006 , the Ukrainian Parliament described the Holodomor as a genocide .
It is regrettable that the United Nations , due to the Russian veto and the cowardice of the French and United Kingdom Governments , has refused to give it this description .
The latter does not , moreover , call into question the honour of the Russian people , who were also victims of communism , but it does denounce the horror of this totalitarianism , which has killed 200 million human beings worldwide , and which we are , it must be said , denouncing very belatedly .
( ES ) Madam President , today 's debate is intended to commemorate ( meaning to keep alive in our memories ) the sacrifice of so many millions of people who fell victim to a demographic disaster , unprecedented in peacetime , due to Stalin 's policies .
Madam President , I believe that the famine suffered by those people was a direct attack on the Ukrainian peasantry who were firmly opposed to collectivisation .
As recalled in this House , in particular by Mr Bielan , this was a deliberate act because the 1932 harvest , although below average , would have been sufficient to feed the entire population , as proven by the fact that in that year , the Soviet Union exported more than one million tonnes of grain to western Europe .
The result , as highlighted by all the speakers in this debate , was the deaths of between six and eight million people in the whole of the Soviet Union , and between five and six million in Ukraine .
The gravity of this event stemmed not only from the deaths of so many people , but also from the silence and concealment .
That is why I believe , Madam President , that it is vital for the European Parliament , as other institutions such as the United Nations or the OSCE Parliamentary Assembly have done , to today raise its voice in homage and to keep alive in all our memories the sacrifice of all those people who fell victim to a totalitarian and criminal ideology .
However , Madam President , and this too has been said in this House , the most important thing is to look to the future and ensure that the children being born today in the great country of Ukraine have to resort to newspaper libraries and history books to discover the horror experienced by previous generations in the Holodomor .
( PL ) Madam President , today the European Parliament is marking the 75th anniversary of the mass famine in Ukraine , one of the greatest crimes against humanity of the 20th century .
The famine in Ukraine , the Volga region , Kazakhstan and other parts of the Soviet Union in 1932-1933 was not the result of natural causes , but of Stalin 's system of wielding power .
Forced collectivisation of agriculture and fighting against private ownership in the countryside , destruction of the middle classes and private enterprise under a totalitarian dictatorship , violence by the state against farmers , meant defeat , starvation and death in horrifying circumstances for millions of people .
The European Union honours the victims of this crime , and salutes those who survived it , the last living witnesses to this tragedy .
The great famine affected the Ukrainian people in particular .
Stalin 's policy in Ukraine involved , on the one hand , the inhumane conditions of collectivisation and , on the other , the destruction of national culture , churches and repressions against the intelligentsia .
Many Ukrainian writers were shot , imprisoned or sent to labour camps during the 1930s .
In 1932 , the existing writers ' groups were dissolved .
Many national cultural figures perished .
The Rozstriliane Vidrodzenniya ( ' Firing-squad Renaissance ' ) symbolised Ukraine in the 20th century .
The mass famine in Ukraine , as well as in other regions of the Soviet Union , is a fundamental research task for historians , political analysts and scholars of totalitarianism .
The great famine cannot be the subject of ideological manipulation or other nationalist policies .
All archives on the Stalinist system must be opened , and meticulous studies carried out to determine the numbers of the victims , with precise academic descriptions of the causes , the course and the consequences of the famine .
Knowing the truth about the past will serve unity , the establishment of democratic culture as a permanent foundation for Europe .
I would like to use the occasion of this debate to remember the great works of the Polish emigré , Jerzy Giedroyc , whose Kultura published in Paris brought understanding between Poland and Ukraine .
I would like to hold up the Ukrainian language anthology published in Kultura in 1957 concerning the persecution of Ukrainian writers , Rozstriliane Vidrodzenniya , which was edited by Lavrinenko , and the Polish-Ukrainian chronicles from 1952 written by Professor Bohdan Osadchuk in the same journal , to the European Parliament as an example of Europe working together to overcome historical fatalism , and to create agreement between the nations regarding a future democratic community .
( LT ) Ladies and gentlemen , the great Holodomor famine which occurred in Ukraine is an episode in the history of Europe which we must not forget .
I am convinced that the famine must be recognised as an act of genocide implemented by the Soviet Union against the Ukrainian nation .
This is one of the worst crimes against humanity committed during the period of the Soviet Union .
The tragedy of the people of Ukraine was a guarded secret ; even in Europe , few people know that one of the most savage crimes of the 20th century was committed not in some distant land , but here in Europe and during peacetime .
Millions of Ukrainians became victims of the famine engineered by the Soviet authorities .
The annihilation of the peasants by the Soviet totalitarian regime also represents an identity crisis for Ukraine .
Thus , firstly , we have to condemn the defenders of the regime in the former Soviet republics who deny this and other crimes of the Communist period ; secondly , we must support Ukraine 's aim , the aim of our future colleague to have this genocide of the Ukrainian nation recognised at an international level .
Thirdly , the Holodomor is just one of the crimes of communism , communism whose crimes inevitably must still be heard at a second Nuremberg .
( DE ) Madam President , the European Union , together with numerous other countries , has recognised the catastrophe known as the Holodomor which took place in Ukraine in 1932-1933 as a crime against the Ukrainian people .
Even the United Nations passed a resolution at its General Assembly in 2007 commemorating the victims of the Holodomor and condemning the regime .
The Stalinist regime in the Soviet Union artificially provoked a food shortage to force Ukraine - but not only Ukraine - into its planned agricultural economy .
This objective was prized more highly in the eyes of the rulers of the time than preserving human life .
No consideration whatsoever was given to the people and millions suffered an agonising death .
This means that the Holodomor was not a natural disaster ; it was planned by man and executed in cold blood .
I welcome today 's debate .
Consistent rehabilitation and the publicising of crimes are the only way to come to terms with the past .
Opening up archives is a first , important step in the right direction .
This applies not only to Ukraine , but to all other countries which lived under Soviet communist rule and , of course , to Russia itself .
As experience from dealing with archives has shown , general and public access alone does not suffice .
On the contrary , support needs to be provided during the search for information .
This can be achieved , for example , by opening documentation centres and employing historians .
Crimes cannot be undone , but they - and more importantly their victims - should never be forgotten .
The worldwide recognition of the Holodomor as mass murder of the people of Ukraine and elsewhere is of huge significance to world politics .
This could create a precedent for many other nations in whose past mass murder was committed .
In all events , the European Union is sending Russia a clear message by recalling the crime committed and deeply condemning it , thus making it perfectly clear for the forthcoming partnership and association negotiations that one of the basic pillars of the EU , namely respect for human rights , is non-negotiable .
( PL ) Madam President , in 1932-1933 , the authorities in the USSR started forcibly requisitioning food from collective farms in Ukraine , leaving the farm workers without food .
This resulted in the famine known as the Holodomor and the deaths of millions of inhabitants of a country which had previously been a breadbasket .
Given that the object of this operation , for which Stalin and his minions were responsible , was Ukraine 's farmers as a social group and as a nationality , the Holodomor meets the definition of genocide contained in the UN Convention of 1948 .
The resolution we have drawn up for the 75th anniversary of the Holodomor is a compromise which largely concedes the truth of this crime .
All it lacks is clearly calling the Holodomor a crime of genocide .
This is the result of a number of groups in this House .
During the compromise negotiations , I noticed that the group of socialists is generally opposed to historical debates .
This is a fine stance to take when you consider how the European socialists are always eager to condemn Nazism and General Franco , while they emotionally refuse to do so in the case of the Soviet authorities or the Spanish republicans .
During these negotiations , I also heard how commemorating the victims involves deference , thereby avoiding words such as genocide .
This kind of moralising and selective memory among the European socialists shows that historical materialism has been superseded by hysterical relativism .
I remain hopeful , however , that this does not apply to all members on the left of this House .
I also heard that the socialists are against voting on historical truth .
That is the honest truth .
The problem is that here we are not talking about the truth of the Holodomor , but only voicing the truth about our own selves .
A resolution on matters of history is always an acknowledgment of values , while the lack of position is also , in itself , a position .
It means that the phrases spoken are hollow .
How is it possible to express one 's relation to values other than by assessing events from the past ?
Genocide is genocide , regardless of whether it was perpetrated by Hitler or Stalin , or of how the present Russian government sees it .
If anybody today said that the victims of the Holocaust deserve less attention than the gas chambers , they would put their credibility in question .
We are all equal before the law and the truth !
( EL ) Madam President , the arrow of the famine in Ukraine is being withdrawn from the quiver of anti-communism in order to serve the needs of the anti-communist campaign and rewrite history , to criminalise the communist ideology and ban actions by communists .
There are , moreover , numerous examples which we could cite of countries in which the symbols of , and action by , communist parties are still banned , countries which belong to the European Union .
Thus , an undisguised attempt is being made to distort historic facts and interpret them in an arbitrary and unscientific manner because , quite simply , the basic objective is to underpin the strategic defamation of socialism and communism .
Anticommunism has always accompanied the harshest and most savage attacks against the people .
As the anti-grassroots attack by the European Union against the fundamental rights acquired by the working class through hard struggle and sacrifice becomes stronger , as its exploitation by capital becomes more savage and barbaric , as the imperialist policy of the European Union against countries and nations becomes more aggressive and criminal , so anticommunism , the reactionary defamation of socialism we saw in the 20th century , and the attack on the vanguard of the working class and the oppressed sections of communist parties intensify .
This vulgar propaganda is a sequel to the attempt to use coarse lies and slander in order to blacken , in the eyes of the mainly young people , the massive contribution of the socialist system ; its contribution to the defeat of fascism and to the construction , for the first time in the history of mankind , of a society free from the exploitation of man by man .
An attempt is being made to equate socialism , that is , everything progressive born of human thought , with the reactionary and inhumane fascism which is the true child of the barbaric capitalist system .
This specific famine in Ukraine was mainly due , as all objective historians agree , to massive sabotage by the rich peasants who , in reaction to the new Soviet power and collectivisation of the land , first caused a civil war and then destroyed machinery , killed animals , set fire to the property of the kolkhoz and generally sabotaged the sowing and harvesting of crops in any way they could , and to the huge drought and typhus epidemic which broke out in that area of Ukraine at the time .
Obviously , a debate such as this to uncover the historic truth cannot be held in this manner .
If you really think that you have arguments , organise a debate in which all the scientific facts which will help to uncover the truth can be expressed .
( PL ) Madam President , the Holodomor is a fact and symbolises one of the most inhumane methods of slaughter .
An ideology called upon to serve the ordinary people took a form which today beggars the imagination .
It was a simple method - it required no armaments or men , no gas chambers .
All it took was to gather up everything the earth had given , and the " disobedient " population would disappear from its villages , because it did not fit into the system .
People were pushed into a Utopian vision , and despite its horror and its cost , many still find it attractive and it is defended by some members on the left side of this House .
The Bolshevik ideology used methods which cannot be justified in any way .
My PhD on Ukraine dealt with the traumas of people who had survived this socialist horror , even though survivors were the exception .
The accounts provided by survivors reveal that starvation led to cannibalism ; for example , we are aware of the case of a mother who sent her six-year-old son into the forest in winter , because he would not have survived in the village but been eaten .
On the one hand , we have the 1930s , with Joseph Stalin , the wise father and friend of the peoples heralding world revolution and , on the other , we had millions dying in the streets with swollen stomachs .
It must have been a horrifying sight even for the political commissars serving the authorities .
That was how it was in eastern Ukraine .
10 years later , however , a tragedy of the same nature befell the Poles in what was then eastern Poland , albeit on a lesser scale .
The nationalist ideology of the Ukrainian UPA , which colluded with the Nazis , resulted in the ethnic cleansing of Poles .
The methods were equally savage : burning alive , cutting open pregnant women 's stomachs , beheading children with axes .
The men were at the front then .
Today , this Golgotha of the east , as the survivors call it , is a subject of taboo and embarrassed silence and , most ironically , statues are now being erected to the nationalist leaders of that time .
Perhaps now is an occasion - and there are observers from Ukraine here - while honouring the victims of the Holodomor - also to honour the Poles and Ukrainians who were so savagely murdered for not agreeing with that ideology .
It is not easy to admit to such facts , but failing to do so will make it difficult to bring peoples closer together , to accept Ukraine into the sphere of the European values for which we strive in this House .
I understand Russia 's protests against the European Union .
If we are going to speak of the Holodomor , as they propose , we should also talk about the extermination of the Indians in the New World by the colonists .
The Holodomor is worthy of particular condemnation .
However , let us also add the millions sent to labour camps , i.e. death camps , in Siberia during World War II - Ukrainians , Poles , Tartars .
Just for the benefit of this gathering , I would like to add that of the 100 000 POWs of General Paulus ' army sent to Siberia following Stalingrad , only 5 000 survived up to 1955 .
For the sake of Europe , its Parliament cannot trivialise these tragedies of the 20th century .
( HU ) The greatest Hungarian poet of the 20th century said that ' We must confess the past ! '
Yes , we must confess the past , but not in order to foster tensions between peoples and countries .
Every people must face its own sins ; the way in which the Germans have faced their own role in the Second World War is exemplary .
Mr Zaleski , as a Pole , alluded to the fact that many people have sins to confess , and that the Holodomor is not the only one .
I speak as a representative of a people whose parliament in 2003 was the first to condemn the Holodomor .
At the same time , I would very much like it if this debate was not an anti-Russian one , because those present in this House , those who take the floor , should be familiar with the ethnic map of Ukraine , and should know which counties were affected by this Stalinist horror , by means of which the Communist dictatorship strove to exterminate the peasantry - for the most part those who died were Ukrainians , but not exclusively Ukrainians .
In those town and cities - Donetsk , Dnepropetrovsk , Odessa - there were also Romanians , Russians , Jews and other groups who died .
In these places , it was the peasantry that they sought to exterminate .
We must recognise that this was genocide , but not on ethnic grounds .
Based on the principles of an unacceptable , failed 20th-century Stalinist , Communist dictatorship , they sought to wipe out an entire class , the peasantry , the peasant farmers .
The victims of this campaign were mainly Ukrainians , but we must pay tribute to all the victims , regardless of nationality .
What Mr Roszkowski said is not true , namely that the Social Democratic group is trying to whitewash something .
No , we are simply honouring the facts , and insisting on the facts , because by taking sides on behalf of the Holodomor , we are not prepared to take part in a condemnation of Russia - although Russia has a lot of soul-searching to do on account of Stalinism , the massacre at Katyn - but neither should we forget that the Russian people suffered at least as much from the Stalinist dictatorship , and had as many victims as other peoples .
Therefore , I say that we should pay tribute , but let us also try in these debates to show some respect for historical facts .
We bow our heads before the victims of the Holodomor , but we cannot serve Ukrainian nationalism ; rather , we must work to ensure that Russia , Ukraine and every country face its past and make peace .
( HU ) Madam President , after many years of denial and silence , no one today disputes that the Holodomor was one of the most serious , deliberately caused and politically motivated mass murders of the 20th century .
The European Parliament is fulfilling a longstanding obligation when it bows its head in memory of the victims .
The closest ally of sin is indifference and forgetfulness .
We must not forget !
Millions died in order that Stalin might fulfil his dictatorial plan .
That plan was not only to collectivise agriculture forcibly - that was one of his aims - but equally to break Ukrainian national self-awareness and destroy the institutions of national identity .
During the years of the Holodomor , and in the course of the 1930s , 80 % of Ukrainian intellectuals were killed .
The independent Ukrainian church was abolished .
The Ukrainian language was squeezed out of public life .
Therefore the Holodomor is an indelible part of Ukrainian national identity and collective memory .
We must recognise the sacrifice that Ukraine 's citizens made in order to live in freedom and be able to decide on their own future .
The European Parliament recognises Ukraine 's European ambitions .
By adopting this resolution , we are sending the message that not only Ukraine 's past , but its future is also inseparably bound up with that of Europe .
Thank you for the floor .
( LV ) Ladies and gentlemen , the artificially provoked famine in Ukraine , or genocidal famine , is one of the greatest crimes against humanity in world history .
According to all the criteria , it meets the definition of genocide .
Firstly , it is of an ethnic nature , since it was directed against the rebelling Ukrainian people , who had displayed their opposition to Russification on more than one occasion .
Secondly , it was also a social genocide against prosperous Ukrainian farmers , although the famine killed everyone , regardless of their level of prosperity .
This crime was completely cynical .
Stalin 's totalitarian Communist regime found the cheapest way of killing a large number of people .
Millions died in Ukraine at the hands of the slow , terrible famine .
Now , documentary evidence is accessible which shows that the Nazis themselves in the 1930s went to Moscow to acquire experience in the organisation of mass murder .
The decisions at that time about the expropriation of food were taken in Moscow .
The decisions about the 2006 gas war between Ukraine and Russia were once again taken in Moscow .
Contemporary Russia , through its conception of foreign policy , is clearly demonstrating that it is recapturing its position in its part of the world .
Moscow 's court historians are not ashamed to say that the artificially created famine in Ukraine was exclusively man-made .
It is to be hoped that Ukraine will not be the next state , after Georgia , upon which Russia will be able to inflict brutal aggression .
We must clearly say that the events in Ukraine were genocide .
My country , Latvia , has already done so , just as many other states have also done , through statements by their parliaments .
I would like to stress , once again , that the crimes of totalitarian Communism ought to be considered to be subject to condemnation in just the same way as Nazi crimes .
We need another Nuremberg , because innocent victims are victims , regardless of who has committed crimes against them .
Although our peoples have varied experiences , nonetheless a uniform understanding of historical events in the European Union is an absolute necessity .
In fact , this is the foundation of our common future .
Thank you .
Madam President , artificial , man-made famines were used systematically as a tool by Communist totalitarian regimes .
Seventy-five years ago , Stalin decided to uproot the Ukrainian national identity and resistance by creating such a famine in the very bread-basket of Europe .
Regions struck by famine were not merely denied assistance .
Even worse , hundreds of villages were cordoned off by the Red Army .
Starving people were denied the most elementary human right - the right to escape from certain death .
People who tried to flee were hunted down like wild animals and shot .
Only today are we reacting to one of the most appalling crimes by the Communist dictatorship .
An authoritative assessment of such crimes is long overdue .
All victims of the crimes against humanity deserve the same status .
There cannot be first-class Nazi victims or second-class victims of Communism just because Europe still lacks an integrated approach to all totalitarian regimes and has hesitated to take a concrete stand on crimes that took place in the eastern part of the continent .
We have a duty to know what happened under Stalin just as well as we know what happened under Hitler .
We need to extend not only our solidarity to the Ukrainian nation and , indeed , to all nations that have suffered under totalitarian crimes , but also to pass a moral verdict .
Only in this way can we reach the goal of these debates : to guarantee that this monumental , destructive disregard for human lives and dignity will never be repeated in any part of Europe .
We need an all-European reconciliation , a reconciliation that can result only from truth and justice .
Our duty is to make sure that the famous ' never again ' will equally apply to the Ukrainian nation .
( PL ) When asked whether it was worth risking nuclear war to overthrow capitalism , Mao Zedong said it was worth sacrificing even a hundred million lives so that the rest of humanity could live happily under communism .
Joseph Stalin had the same gruesome , criminal logic .
When resistance against collectivisation among the peasants grew , he decided to physically eliminate those living in the most rebellious regions .
These regions were inhabited by Ukrainians .
Eliminating these also solved the problem of nationality , because as Stalin said on another occasion , ' the problem of nationality is basically a peasant problem . '
Hence , as a result of the planned criminal campaign , in Ukraine itself , millions of people died .
It is telling enough that official population statistics for Ukraine put the population at well over 31 million in 1926 , while in 1939 , despite significant natural population growth , the population was only 28 million .
It was not only the population of Soviet Ukraine that died .
Administratively-ordered food requisitions , accompanied by bans on food imports from other regions , resulted in famine in the Volga region , the Kuban and the northern Caucasus .
The majority of the population of these areas was Ukrainian , but there were also Russians .
Today , we are also raising the issue of the famine in Ukraine to manifest our conviction that this fragment of the dramatic history of our common Europe is still not sufficiently well known .
( Applause )
( PL ) Madam President , the last century saw huge numbers of terrible massacres .
Some were conducted by shooting , gassing , with axes and pitchforks , while others were committed through starvation .
In the territory of the then Soviet Ukraine , it took the form of condemning millions to starvation in an area that has the richest soil in the world .
This was done deliberately , and not caused by the weather or natural disaster .
It is worrying that , over the years , this genocide against Ukrainians , Poles and Russians was not called by its proper name , as it is worrying today that the genocide committed against hundreds of thousands of Poles , Jews and Ukrainians who resisted the fascism of the Ukrainian nationalists on the former and present territory of Poland during World War II is not termed genocide .
It is also all the more worrying that a lack of condemnation today justifies and legitimises organisations which refer to the heritage of these murderers .
These organisations are operating legally in Europe today .
There is no politically justified genocide .
All must be named and condemned .
Madam President , we are talking about this man-made famine now , 75 years after the events , because , if we do not talk about it now , then it could become like the dark midnight of justice .
It is still two hours to midnight now , but we are building the future .
We cannot build that future on wobbly foundations .
It has to be built on a solid foundation , and a solid foundation means the truth .
The future cannot be built on lies , which would be like building it on sand .
It does not really matter how many people died in Ukraine .
What matters is that the victims of that man-made famine - the Ukrainian populace - feel that justice is being done , because we have to restore people 's faith in justice .
Otherwise , we cannot build a just society and they cannot believe in a future .
All victims ' cries have to be heard , regardless of whether they are the victims of Nazism , apartheid , slavery or Communism .
This House stands for the fundamental values of humanity .
We cannot send out an ambiguous message .
That is why we have to be truly unbiased , however painful that might be politically for us .
Otherwise we are not defending human dignity .
It is very alarming that , in Russia today , history is being rewritten , so how can we build a common future ?
It is a fitting time for us to discuss Ukraine now , because at this very moment , in 2008 , Ukraine needs help .
It needs hope for a better future , which means accession to the EU one day .
( CS ) The famine was the result of a carefully planned systematic policy of J. V. Stalin aimed at a clear set of objectives : the voluntary surrender of land ownership , the establishment of agricultural collectives , the diversion of all agricultural products and seed stocks to feed the Russian army and the deliberate starving of Ukraine 's towns and cities .
The main aim was to suppress and destroy Ukraine as a nation .
It was genocide .
It involved the persecution of the civilian population within the country for reasons of politics and race and it therefore meets the legal definition of a crime against humanity .
This is not simply a question of commemorating the famine .
It is a question of symbolic redress for the victims , of careful study , analysis , knowledge and acceptance of shared responsibility and along with that a shared closing of accounts at a European level .
Communism is a crime against humanity .
Its consequences are comparable with those of fascism and Nazism .
Let us therefore establish a European Institute of the European Conscience and let us also celebrate 23 August as the Day for Victims of All Totalitarian Systems .
Let us understand communism as a terrible part of our common European history .
Only through a shared recognition of responsibility for the past will we find the way to the future .
Situations such as those faced by Iraqi society , and other parts of the world today , for example , teach us that the deeper the damage to the fabric of society the more painful , costly and difficult in human terms it is to repair it .
Ukraine still bears heavy scars .
Let us offer her our help .
( PL ) Madam President , today the European Parliament is remembering the victims of one of Stalin 's greatest crimes , the victims of the famine that was deliberately caused by the despotic Bolshevik regime that ruled the Soviet Union and whose intention was to weaken and destroy the Ukrainian nation , and thereby strangle its desire for freedom and to establish its own , independent state .
Ukraine , as well as certain regions of southern Russia , the northern Caucasus and Kazakhstan , saw scenes of appalling , horrifying despair , suffering and desperation by entire families that were starving to death .
Today , we want to pay our respects to all those who were killed during the great famine in Ukraine .
The victims of mass killings , military massacres and ethnic cleansing equally deserve to have their memories honoured , and for the wrongs committed against them to be remembered .
Regardless of the cause for which they were committed , and the ideological goals that drove these actions , the constant element in them is the suffering of the victims .
Let us show solidarity with the Ukrainian people , but let us also ask Ukraine to come to terms with the dark pages in its history .
In 1939-1945 , nationalists of the Ukrainian National Army brutally murdered 150 000 Poles , mainly women and old people .
The husbands and fathers exiled to Siberia may have been living in Gehenna there , but had the hope that their families in the eastern borderlands were safe .
Unfortunately , these families fell victim to the nationalists , who saw no place for their Polish neighbours in the new Ukrainian state .
The victims of the massacres in the eastern borderlands are waiting for the day when their fate is also written into the common conscience of Europe , as today the victims of the great famine have been .
Madam President , coming from Ireland , a country that also suffered a tragic famine over 150 years ago , I understand the Ukrainian desire to have the victims of their artificial famine from 1932 to 1933 commemorated .
This resolution of Parliament follows previous commemorative resolutions from other international organisations such as UNESCO and OSCE .
Our resolution on the commemoration of the victims of the Holodomor in Ukraine was adopted at the 34th session of the UNESCO general conference , which was supported by Ireland among others .
At the Madrid OSCE ministerial meeting in November 2007 , 30 countries associated themselves with Ukraine 's statement commemorating the 75th anniversary of the Holodomor .
European integration must continue to be based on a readiness to come to terms with the 20th century 's tragic history .
This present European Parliament resolution makes an important call on countries originating from the Soviet Union to provide full access to archives on this tragedy for comprehensive scrutiny in order to unveil and fully investigate the causes and consequences of this famine .
Present-day relatives of the victims are seeking closure and should , therefore , have the right to access such information in order to come to an understanding of the greatest catastrophe in Ukraine 's modern history .
I add my voice to this expression of sympathy to the millions of Ukrainians that suffered this calamity and , in particular , to the relatives of those who died as a result of this artificial famine .
( SK ) My father , Štefan Kányai , who spent over ten terrible years in Russian gulags in the Urals , Karaganda and Kazakhstan , often said to me : ' There are witnesses still living who saw and remember Stalin 's genocide , a mass murder that was committed without weapons .
Stalin 's regime ripped out many pages from the annals of European history and your duty is therefore to open archives in the former Soviet Union and to replace those missing pages .
The memory of the victims is sacred and therefore you must act ! '
I feel enormously moved that my name , together with the names of my colleagues in the PPE-DE Group and the names of colleagues from other political groups , is to be found at the head of a resolution through which we confirm that European integration is based on a readiness to come to terms with the tragic history of the 20th century .
May this resolution , coming as it does in 2008 , the 75th anniversary of the famine , be a mark of our fellow feeling for the people of Ukraine and especially the survivors of the famine , as well as the families and relatives of the victims .
May this resolution be a lesson for a new generation which has not experienced persecution .
Freedom is precious and must not be taken for granted .
Evil still exists and must be confronted .
( PL ) Madam President , it was only after the collapse of the eastern bloc that we started to become aware of the horrifying truth about what had gone on in Ukraine and other parts of the Soviet Union under Stalin .
Totalitarianism had prevented the world from finding out about these repulsive crimes against humanity .
The great famine in Ukraine in 1932-1933 is a historical fact which was denied by the communist authorities throughout the existence of the Soviet Union .
We now know about countless innocent humans who were condemned to die slowly of starvation .
Although many years have passed since the Holodomor , we are far from knowing exactly how many people were killed by Stalin 's policies .
I would like to emphasise that any acknowledgment of the great famine as genocide or exposing Stalinist totalitarianism , is not directed against the Kremlin , as it is often misrepresented .
It is simply paying our respects to the victims of a totalitarian system .
The European Union , as an international institution which is so dedicated to human rights , should clearly and unambiguously state its position .
If we want to honour the memory of the victims with dignity and as befits them , we should adopt a resolution which clearly shows the historical truth , and expresses the solidarity and sympathy of the European Union .
( PL ) Madam President , today it is hard for us to imagine what mass starvation means .
It is also difficult for us to imagine how it was possible for millions of people in Ukraine , which was capable of feeding the whole of Europe , to die of starvation .
It was a result of totalitarian communism , and took the lives of children , women and men , Ukrainians and of other nationalities living in the then Soviet Union .
What should we call this crime that was committed 75 years ago ?
There is only one name for it , and that is genocide .
For stealing five ears of grain from a collective farm , people were put to death or sent to camps for years .
Today when we talk of this event , we are not speaking against Russia .
We want to pay our respects to the victims of communism , and say loudly and clearly : never again such crimes .
Madam President , honourable Members , I do not know what more can be said in condemnation of a crime as atrocious as that perpetrated by the Stalinist dictatorship , one of the two criminal dictatorships that ravaged Europe last century .
No further words are needed because those Members that have spoken have done so in a convincing and worthy manner .
I would like to conclude this debate , Madam President , by reading a few words penned by the great writer Vasilij Grossman , who described the most tragic moments of the Holodomor in his novel Forever Flowing .
I read it as though it were a sort of secular prayer , a remembrance for millions of victims , with which to associate the memory of so many other innocent victims whose sacrifice , I say again , must not be in vain for Europe .
The death , last century , of millions of people at the hand of cruel dictatorships must be the seed from which democracy must continue to germinate .
They must have the opposite effect to the one the criminal dictators intended .
The European Union , as I said in opening , was born to build peace and to guarantee peace .
We cannot , however , forget the sacrifice of so many innocent victims .
I will read to you the simple words with which Grossman recounted that tragedy of many years ago : ' Starvation raised the country to the ground .
First it took the children , then the old and then the middle-aged .
In the beginning they dug graves in which to bury the dead ; then they stopped when they no longer had the strength .
The dead lay in the courtyards and in the end stayed in their huts .
All sank into silence and the whole country was decimated .
I do not know who was the last to die . '
Nous n 'oublierons jamais .
We will never forget those innocent victims , as we seek to build a different future .
I have received four motions for a resolution under Rule 103 ( 2 ) of the Rules of Procedure .
This emotional debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow , Thursday 23 October .
Written statements ( Rule 142 )
, in writing . - ( HU ) It is my conviction that in addition to deepening integration , the European Parliament must also strive systematically to confront the darkest eras of our common history .
It is for this reason , then , that I consider it gratifying that today 's sitting provides the opportunity to draw attention to the Ukrainian famine , one of the saddest , incomprehensibly forgotten memories of the 20th century Communist dictatorships .
The arguments surrounding the famine that cost some 3 million human lives are a good illustration of the fact that to this day , that period of history has still not fully been addressed .
We do not share the opinion of those who attribute the catastrophe purely to the worse-than-average crop yields , the resistance of the Ukrainian population or indeed a few erroneous economic policy decisions .
We must state explicitly that the Ukrainian tragedy was the direct consequence of a policy of terror raised to state level .
By putting a stop to forced collectivisation and the confiscation of food stocks , the leaders of the Soviet Union could have saved millions of human lives , but they did not do so .
It is precisely for this reason that the events of the early 1930s in Ukraine are no different from the most terrible genocides of history .
In my view , all dictatorships , whether we are talking about the cruelties of National Socialist or Communist systems , spring from the same source .
We need to seize every possible tool to strengthen the new generations ' awareness of the horrible deeds of Communism .
The creation of a European research institute and memorial to the history of dictatorships could play a significant role in this process .
in writing . - ( PT ) It was 75 years ago that the Stalinist machinery set in motion one of the worst crimes that Europe has ever known : the Holodomor , the great famine which took the lives of over three million Ukrainians .
Having been deprived , as they still are , of important defining elements of their collective identity , Ukrainians were deliberately deprived of food , in a cruel demonstration of ' real socialism ' and in a context of forced collectivisation and sovietisation campaigns conducted by one of the most homicidal regimes in history .
Ukrainians , together with all other Europeans , are today remembering the Communist brutality , tyranny and violence that rained down on them and that constituted , under international law , a clear case of genocide .
The intention of ' deliberately inflicting on the group conditions of life calculated to bring about its physical destruction in whole or in part ' , in the exact words of the 1948 Convention on the Prevention and Punishment of the Crime of Genocide , is absolutely clear .
One year ago , the President of this Parliament described the Holodomor as a ' terrible crime against humanity ' .
I wholly subscribe to that view and bow my head in memory of the victims .
I salute all Ukrainians , particularly those who live and work in my country , Portugal .
Airport charges
The next item is the recommendation for second reading by Ulrich Stockmann , on behalf of the Committee on Transport and Tourism , on airport charges ( 08332 / 2 / 2008 - C6-0259 / 2008 - .
rapporteur . - ( DE ) Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , after this very moving issue , we now move on to more technical matters .
We want to pass the directive on airport charges at second reading tomorrow and , after the clear vote in the Committee on Transport and Tourism , I am certain that we shall be able to do so .
What is this directive about ?
It introduces uniform principles and procedures throughout Europe for levying airport charges .
This means that transparent bases for calculation , non-discrimination against airlines and a set consultation procedure are some of the factors used to establish fair airport charges .
An independent supervisory authority can resolve conflicts which arise on the basis of clear rules .
This will strengthen the systemic partnership between airports and airlines and prevent any possible abuse of market power .
What was the starting point ?
Over the past 15 years we have made two attempts to reconcile the conflicting interests of airports and airlines in this area .
One of the reasons they failed was because we have totally different procedures and structures in the Member States .
In the United Kingdom , for example , there is a strict regulatory authority which can set ceilings , in five Member States we have airport networks and the practice of cross-subsidy , we have parliaments which decide on airport charges , decentralised competences in Germany and much more besides .
Nonetheless , we have managed to negotiate a sustainable compromise with the Council .
What now are the components of this compromise ?
We have set the scope at airports with over five million passengers a year , plus the largest airports of a Member State .
At present that means that the directive applies to 69 airports in the European Union .
We have introduced a compulsory procedure for regular consultation between airports and airlines and , at the same time , we have laid down a structured arbitration procedure with deadlines and , of course , set up the supervisory authority I referred to .
What do we now mean by fair charges ?
Airport charges should have a stronger cost reference in future , must be substantiated by transparent calculations and must refer to the agreed level of service .
At the same time , there is a strict ban on discrimination .
What this means in principle is that we have the same charges for the same services for every airline at the same airport , with the possibility of differentiation .
What pleases me is that we have allowed this , first and foremost , for noise and pollution .
Some countries will continue to have common charging systems for the aforementioned airport networks and for what are referred to as airport systems in towns and conurbations , but these too must meet the transparency requirements of the directive .
We have tried , by providing for pre-financing of infrastructure through charges , to respond to certain concerns of our colleagues from the eastern European Member States .
This will be possible , even if difficult on the basis of national criteria , provided that ICAO standards are met .
What do we expect from the effects ?
More competition between the European airports , more competition between the various airlines at an airport , perhaps gradually falling ticket prices if the airlines pass the lower charges on to passengers .
The directive has to be implemented in two years ' time .
My thanks to all the shadow rapporteurs for our successful negotiations and to the Slovenian President-in-Office of the Council and the Commission .


Madam President , I would like to congratulate the rapporteur , Mr Stockmann , for his excellent work : he has described very well the content of a text , a proposal for a directive , that we are about to adopt .
It is a proposal that aims to include in Community law certain principles to which all Member States have already subscribed within the framework of the ICAO : non-discrimination , transparency and consultation .
The framework established by the directive will enable us to structure dialogue between carriers and airports for the setting and collecting of charges .
For example , the directive will oblige airports to consult the airlines before taking decisions with regard to airport charges .
I myself proceeded in a similar manner , consulting the airlines and airports before drafting this proposal , which has , in essence , been approved by both parties .
As Mr Stockmann mentioned , the directive introduces the idea of national independent supervisory authorities .
These bodies will play an influential role since they will be responsible for ensuring that the basic principles I outlined are respected .
These are , in broad terms , the aims of the proposal .
I would like to thank the rapporteur again for the work he carried out at second reading in order to seek agreement with the Council .
The result , it is true , has taken a lot of work , many meetings and a commitment from us all , but I believe that we have succeeded in producing a good document .
The results of the negotiations are to be found in a number of amendments that the Commission requires in order to subscribe to it in full .
I am very pleased that the Committee on Transport and Tourism has also unanimously supported this agreement .
I am , of course , ready to follow the debate carefully and to take note of all your comments .
Thank you , Madam President .
Commissioner , in spite of the rain , this could be a nice day .
I would like to congratulate both the rapporteur and the shadow rapporteur since , by joining forces with the Commission , the Slovenian and then the French presidency , we have succeeded , following lengthy discussions , in achieving a good compromise .
We , too , are taking a leap in the dark , and so I would appreciate it if Member States were to begin implementation of this directive as soon as possible , and not only after the two-year period that has been negotiated .
This will allow us to gauge effectively what our legislative activity is worth , and to make the necessary adjustments at the time of the four-year review .
I hope that the Member States understand this and quickly complete the necessary institutional developments , where needed .
I trust , as well , that the directive will result in transparent charges and moderate price increases , so that we can prevent predatory airlines from abusing their superior power to gain an advantage over their competitors by offering the same service for lower prices at airports crying out for customers .
At the same time , we could also ensure airports do not arbitrarily raise their charges in an untransparent manner and , as is often done , by leaps and bounds .
In both cases , the aim is to ensure that European consumers pay only for what they have actually used .
This is another reason why we have not allowed the costs of security or of assistance to disabled passengers to be included in the charges .
I consider it a good compromise that whether or not revenues from an airport 's commercial activities may be taken into account is left to the discretion of the Member State in question .
Similarly , a good result was achieved through the agreement reached regarding airport networks , whereby a common managing body is acceptable , but participants will be subject - as promised by the Commission - to the rules of competition when it comes to setting charges , even if there is a danger of market distortion with respect to nearby airports in other countries .
The compromise regarding spheres of authority is a good one .
In addition to having airports whose annual passenger traffic is over 5 million and the airport with the highest passenger movement in each Member State , I myself would have preferred that smaller and possibly competing airports nearby had also been included .
In order to reach an agreement , however , I abandoned this position , although at the next review I would like to examine this element as well .
I accept , even if I am not happy , that we have confirmed in the recitals the possibility of pre-financing , referring to ICAO policies , although I would have preferred to see these in the main body of the text .
I hope that gradual increases in charges , instead of sudden price rises , will be perceived by passengers in a more benign manner , but this too will need to be looked at upon review .
The result is transparency in financing by the State or other public authorities .
This is an important factor in the competition between airports , and so is taking into account the perspective of environmental protection .
I see as the most significant result the fact that each Member State must establish a strong , independent national authority with considerable powers .
I am proud that the principle whereby , in the event of disputes over establishing the charges , there should not be an endless process of conciliation , was accepted and included in the report .
Instead , an interim decision should be taken , which can set in motion the conciliation process .
Thank you very much , Madam President .
on behalf of the PSE Group . - Madam President , I welcome the report of my colleague , Ulrich Stockmann , and I thank him for his hard work on this difficult dossier .
All through the process of this report , the concern of my group has been to ensure that the system of airport charges throughout the EU is both fair and transparent , and that a detailed appeals procedure was in place in case of dispute .
Often people think of aviation as a single industry but , when one examines issues like airport charging , it soon becomes apparent that the airport and airline sectors have different views and aspirations .
The report before us offers a balanced solution , favouring neither the airlines nor the airports .
Whilst , personally , I would have preferred the scope to be based on a percentage of national passengers rather than an arbitrary figure , the rapporteur in his report has ensured that the figure is at a reasonable level of five million passengers - not the Commission 's ridiculously low figure of one million - and the major airport of a Member State has to be included .
A key element in the whole of our discussions has been whether certain airports enjoy a dominant trade position .
My group believes that , where this is the case , airport charges need to be regulated .
However , many airports are in a competitive situation and airlines are free to choose where they fly into .
In my region , Manchester Airport has 22 million passengers a year but faces competition from eight airports all within a 150-km radius .
Clearly , in these circumstances , the market itself is a good regulator .
I therefore welcome that the UK will be allowed to maintain its present system of monitoring airport charges , because it has in place a regulatory framework that encourages competition and regulates charges through its own supervisory body only at those airports that have a dominant position .
It may be that other countries could follow this regulatory framework as a way of delivering a fair and transparent airport charges system .
I hope now that we can agree this directive at its second-reading stage .
This should help us deliver a directive that will put an end to secret meetings setting charges for airports in a monopolistic or dominant trading position .
I seriously hope that airlines also recognise that we will now have a transparent system with a detailed appeals procedure , with full consultation , to end the constant complaining about airport charges and work with the airports to deliver a cost-effective , value-for-money service for users and passengers alike .
Mr Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I believe that no one doubts the need for transparency and justifiability in the European Community 's airport charges and costs if , for no reason other than the fact that some of the airports in the Community enjoy a natural monopoly .
However , from the moment the document was first discussed , the European Parliament has considered very carefully the Commission 's proposals and wishes to control more than 150 of the Community 's airports .
When participating in the preparation of various documents , Members of the European Parliament often face the dilemma of deciding how much control and regulation is necessary before they become an end in themselves and paralyse the actual controlling activities .
This is especially relevant in the current crisis , when sensitivity in considering questions important to business is a true necessity .
I believe that in the document which is to be voted on tomorrow , the European Parliament has managed to find and defend a happy medium by establishing the number of airports which need to be controlled .
I am pleased that the Council was also of a similar opinion and the Commission demonstrated the flexibility necessary to find a constructive compromise .
The other equally important matter was to find a balance between the main players operating in this sector , i.e. the interests of airports and airlines .
I believe that here we also showed ourselves to be quite capable of satisfying the expectations of both sides .
All the more so because any one-sided , unbalanced proposal would somehow or other affect EU consumers ' opportunities to use the safest means of transport .
All this was achieved thanks to the professional efforts of the rapporteur .
Mr Stockmann has always distinguished himself as an impartial politician who listens to all sides .
This is the fourth time we have worked together in the preparation of air transport regulation documents .
This time , once again , he did not disappoint , only further enriching me with new experience .
I would like to thank and congratulate Mr Stockmann and my other colleagues as we end the discussion of this document in the European Parliament .
I would also like to wish the European Commission success , as it now has the difficult task of implementing and monitoring the effectiveness of this directive , and would like to wish all representatives every success .


Thank you , Madam President , Mr Tajani , first of all I would like to congratulate the rapporteur , Mr Stockmann , and all the shadow rapporteurs on the compromise reached with the Council at second reading .
In my view , the agreement concerning the directive 's scope is also to be welcomed , since it will affect every Member State , by regulating at least their main airports .
I hope that in two years ' time , when this directive enters into force , it will no longer be possible in the European Union to have a repetition of such legally incomprehensible court decisions as the one recently handed down by a Lithuanian regional court against a Latvian aviation company and its main airport .
Through this decision , the court of one Member State is seizing property belonging not only to another country 's airport , but also to another country 's aviation company in another Member State .
The court 's decision was based on unaccustomed discrimination on airport charges in Latvia 's main airport .
I very much hope that this directive will render such legally unclear interpretations impossible in the future , as they have a detrimental effect on the aviation business .
Thank you .
on behalf of the IND / DEM Group . - Madam President , this report is supposed to prevent individual airports from abusing their dominant position in the market , and to create a level playing field for operators and safeguard consumer interests .
How many times have we heard those kind of arguments before ?
If implemented , this harmonisation of airport charges is likely to be as successful as the harmonisation that brought us the common agricultural policy , the common fisheries policy and the ever-increasing burden of EU regulation on businesses , which costs the UK at least GBP 26 billion per annum .
What it will do is require a completely unnecessary change in British law relating to airport charges and transport-related matters .
It will require the setting-up of a supposedly independent supervisory authority that will add yet another layer of bureaucracy , and the inevitably increased costs that will follow .
There is , of course , existing price-cap regulation in the UK , designed to incentivise airport operators to achieve cost efficiencies .
The objective of this continual torrent of legislation is to harmonise every aspect of life in the European Union and bring it under the ultimate authority of the European Union .
Any other consideration is secondary or unimportant .
What we can be absolutely sure of is that these measures will mean increased costs to the air traveller .
( DE ) Madam President , Mr Vice-President of the Commission , ladies and gentlemen , I think that the previous speaker has simply not understood the dossier .
What we are doing here is laying down rules for transparent provisions governing the levying of airport charges , the purpose of the whole exercise being to ensure that airport charges are set objectively and to reduce them for the benefit of users .
That is our job .
There are in fact two different situations .
Some airports are so dominant that airlines basically face a monopoly situation and possibly pay overly high airport charges .
At other , possibly small airports , an airline can decide whether or not to use the airport on the basis of how low the airport charges are , which is a totally different situation .
I must therefore say that what Mr Stockmann has achieved in his report - and my thanks to him - is a good list of criteria for establishing correct , properly substantiated airport charges , which also have to be borne by passengers , with a national supervisory authority acting as the control body .
Mr Vice-President , you will , of course , have to ensure over the next two years that the national supervisory authorities truly are independent .
This means that national supervisory authorities must not be linked to airports or married to airlines .
We insist that the supervisory authorities strike a fair balance between airlines and airports for the benefit of users .
Secondly , using these new criteria , we also want to foster fairer competition between airports .
In some cases , there are airports in two different Member States just a few kilometres from the border between them .
We want to be sure that there is no unfair competition here .
I believe that the new criteria are correct .
Allow me to close with a question to you , Mr Vice-President .
I believe that nearly two years have passed since the Commission issued guidelines for regional airports .
Over the last few months , you have been investigating whether there have been illegal subsidies at some airports , by which I mean state subsidies for specific airports that distort competition .
We should all like to know what your conclusions were .
We hope that you can promise us today that you will present the investigation on illegal or legal regional aid soon , because there is one overriding issue here : we want fair competition between airports for the benefit of passengers .

( RO ) I would like to congratulate Mr Stockmann for his efforts in achieving a common position for the Council with a view to adopting the directive which sets down common principles for the levying of airport charges at Community airports .
For airport users , the proposed legislation now gives a framework for charge setting which involves them in making the decisions , which is transparent and which allows appeals .
The Council accepted Parliament 's proposal to limit the scope to airports with more than 5 million passengers annually and the largest airport in each Member State .
Differentiation in airport charges has to be based on transparent , objective and clear criteria .
In accordance with the common position , airports need to operate on a cost-efficient basis and incentives will be allowed for new routes to disadvantaged and outermost regions .
However , these incentives must be granted on the basis of transparent criteria .
We support the idea , according to the information from the Commission in accordance with Community legislation , that Member States can authorise an airport managing body to apply a common , transparent charging system to airports which serve the same city or conurbation , provided that each airport fully complies with the requirements on transparency set out in the directive .
In addition , environmental criteria will become grounds for adapting airport charges .
The airport managing body will publish decisions on modifying the charging system at least two months before they enter into force .
With regard to pre-financing airport investments , Member States should refer to ICAO policies or establish their own safeguards .
Parliament considers that it is necessary for independent supervisory authorities to be able to delegate to other independent supervisory authorities , at their entire responsibility , the application of the directive 's provisions , subject to compliance with the same standards .
( PL ) Madam President , Commissioner , I would also like to join those congratulating Mr Stockmann on the result of his work .
The issue we are discussing needs regulation , and such regulation does not disturb my liberal spirit , nor do regulatory institutions .
We can see now , after the financial crisis , that the free market should work and does work , but we must create systems which are capable of regulating in a modern economy the mechanisms that occasionally get stuck or go beyond the usual mechanisms of economic competition , of pure free-market competition .
We are now debating the final draft of a certain document , of a work which we all realised right from the outset would be a long road , as regulating any natural monopoly - and airports are , for obvious reasons , usually subject to the rules of natural monopolies - is difficult .
It is a step forward in the interests of our citizens , in the interests of the citizens of the European Union , who will once again receive something tangible which affects their life from this House and the work of the European Commission .
I congratulate those who participated in its work and , hopefully , in the two years during which the system is implemented , Member States will measure up to the task .
( PT ) Many of us here in this House use the Internet to book our flights and buy our tickets .
However , I believe that most of us do not know how the airport charges that are paid together with the tickets are set .
As I know , however , that not all charges mentioned on the ticket are airport charges , I would ask you to humour me in a little exercise : if a passenger flies from Lisbon to Brussels , for example , by Brussels Airlines , the charge mentioned on the ticket is EUR 48 ; if he travels by the Portuguese airline TAP , the charge is EUR 2 less .
However , in the other direction , this difference disappears and the passenger is treated to EUR 15 extra in charges per journey .
Why ?
However , if our imaginary passenger travels to London by Brussels Airlines , flying from Brussels to Gatwick Airport , the charges for a return journey are EUR 124 , but if he uses BMI to fly to Heathrow , he only pays EUR 65 in charges .
If he travels to Heathrow with BMI and returns with Lufthansa , he now pays EUR 70 in charges .
Why these differences ?
Sometimes he pays one amount on the outward journey and another amount on the return journey .
Sometimes airlines all charge the same amount for the same airport and sometimes they do not .
In some cases , you might not even know how much you have paid .
The existence of different airport charges is not a bad thing , however .
Different services must have different charges .
What is not desirable is for the same charges to apply to different services and , conversely , for apparently identical services to be subject to different charges .
In particular , what we want is for these charges to be comprehensive and to be set according to clear and transparent criteria .
That is our ultimate goal .
We want to ensure fair and transparent competition between the major European airports and , in this way , not only help to refine the internal market , but also reduce the costs incurred by passengers when they buy their tickets .
That is why , with hope in our hearts , we support this proposal for a directive .

( ES ) Madam President , I must firstly congratulate my colleague , Mr Stockmann , on his magnificent report , and particularly on his patience and tenacity in taking this forward .
It is a text that will help us to create a common airspace and prepare , with particular emphasis on transparency and non-discrimination , for what will become the great leap into the single European sky .
Through this common system for the collection of user charges , we will be able to maintain the necessary conditions for fair and transparent competition .
We will also be preparing for the future due to taking account of environmental criteria in the modulation of charges and also due to excluding charges for assistance provided to passengers with disabilities .
In this respect too , we are preparing for the future .
I must also highlight the consideration given to the need to avoid an excessive burden on small airports , through the setting of a minimum limit of five million passengers per year .
Finally , we are delighted that the management of airport networks by a single body has been recognised , given that this has been proven to work well - as in the case of the Spanish airports authority , AENA - and that other ways of controlling and setting charges subject to legislative scrutiny have been taken into account - which is also the case in my country - in addition to through the independent supervisory authorities .
I am therefore pleased that these proposals have been taken into account .
I must also congratulate the rapporteur on having set firm deadlines for the publication of decisions .
This will avoid legal uncertainty and offer guarantees to users as to when these decisions will be implemented .
This is also positive because parliamentary scrutiny is taken into account in these deadlines and decisions .
Madam President , I welcome the increased transparency introduced by these new rules on airport charges .
Too often , airports are secretive about the deals they strike , even when they are owned or part-owned by public authorities .
The public has a right to know how such airports are raising and spending their money .
But I am disappointed that the threshold for greater reporting has been set at five million , with no reference to percentage national market share .
This threshold will hit particularly hard regional airports such as Newcastle .
With six million passengers a year , Newcastle comes above the threshold , yet it is a minnow compared to the giants of Heathrow and Gatwick .
Since regional airports compete mainly with their nearest neighbours , it would have been fairer to have had a system which treated all small and medium-sized airports in the same way .
I therefore regret that the Council did not pursue the option of confining the scope of the directive to airports with over five million passenger movements per annum and over 15 % of national passenger movements .
Such a threshold would still have ensured that Europe 's big airports could not dictate airline charges behind closed doors .
I hope that , when the Commission reviews the directive , it will look carefully at whether regional airports like Newcastle are suffering from market distortion .

( PT ) Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I should like to start by congratulating Mr Stockmann on his openness and readiness to compromise during the preparation of this excellent report , which will directly apply to airports with over five million passengers and , in particular , to the airports of Faro and Lisbon in my country .
This proposal must be adopted by this Parliament and by the Council because it guarantees non-discrimination in airport charges , except where necessary and compatible with the Treaty .
A compulsory procedure for consultation between airport managing bodies and airport users should be put in place .
Any differences in charges will be transparent and based on clear criteria .
Airports will levy the same charge for the same service , although discounts may be granted to airport users based on the quality of a service used , provided that all airport users can benefit from this discount under public , transparent and objective conditions .
Discounts may also be granted to users who open new routes in accordance with competition law .
A national independent supervisory authority should be established which will intervene in the event of disagreement over a charging decision .
Incentives should be permitted for the launch of new routes linking the least-favoured and outermost regions .
Finally , Member States should be able to authorise the managing body responsible for an airport network to introduce a charging system common to this network .
Madam President , with this new directive , future airport charges levied at our airports , and even in outermost regions such as the one that I come from , will guarantee universal access for all to air transport .
This is particularly important in a region such as mine where air transport is the only way of arriving or departing .
That is why I hope that this proposal will be adopted tomorrow and that the Commission and the Council will duly accept it .

Madam President , I echo the thanks of my colleagues to Mr Stockman for what I think he described as a workable compromise in the interests of 69 European airports .
I also share the words of Mr Becsey , and indeed of my colleague Brian Simpson , about fair and transparent competition .
I am happy that this report , as it is presented now , is a good deal , not just for London 's three airports of Heathrow , Stansted and Gatwick , but for the airports of the rest of Europe , whether it is Mr Zīle 's Latvia , Mrs Ţicău 's Romania , or Portugal , and indeed for the Commissioners - Italian airports , and I believe there are airports in Germany as well , although not many people go to them .
But I think , also , it is a good deal for Europe 's passengers and , of course , airports are nothing without the citizens , the passengers .
They are our priority , as - equally - is the environment , which I think is addressed by this report .
Mr Batten , my London colleague , in what could best be described as his hit-and-run contribution ( because he has gone away ) , suggested that there were going to be new bodies set up and all sorts of other scaremongering .
But those bodies - the Civil Aviation Authority - exist already .
So I think that is a misunderstanding on his part - to be polite to him .
And , to Fiona Hall , I am not sure that Newcastle is in direct competition with London .
There is a good distance between the two of them , and anybody who chooses to go into London rather than Newcastle has still got a tremendous distance to go .
So I think you are not comparing like with like there .
I think that this is a good , workable compromise .
I think all the original concerns that we wanted to address have been covered and , as a package , it does provide the balance - in the interests of airlines and in the interests of passengers - that we were looking for , whilst allowing the airports sufficient freedom to operate in a competitive environment .
I live in hope that , as a result of this , we might one day - you never know , colleagues , you never know - we might just get a decent service into Strasbourg .
It is a long shot , but you never know - and it is worth working for .
( PL ) Madam President , I would like to start by voicing my thanks to Ulrich Stockmann , our rapporteur .
He has got through a great deal of work , starting with the draft directive , which he approached in an innovative way , as he wanted to properly prepare the report in collaboration with the Commission and the Council , in which he was successful .
Above all , I would like to emphasise his initiative in refining the definition of airport charges , and secondly the airports we are covering , and the service levels of airports and their correlation with the obligations of airport operators .
Of equal importance , especially for the new Member States , is the funding of new infrastructure projects .
We are delivering a draft directive which , from the passenger 's viewpoint , will allow those of us in Europe who use , run or pay for services to know how much we will have to pay , why , and where the money is going .
This is a major step towards creating a real European system and European airlines network .
I thank you for this , and deeply believe that this draft directive will serve civil aviation well .
( CS ) Smoothly functioning airport services are important to the functioning of the internal market of the European Union .
Both passengers and airline companies criticise the lack of transparency and sometimes also the excessively high airport taxes which add to the cost of travel to an unjustifiable extent .
We are finally responding to this with the passing of this directive at its second reading .
The regulations will oblige airports with more than five million passengers to make their fees transparent and to justify their costs .
It will also simplify disputes between airport users and airport operators .
I firmly believe that this will lead to a reduction in charges and that it will improve the competitive environment .
I am delighted that the Council has also recognised the opening up of the bidding process , which will contribute to the opening of new routes to disadvantaged and more out-of-the-way destinations , and that it has been possible to arrive at a common definition for the networks of airports which will be operated by the same management bodies .
I congratulate the rapporteurs on these results .
( PL ) Madam President , Commissioner , Mr Stockmann deserves our gratitude .
This is indeed a good compromise .
I congratulate him .
Today we are finalising work on airport charges .
In short , in two years ' time , we will have a consolidated system for levying these charges throughout the European Union .
It will affect airports with more than five million passenger movements per annum , and the largest airports in a particular country .
They may still be debatable , but I believe the figures are good .
As far as I am aware , this will affect some 80 airports in the European Union .
A particular virtue of the regulations adopted are their transparency , which will help the supervisory authorities .
Airports in unfavourable regions will be able to apply the relevant preferences .
It also considered the environmental aspects and the situation of disabled people .
I hope that the directive will provide not only fair competition at airports , but also result in increased passenger safety , and protect passengers from excessive take-off or landing fees .
Madam President , I think the debate has shown that Parliament and the Commission have done a good job , and the praise directed at Mr Stockmann serves only to confirm that he has taken the right course .
I would like to thank him publicly once again for his work and cooperation with the Commission in finding a successful compromise solution which , as far as I can see , has been appreciated by all those who have taken the floor .
I believe that the proposal for a directive that we are examining , and which I hope can be adopted by this House , as Mrs Ayala Sender said , is non other than a step towards achieving the single sky , a goal that , in my view , the Commission , with Parliament 's support and then with the backing of the Council , must be pursued in order to send out a strong message before the end of this parliamentary term .
I endorse all the choices and judgments made on the establishment of the independent authority , which already exists in many countries of the Union .
I think that we should pursue this ; it is a positive choice we have made together .
Before I conclude , I would again like to thank all the Members who have contributed to the debate , and to answer the question asked by Mr Jarzembowski .
There are seven regional airports being considered .
The proceedings , lasting 18 months , were opened in July 2007 .
I therefore do not expect the results to arrive before the end of this year or the beginning of next year .
Naturally , the results will be made public , but it would be unfair and improper of me to make any comment before the work is completed .
However , as soon as it is , and as soon as the Commission has made a decision , Parliament will be informed and then Mr Jarzembowski will have a full answer , in addition to the information I have been able to give , relating to the Commission 's proposals for the seven - I would emphasise this , the seven - cases being examined .
rapporteur . - ( DE ) Madam President , I should like once again to thank all my fellow Members for their truly constructive cooperation and for our exciting discussions .
I am counting on a great deal of support tomorrow .
It is late and enough words have been exchanged .
Let actions follow tomorrow .
I would be delighted if we could complete the legislative procedure at second reading .
( Applause )
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow , Thursday 23 October .
Written statements ( Rule 142 )
in writing . - ( RO ) A European framework for regulating airport charges is of major importance in terms of reducing the cost for people travelling within the European Union and therefore , of increasing workers ' mobility , especially those who are highly qualified .
Worker mobility is actually a key element in an effective labour market , in the context set out in the relevant chapter of the Lisbon Strategy , aimed at economic growth and increasing the number of jobs .
Furthermore , facilitating the movements of highly qualified workers would lead to an increase in information flow and in useful knowledge in the production areas with high added value , in keeping with the aim of the Lisbon Strategy to transform the European economy into the most dynamic knowledge-based economy in the world .
Ladies and gentlemen , a compromise has been reached between the Council and our institution , thus making it possible to conclude this matter at second reading .
I am delighted with this agreement , which should in particular prevent abuses of a dominant position and facilitate the balanced development of the European airport sector .
This directive on airport charges is a real step forward : by making relations between airports and airlines more transparent , it will enable what are often opaque and conflictual relationships to be enhanced and improved .
Moreover , the introduction of an independent authority is going to make it possible to resolve any conflicts between the partners objectively .
The beneficiaries of these new rules should , ultimately , be air transport users , and I am delighted about that .
Thank you for your attention .
Agenda of the next sitting : see Minutes
Closure of the sitting
( The sitting was closed at 11.10 p.m. )
Opening of the sitting
( The sitting was opened at 10 a.m. )
Documents received : see Minutes
Sea piracy ( motion for a resolution tabled ) : see Minutes
Annual report on the European Ombudsman 's activities in 2007 ( debate )
The next item is the report by Mrs Zdravkova , on behalf of the Committee on Petitions , on the annual report on the European Ombudsman 's activities in 2007 .
Ombudsman . - Madam President , thank you for this opportunity to address Parliament on the annual report of the European Ombudsman for 2007 .
I also wish to thank the rapporteur , Mrs Zdravkova , and the Committee on Petitions for their excellent and constructive report .
My report records progress in handling complaints , promoting good administration and providing knowledge about the Ombudsman 's role .
The number of admissible complaints increased , in both absolute and relative terms , from 449 ( 12 % of the total ) in 2006 to 518 ( 16 % of the total ) in 2007 .
We therefore met both of the objectives which Parliament has consistently emphasised : increasing the number of admissible complaints and reducing the number of inadmissible complaints .
The main types of maladministration alleged in admissible complaints were : lack of transparency , including refusal of information ; unfairness or abuse of power ; unsatisfactory procedures ; avoidable delay ; discrimination ; negligence ; legal error ; and failure to ensure fulfilment of obligations .
Three hundred and forty-eight decisions closing inquiries were made .
That represents a 40 % increase compared to 2006 .
In 95 cases , the inquiry revealed no maladministration .
Such a finding is not always negative for the complainant , who at least has the benefit of a full explanation from the institution concerned .
Even when maladministration is not found , I may identify opportunities to improve the quality of administration provided by institutions .
If so , I point them out in a further remark .
Many of my inquiries result in a positive sum outcome that satisfies both the complainant and the institution complained against .
One hundred and twenty-nine cases were settled by the institution concerned to the satisfaction of the complainant .
That is double the number of cases settled in this way in 2006 , and reflects a growing willingness on the part of institutions and bodies to regard complaints made to the Ombudsman as an opportunity to recognise and put right mistakes that have occurred .
When I find maladministration , I try to achieve a friendly solution .
In some cases , this can be achieved by the institution or body concerned by offering compensation to the complainant .
Any such offer is made ex gratia , or in other words without admission of legal liability and without creating a legal precedent .
When a friendly solution is not possible I close the case with a critical remark .
A critical remark is also appropriate if it is no longer possible for the instance of maladministration to be eliminated .
It confirms that the complaint is justified and indicates to the institution or body concerned what it is has done wrong .
Such a criticism is intended to be constructive , so as to help avoid similar maladministration in the future .
It is important for institutions and bodies to follow up critical remarks and to take prompt action to resolve outstanding problems .
To better monitor the impact of my criticism , I launched a study of the follow-up to all critical remarks , and to the cases involving a further remark , made in 2006 .
The results of that study , published on my website and sent to all the bodies concerned , should provide encouragement to the European public service to improve practices and further develop a culture of service to citizens .
In cases where it is still possible to eliminate the instance of maladministration , I normally make a draft recommendation to the institution or body .
If it fails to respond satisfactorily , I may send a special report to Parliament .
I submitted one such report to you criticising the Commission for not dealing with an infringement complaint concerning the European Working Time Directive .
I welcome Parliament 's support , as expressed in your resolution of 3 September 2008 , based on Mr De Rossa 's report .
This year , I have again included star cases in my annual report .
These are cases where I consider that institutions or bodies involved responded to my inquiries in an exemplary fashion .
Seven such star cases are highlighted .
Four of these concerned the Commission , one concerned the Council , one the European Central Bank and one the European Aviation Safety Agency .
I have continued to make every effort to ensure that EU institutions and bodies adopt a citizen-centred approach in all their activities , by seeking every opportunity to achieve friendly solutions and by launching more own-initiative inquiries in order to identify problems and encourage best practice .
I would now like to mention some other activities undertaken with a view to ensuring the best possible service to citizens .
I have continued my efforts to improve the quality of information concerning rights under EU law , provided especially through the European Network of Ombudsmen .
That network , which includes the Petitions Committee , cooperates in case handling and in sharing experiences and best practice .
One of the purposes of the network is to facilitate the rapid transfer of complaints which are admissible for me to a competent ombudsman or similar body .
When possible , I transfer cases directly or give suitable advice to the complainant .
During 2007 I was able to help 867 complainants in this manner .
A further important initiative which should come to fruition within the next quarter of the year is that my office is developing an interactive guide to help citizens find the most appropriate avenue of redress for their grievances .
This guide should enable an even greater proportion of complainants to address directly the body best equipped to deal with the complaint .
Complaints which are inadmissible for me will therefore be resolved more promptly and effectively .
My institution will then be better able to fulfil its core role - to help citizens who are unhappy with the way they are being treated by EU institutions and bodies .
The Ombudsman cannot work alone .
Ensuring a top-class administration is a task that must be fulfilled proactively in cooperation with EU institutions and bodies .
The increased settlement of cases and friendly solutions is a source of encouragement and serves as an indication of our mutual efforts to contribute to building citizens ' trust , vis-à-vis the Union , at a point in time where that is greatly needed .
I am also deeply grateful for Parliament 's support and guidance , both in terms of the budgetary resources you provide my institution with and in terms of the positive relationship I enjoy with the Petitions Committee .
With your continued support , I will endeavour to build on the achievements of this past year .
Finally , as this is the last occasion during this parliamentary term that I have the honour of presenting my annual report to this House , I would like to put on record my deep appreciation for the close cooperation and good advice that I have received from Parliament and individual Members during the past four and a half years .
( Applause )
You are absolutely right .
This Parliament has shown confidence in the Ombudsman .
Member of the Commission . - Madam President , on behalf of the Commission and of my colleague , Vice-President Wallström , let me thank the rapporteur Mrs Zdravkova for her excellent work .
We welcome the Committee on Petitions ' report about the Ombudsman 's annual report on his activities in 2007 .
As you know , this Commission has made a strong commitment to improving its administration , and we are improving .
We can see that , both from the Ombudsman 's Annual Report and from the Committee on Petitions report .
In 2007 the number of cases in which an institution or a body actually put an end to maladministration practices as a result of a complaint lodged with the Ombudsman doubled .
This reflects the willingness of institutions - including , definitely , the Commission - and bodies to regard complaints as an opportunity to correct errors and cooperate with the Ombudsman in the public interest .
Also , the number of cases in which no maladministration practice was established increased .
The Commission is happy about this , since we are the institution that receives most of these complaints .
I also want to underline the fact that the Ombudsman has been proposing an increasing number of friendly solutions in order to settle disputes and that , overall , the Commission has been cooperative and appreciative of this type of proposal , wherever possible .
In 2007 , only one special report concerning the Commission was submitted to Parliament by the Ombudsman , and the Ombudsman mentioned this .
But I would like to remind you that this special report concerns the Working Time Directive , and it was only last month that you had a discussion on that with my colleague Vladimir Špidla .
Let me conclude with three specific points which are touched upon in your report as well as the Ombudsman 's Annual Report .
First , on infringements .
As you are aware , the Commission has reorganised its decision-taking on infringements , with a view to facilitating the progress of cases .
This was presented in the 2007 communication ' A Europe of results - applying Community law ' .
We are following up cases more actively and organising the work more effectively for citizens .
Also , an EU pilot project has been launched .
More solutions to problems should be found more quickly .
Second , on the call for EU institutions and bodies to adopt a common approach towards a European code of good administrative behaviour .
I want to draw your attention to the fact that the Commission has its own code of good administrative behaviour , adopted in 2000 .
This code still constitutes a modern and very effective instrument .
Its implementation is well established .
I do not want to prejudge the future , but for the time being we want to keep things that way .
Third , regarding the communication policy .
The idea of launching an information campaign for European citizens to help them find out more about the duties and competences of the European Ombudsman is definitely welcomed by the Commission .
Each institution , including the European Commission , also has its own website , where complaints and petitions may be lodged .
The Europa website is common to all EU institutions and has links to all other EU institutions , including the Ombudsman 's website .
In this way , citizens are easily and smoothly directed to the bodies able to settle their grievances and complaints .
The idea of an interactive manual designed to assist citizens in identifying the most suitable forum for resolving their problems is well worth studying much more closely .
Because in all this , we should never lose sight of who comes first and who we do all this for : the European citizens .

on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - ( DE ) Madam President , Mr Diamandouros , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , firstly , I would like to congratulate the rapporteur Mrs Zdravkova on her report , which I believe is her first .
It forms an excellent foundation for the debate and the discussion on the results of your work over the past year , Mr Diamandouros .
This report follows on , to a certain extent , from the report which I produced for the European Parliament at the same point two years ago .
At that time , you had just launched the network of national ombudsmen and committees on petitions and it seems clear from the report that this network has been extremely well received by the citizens of Europe who are the main focus of your work .
In addition , your education campaign , which has resulted in more admissible complaints being received , is a successful example of the fact that efforts to educate citizens about their rights and their opportunities for obtaining help are well worthwhile .
I also strongly welcome the fact that the report , in a similar way to the report produced by Mr Mavrommatis a few years ago , highlights the success of the informal procedures which you want to concentrate on more closely .
This success is due to the fact that the time spent on formalities can be reduced .
It is good for you to continue with this citizen-centred approach .
Some examples of your work over the past year demonstrate your ability to act , but also your sensitivity towards the general public in Europe , both in relation to the European Working Time Directive and the internal organisation of the European Parliament .
Of course , it is not always easy for you to find the right words .
However , weak points must be exposed by the Ombudsman with a certain amount of advance notice and appropriate restraint .
In the end , it is all about us working together to serve the citizens of Europe .
You have made a very positive contribution towards this over the past year , Mr Diamandouros .
on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( GA ) Madam President , first of all I would like to thank the rapporteur , Mrs Zdravkova , for her work on this report .
The office of the Ombudsman is clearly improving .
We have long complained that there are too many complaints being made to that office which do not relate to its function .
Last year , for the very first time , that number has reduced and I congratulate him for that work .
The Ombudsman 's interactive handbook is a creative solution that assists citizens in finding the proper institution for their complaint and I think it could be used more widely .
If we are to demonstrate to the citizens of the European Community that this Union is working on their behalf , we must ensure that they get answers and solutions to their problems .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - Madam President , I wish to begin by congratulating the rapporteur on a very comprehensive report and also the Ombudsman and his staff on the many positive steps that they took in 2007 .
What I find most encouraging is that the Ombudsman works at so many different levels : it is not just about processing complaints , which is central to his work , but also about how resolutions or solutions are arrived at .
There is an increasing number of friendly solutions , more informal procedures , where relations with the institutions are such that a growing number of cases are solved rapidly .
That is real progress and must be built on .
Citizen-friendly solutions are where we want to go .
I am also pleased to see that better communication at all levels is central to the agenda of the Ombudsman .
The adoption of the European Network of Ombudsmen statement and increased cooperation in this area are vital , and we look forward to the launch of the new website , which will include an interactive guide to assist citizens .
However , this brings me to my final comment , which concerns citizens , and refers to the proposed oral amendment on paragraph 23 .
That paragraph reads : ' Proposes that the Ombudsman take measures to reduce the number of complaints ( a total of 1 021 ) in relation to which no steps have been taken by him at all ' .
The oral amendment seeks to change that final phrase - ' in relation to which no steps have been taken by him at all ' - to the statement ' in such cases where no action is possible ' .
From the perspective of the Ombudsman , no action is possible ; but from the perspective of the citizen , no action is taken - and those are two very different perspectives .
So I have a question : is it made clear to the 1 021 citizens that no action is possible by the Ombudsman , with a clear explanation given with further advice where possible , or is it the case that simply no action is taken ?
If the former is true and citizens are given reasons , I have no problem and , indeed , I am very pleased .
But if the latter is true and no action is taken , then citizens will be frustrated and angry .
So I would like clarification on that point , please .
on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - ( DA ) Madam President , I should like to thank the rapporteur for her splendid report .
It is a fine piece of work , and we were particularly delighted with the considerable willingness there was to cooperate .
I also wish to thank the Ombudsman for his brilliant annual report .
The institution of the Ombudsman is , of course , incredibly important for the EU .
Its work shows that the EU is closer to Europeans than it is reputed to be , listening as it does to criticism .
Happily , it is on the right lines .
Far more complaints than last year were resolved to the complainants ' satisfaction through the EU institution itself making proper allowance for them .
It shows that the EU system is coming to understand the need to serve people as best as possible .
Unfortunately , there are institutions that do not comply with the recommendations .
In such circumstances , all that the Ombudsman can do is place the matter before Parliament - an option he can hardly be accused of misusing , since only one case was presented last year to the Committee on Petitions .
When a case comes before us in Parliament , we are clearly obliged to say that we are willing , at least in principle , to go to the European Court of Justice if the institution concerned does not comply with the Ombudsman 's decision .
In that way , we can give the Ombudsman the necessary clout and authority in the system .
On behalf of the Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance , I have tabled a couple of amendments , the sole purpose of which is to clarify the concept of maladministration .
It should be possible to identify those cases in which the Ombudsman can observe that an institution or other EU body has not complied with the rules and principles applicable to it .
However , there is no maladministration in cases in which the Ombudsman merely notes that there is room for improvement in the way in which the institution handles matters .
It is that distinction that my amendments are aimed at clarifying .
Finally , I have a similar question to that raised by Mrs Harkin , concerning when cases are rejected .
We should like to know why they are rejected .
The reason should ideally be given in the answers to the complaints , and I want to ask if that is in fact the case , as otherwise matters would be very frustrating , as has already been pointed out .
on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group . - ( EL ) Madam President , the report on the European Ombudsman 's activities affords us an opportunity to ascertain how citizens view the workings of the institutions of the European Union and gives us practical ideas and examples as to how the institutions of the European Union can improve how they operate and how they serve the citizens .
I in turn should like to thank the European Ombudsman , Mr Diamandouros , for his exceptional work , and our rapporteur , Mrs Zdravkova , on her very interesting report and take this opportunity to underline certain points :
Firstly , the fact that the number of complaints received by the Ombudsman is increasing is a very good thing , but it contradicts the Commission 's self-satisfaction in terms of constant improvements to its administration and greater transparency .
I would advise the Commission to be more honest and more modest .
It is also a good thing that the number of complaints admitted and the efficacy of the interventions of the European Ombudsman have increased .
However , the large majority of complaints still concern matters which do not come directly within his jurisdiction .
There is a large proportion of citizens within the European Union who want greater transparency and sound management both from the European institutions and in the application of Community legislation in general and , unfortunately , they do not always find it .
That is why the European Parliament has repeatedly called for all the institutions and organisations of the European Union to be given the financial and human resources needed to ensure that citizens receive immediate and in-depth replies to their complaints , questions and referrals .
We also need cooperation between the European Ombudsman and the ombudsmen in similar organisations at national , regional and local level in the Member States .
We also need to give a broader , more expansive interpretation to the term ' maladministration ' , so that it also includes cases in which the administrative authorities demonstrate sloppiness and negligence or a lack of transparency in the performance of their duties towards the citizens .
This will result in more material interventions on the part of the Ombudsman , which is in the citizens ' interests .
It is also extremely important for the Ombudsman to be able to take up cases relating to all the institutions of the European Union , including those which operate under the third pillar .
Finally , I should like to reiterate once again the call to all the institutions and organisations of the European Union to adopt a common approach towards a European code of good administrative behaviour .
It is not enough for us to speak highly of the European Ombudsman ....
( The President cut off the speaker )
on behalf of the IND / DEM Group . - ( SV ) Madam President , together with Volvo and IKEA , the institution known as the Ombudsman is Sweden 's best-known contribution to the global community .
It is a very important institutional innovation for democracy in general and the EU institutions in particular .
Why ?
Well , because an Ombudsman is there to ensure that people can demand their rights in political and bureaucratic structures that are becoming ever more complex and , thus , non-transparent .
Nowhere in the democratic world is complexity and non-transparency more dominant than in the byzantine power structure that the EU has established and that it is constantly extending further .
It is rare for me to feel any enthusiasm for the reports presented here in the European Parliament .
Whenever I do so , the reports concerned are those relating to the internal market or an environmental issue of some kind .
Mrs Zdravkova 's report is another exception to my rule , in which we see a picture emerge of the Ombudsman working pretty effectively to fortify individuals against the byzantine hegemony that is unfolding .
I am thinking of information provided to the general public via a properly updated website , information sheets , networks of national and regional ombudsmen , conferences and , especially , meetings and other contacts with the system 's eurocrats , designed to make the latter see that they are there for the benefit of Europeans , rather than Europeans being there for the benefit of them .
At the same time , it is regrettable that Europe 's powerful elite pursues a European project associated by most people with impenetrable and byzantine bureaucracy .
In anticipation of a grassroots reaction against this development , we in the European Parliament should strengthen the institution of the Ombudsman .
We should therefore vote in favour of Mrs Zdravkova 's report and , especially , welcome the demand that the Ombudsman have full access to EU documents in the course of his investigations .
( DE ) Madam President , the Ombudsman 's work is undoubtedly fundamentally good .
However , you have a blind spot , which is the administration of the European Parliament .
For example , in April 2007 Mr Eduardo Bugalho , one of the Secretaries-General here , made a firm promise of a position to an employee , Martin Ehrenhauser .
Then the relatively new Secretary-General Harald Rømer intervened and suddenly the position no longer existed and things were continually put off .
This has had an effect on me .
I am probably the only Member of this Parliament who has no member of parliamentary staff available to him at all .
Instead of taking up this issue , you have turned a blind eye .
However , you yourself talk about trust in the institutions of the European Union .
I was elected by 14 % of all the citizens of Austria and I am unable to work in the same way as almost all my fellow Members .
So you should not be surprised that the level of criticism is growing and that , in Austria in particular , the criticism of the EU as it currently stands - not of Europe - is reaching epidemic proportions .
Madam President , rather than dealing with the history I will congratulate the rapporteur on an excellent report and the Ombudsman for his presentation today and his cooperation with us , and indeed the Commission statement .
Could I ask , in particular , for consistency in how the Commission deals with citizens ?
I am concerned that in some cases when an individual brings a case to the Commission the needs and rights of the individual are overtaken by the involvement of the Member State , almost like a victim in a court case being ignored by the prosecution .
I shall give you an example .
A constituent of mine complained about the Irish planning laws as they apply in rural areas .
The action of the Commission in handling that case was exemplary in their dealings with the citizen in meeting and engaging .
However , as the case moved on , I am afraid that declined - I believe , in favour of the Member State to the absolute frustration of the citizen .
I know this person and they were very pleased initially and are now very frustrated .
In other words , the citizen who brings forward the information , who provides the impetus for action is forgotten about in the ongoing process .
I think , Commissioner , when you asked the question ' Who comes first ? ' , you said it was the EU citizens .
I am not so sure .
Madam President , I am extremely satisfied with the work of the Ombudsman as explained in his annual report and in his speech .
The European Ombudsman is a vital part of the democratic structure and functioning of the Union .
The largest proportion of the Ombudsman 's inquiries concern lack of transparency and refusal to provide information .
This is an area of our activities that we must improve if we are to become more credible in the eyes of citizens .
It is important that we support the work of the Ombudsman and that of the Committee on Petitions .
Both deal with the handling of complaints and petitions on EU matters from citizens that help us to find out what is not working at European level and to take corrective measures .
Cases being brought to the Ombudsman and to the Committee on Petitions are of increasing complexity and therefore require greater investment of resources by the institutions in order that citizens ' concerns are properly addressed .
If these concerns are properly addressed , then we will be making some progress towards improving the credibility of , and confidence in , the Union as a whole .
( BG ) Ladies and gentlemen , the European Ombudsman 's report for 2007 demonstrates how beneficial its activities are as a champion of citizens 's rights when these have been infringed , or the European institutions threaten to do so .
I welcome the fact that the number of admissible complaints has increased , as this proves that Europe 's citizens are becoming increasingly aware of the real power of the Ombudsman .
I believe that this institution must have the necessary financial and human resources to enable it to effectively and fully carry out its mission .
The Charter of Fundamental Rights and the European code of good administrative behaviour are and must continue to be a model and a basis for the activities of the public protector of the principles of good administration such as transparency , accountability , legality and fairness on the part of the European institutions .
In this respect , we need to increase information campaigns among citizens by the Ombudsman to raise awareness of their rights and the Ombudsman 's powers to stand up for them , and its cooperation with national Ombudsmen in exchanging good practice .
The introduction of an internet manual is a helpful initiative , but setting up a public on-line register for complaints would increase transparency and help increase the trust of citizens .
- ( PL ) Madam President , certain European Union citizens seem to treat the European Ombudsman as if he were a God , requesting him to resolve issues and deal with matters that are clearly outside his competence .
This is underlined by the fact that , for procedural reasons , the Ombudsman can only consider one in six of the complaints he receives .
We must conclude that there is a total lack of knowledge as to what the European Ombudsman 's function and remit are , and how far the scope of his action extends .
The citizens of the Member States are not to blame for this situation .
The blame lies with the Union 's institutions , which have not succeeded in informing public opinion in the Member States about the scope of the Ombudsman 's remit .
Unless something is done about this , citizens of the Member States will continue to write to the Ombudsman and then be surprised that he cannot intervene .
The fact that more than one thousand of the complaints addressed to the Ombudsman were not considered and no action was taken on them is also cause for concern , as was mentioned in the report .
( NL ) Madam President , the report by the Committee on Petitions is , in essence , very constructive and very positive about the work of the European Ombudsman , and I can personally endorse this view to a large extent .
I would , however , take the opportunity that is being given to me to draw the Ombudsman 's attention to the systematic way in which the European Parliament itself , and , in fact , the Commission to an even greater extent , are ignoring and infringing a number of very clear legal rules , and , in a number of matters , indulge in hidden and therefore , if you think about it , undemocratic decision-making .
More specifically , in my view , the European Ombudsman should in next year 's report , and I would ask him to do this , focus on the way in which the rejection of the Treaty of Lisbon as a result of a democratic referendum in Ireland , rendering this Treaty legally null and void , is deliberately and repeatedly ignored in documents and in decision-making by all European institutions .
I hope that the Ombudsman is prepared to take on this task and as such ...
( EL ) Madam President , Commissioner , the Ombudsman is an independent institution and a mechanism for controlling the administration of the European Union .
The fact that the number of admissible complaints received by the Ombudsman increased in 2007 , while the number of inadmissible complaints fell in 2007 , compared with 2006 , is proof of the fact that European citizens have started to understand the remit of this institution .
Furthermore , I in turn welcome the efforts made by Mr Diamandouros to improve the standard of information provided to citizens in connection with their rights under Community law during his time in this position .
Mrs Zdravkova also deserves hearty congratulations on having achieved unanimous decisions and cooperation in her first report for our committee .
The European Network of Ombudsmen , to which the Committee on Petitions of the European Parliament also belongs , has approximately 90 offices in 31 countries .
Consequently , even at this level , the cooperation of both the network and of the European Ombudsman are valuable in achieving the objective of transmitting complaints to the competent Ombudsman or agency as quickly as possible .
Finally , the European Parliament and the Committee on Petitions should help the Ombudsman to achieve his twin objective of promoting sound administration by the institutions and improving communication with the citizens . Thank you .

Madam President , I should like to say to the Ombudsman that it has been a really interesting debate : sniped at by Hans-Peter Martin , lauded as a god by another .
I think it shows that he has probably - just about - got it right .
Ombudsman , Parliament does not always place you in a very comfortable position when you are called upon especially to rule on decisions that we take and the actions of this House .
I see that I have excited Hans-Peter Martin - how wonderful !
But let me just tell you , Ombudsman , that you always carry out your work in a constructive way and absolutely within your competences .
Probably the reason why we have seen an increase in your workload is because you have been so effective in promoting your work and your office , and I congratulate you on that .
It leaves me nothing more than to say that it is an excellent report .
I look forward to contributions from other colleagues , but also I enjoy working with you , not the least in relation to access to documents , but also as Vice-Chair of the Committee on Petitions .
( Applause )
( FI ) Madam President , my thanks go to the Ombudsman and his entire office for the valuable work they have done to deliver excellent administration and transparency .
It is very important for our citizens that when there is a grievance , they can lodge a complaint about it and can be sure that the matter will be dealt with properly and satisfactorily , and that is what happens .
I also wish to thank the Ombudsman for having shown the strength to fight , almost in vain one might say , for greater transparency in the administration of the European Union .
We know that there is really a lot to do with regard to this .
Progress is slow , but let us be glad about each small step and let us keep banging our heads ...
( The President cut off the speaker )
( MT ) Thank you Madam President .
I also wish to thank the rapporteur , Mrs Zdravkova , as well as the Ombudsman for all his hard work .
I believe that what unites us in this debate is simple : it is the defence of our citizens , the fact that we can all agree that we must stand guard over our citizens ' rights ; that we act as their shield , and that when they find themselves having to deal with unfair authorities and unjust bureaucratic procedures , they should not be made to feel abandoned .
On the contrary , they should have every faith that we stand behind them .
Therefore , since these are the common factors that bring us together , let us go on working together .
In times like these , when our citizens are feeling rather detached from the European Union , it is essential that the Ombudsman , the Commission and the Committee on Petitions work towards building up the consumer 's trust towards the European Union , brick by brick . Let us go on working together to prove that we are indeed worthy of that trust .
( EL ) Madam President , Ombudsman , I have noted the rapporteur 's phrase expressing her support for the role of the Ombudsman as a valuable source of constant improvement to the European administration .
The more citizens who know about the institution of the Ombudsman , the better Europe will be ; it will be a Europe which is not frightened to address and rectify its weaknesses .
That is why it is particularly important for the code of good administrative behaviour to be applied by all the institutions and organisations .
That is why a broad interpretation of the concept of maladministration is particularly useful .
If we speak of active citizenship , we cannot at the same time , when citizens take recourse to the institutions of the European Union in order to enforce their rights , be unable to give a basic response to their concerns or , even worse , be unable to safeguard the fundamental values of the European Union .
- ( PL ) Madam President , despite the overall increase in the number of admissible complaints received by the Ombudsman in 2007 , he handled 17 % more than in the previous year .
In this connection , it should be emphasised that the number of inadmissible complaints has decreased dramatically in comparison to 2006 , which suggests that complainants are better informed about the Ombudsman 's competences .
It emerges from the report that last year the Ombudsman carried out his duties in an active and balanced manner .
This is true of his consideration of petitions , of his work maintaining constructive relations with the European Union 's bodies and institutions and also of his efforts to encourage citizens to exercise their rights .
Nonetheless , there is still a lot of work to be done to ensure that the citizens receive swift and accurate responses to their questions , complaints and petitions .
Above all , the causes of the complaints must be addressed .
That involves substantial improvement as regards increasing the transparency of decision-making processes and the functioning of the European Union 's administration .
Those are the areas generating the majority of the citizens ' complaints .
( ES ) Madam President , I too want to congratulate Mrs Zdravkova on her excellent report .
I would also congratulate all of us , including the Ombudsman , Mr Diamandouros , of course , on the progress and improvements that have been made in his work .
Among the ' star cases ' , I should like to highlight those connected with European transport , specifically the improvement of information on passenger rights and the replacement by the European Aviation Safety Agency of a contested decision .
The own-initiative investigations are , I feel , very positive as they have focused on the issue of Commission payments and also on non-discrimination of people with disabilities .
We should like this collection of know-how , ' star cases ' and good administrative behaviour to be specifically included in the campaign supported by Parliament .
To end , I must also mention in particular the sixth seminar of the European Network of Ombudsmen which introduced , for the first time , the participation of ombudsmen from the regions .
I must also mention the excellent statement made by the European Network of Ombudsmen which both the Ombudsman , Mr Diamandouros , and we ourselves would be advised to use .
( RO ) The European Ombudsman is an institution which is something special , a bit of a novelty for citizens from those countries admitted into the European Union in the last two waves .
However , it needs to be promoted more actively , with a very clear indication as to what the European Ombudsman can and cannot do .
We also think that the number of own-initiative inquiries should be somewhat higher .
If the organisation does not have enough staff of its own , we recommend calling for volunteers in an effort to promote the European Ombudsman institution , especially volunteers from the countries from the last wave or two of enlargement , including Members of the European Parliament .
( DE ) Madam President , the gap between the European Union and the citizens of Europe should not be as large as it has become .
We must ensure that this gap is reduced .
The Ombudsman has a very important role to play in this respect , in particular in areas where and at times when he does his job well .
The most important thing is that we can count on the Ombudsman 's commitment and sense of proportion .
We must not raise excessive expectations which no one can meet .
On the other hand , it is also about ensuring that abuses which occur in the administration of European bodies are actually dealt with and , where possible , that sensible solutions are sought which will satisfy the citizens and ensure their security .
Until now the Ombudsman has shown that he takes this task seriously and performs it well .
We can only hope that this will continue to be the case and thank him and the rapporteur for this report .
( RO ) I would like to congratulate the rapporteur and to emphasise the importance of the European Ombudsman .
I would like to mention in particular the positive consequences of his recommendations concerning the use of the languages of the new Member States in the recruitment and selection process organised by EPSO .
I would also like to stress the importance for the internal market of the recommendation made by the Ombudsman which requested the Commission to avoid , in the future , unjustified restrictions with regard to the official languages which can be used to submit bids based on invitations to tender .
Bearing in mind the importance of protecting personal data , I would like to welcome the cooperation between the European Data Protection Supervisor and the European Ombudsman .
I would just mention , on this point , the Community regulations on the passenger register as part of international flights .
This type of cooperation will become even more important in the future .
I also welcome the resolution of the SOLVIT case where a Bulgarian doctor has been given a certificate of conformity , which allows him to practise his profession in France and ...
( The President cut off the speaker )
- ( IT ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , my compliments to the rapporteur .
As a member of the Committee on Petitions , on the basis of the information contained in the report as well as my own personal experience , I would like both to extend my thanks and to make a request .
My thanks being for the clear progress made compared to the previous year : the number of admissible complaints rose from 449 to 518 , that is from 12 % to 15 % of the total , and there was also an increase in inquiries carried out .
I therefore believe that we are on the right track .
However , and here I come to my request , we still need to up our efforts in terms of communication .
Let us examine together effective strategies , perhaps starting with our schools , to guarantee quality information for citizens on the person , role and powers of the European Ombudsman .
There are promising projects of this kind , to begin this year , which must be implemented and supported .
Then we will undoubtedly see a further improvement in today 's already impressive figures .
Ombudsman . - Madam President , we are under great pressure because you have to vote in about six or seven minutes , so I will offer my excuses to all the people who spoke .
I would like to thank all the Members of Parliament who have been gracious enough to comment favourably on my report , and I will only try to address very specific cases , if I may .
Let me very briefly thank Mrs Jäätteenmäki and Mr Schwab for what I take to be their particular support and their plea for the Ombudsman 's efforts to increase transparency .
This is something to which I remain committed , and I pledge to redouble my efforts to do that , with the support of this body .
I need your support to do that , and I ask you for it .
Mr Martin , I would be very happy to meet you personally so that I might be able to have a chance to listen to the case and be able to respond to it .
I would like to thank Mr Cashman and Mr Busuttil for their comments and encouragement .
I would also like to thank the Members who have spoken very favourably about the actions of the Ombudsman concerning strengthening the activities and the rights of citizens in the new Member States , who are in fact in greater need of becoming more familiar with the practices of the Ombudsman and the Union .
Let me now address directly the questions from Ms Harkin , Ms Auken and Mr Czarnecki , concerning the cases that have not been addressed .
To avoid any misunderstanding , let me make very clear that every single case we have received has , in fact , been addressed .
There has not been a case that has not received a response .
There has never been a case in which we have not written back to the complainant .
We wrote and we informed the complainant why the European Ombudsman could not deal with the complaint .
The 1 021 cases listed as ' no action possible ' are cases where we could not help the complainant by opening an in-depth inquiry , by transferring the case or by offering useful advice .
After this came in I checked and I have some reports .
In one third of all these cases the complainant had already contacted the authority that was competent to deal with the complaint , such as a national original Ombudsman or the Committee on Petitions of the European Parliament .
In 20 % of the cases they received , the case had already been handled by the court and I could not handle it .
In 17 % of the cases there was no competent body in existence that could possibly handle it .
In 13 % of the cases the only appropriate advice would have been to contact a lawyer , but the complainant had already done so .
Therefore I have tried to cover all the cases .
I would like to assure you that there has never been any case in which the Ombudsman has not written , explained and provided written information .
I hope this addresses the questions that you raised .
Member of the Commission . - Madam President , I would just like to reiterate my support for Mrs Zdravkova 's report and to thank the Ombudsman for his cooperation .
Regarding those concrete cases mentioned , we will provide additional information .
It is true that , when we address a complaint , the complainants are not always completely satisfied with the solution proposed .
However , the Commission always tries to deal with each and every case in a very constructive spirit , and we will continue to do so .
rapporteur . - ( BG ) I would just like to take this opportunity to once again thank all speakers for their kind words about my report , my work and for the work of Mr Diamandouros .

This has been a useful , and , above all. a positive discussion , and I am sure that it will encourage Mr Diamandouros to make even greater efforts towards closer cooperation with the institutions , and above all encourage better communication with our European citizens .
I can see that there are many visitors in the hall , and I hope that this discussion has been useful and , above all , of interest to them .
( DE ) Madam President , I should like to start by thanking the Ombudsman for the opportunity to speak .
I am happy to accept .
I have , in fact , asked to speak because Mr Cashman has made attacks and insinuations which I would like to reject out of hand .
They simply indicate how nervous people become when there is a question of increasing transparency .
However , you , Mr Diamandouros , are in favour of more transparency .
I can only encourage you to keep to your convictions with regard to travel expenses and other similar matters , where the majority of Parliament gets you into trouble .
I believe that you are on the right track , Mr Diamandouros .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place today at 11 a.m.
( The sitting was suspended at 11.05 a.m. and resumed at 11.10 a.m. )
Announcements by the President
Ladies and gentlemen , Twenty years ago in 1988 , the European Parliament instituted the Sakharov Prize for Freedom of Thought , which has been awarded every year since then .
Over the course of the last twenty years , we have honoured outstanding organisations or figures who have dedicated their lives to defending human rights and fundamental freedoms and who have fought against intolerance , fanaticism and oppression in their own countries and throughout the world .
The first person to be awarded the prize was Nelson Mandela , whom I will be meeting next week in Johannesburg as part of an invitation to speak before the Pan-African Parliament .
This year the Conference of Presidents has decided to award the Sakharov Prize 2008 to Hu Jia ' on behalf of the silenced voices of China and Tibet ' as it states in the proposal for a decision from the Committee on Foreign Affairs .
( Applause )
Hu Jia was born on 25 July 1973 in Beijing and is one of the most passionate defenders of human rights in the People 's Republic of China .
This dedicated activist is subject to accusations because of his commitment to the environment , his fight against the dangers of HIV and AIDS and his efforts to ensure that human rights are respected .
On 27 December 2007 , Hu Jia was placed under house arrest on charges of inciting subversion .
On 3 April 2008 , he was sentenced to three-and-a-half years in prison .
In his solitary prison cell , Hu Jia is now fighting his illness .
He suffers from cirrhosis of the liver , but as far as we know he is being denied regular medical care .
The arbitrary arrest and conviction of Hu Jia has caused outrage throughout the world .
By awarding the Sakharov prize to Hu Jia , the European Parliament is demonstrating forcefully and with determination its recognition of the daily fight for freedom carried on by all defenders of human rights in China .
( Applause )
Ladies and gentlemen , I have another brief statement to make .
Tomorrow , on 24 October , we will be celebrating the 63rd anniversary of the United Nations .
On this occasion , I would like to highlight the extent , the commitment and the success of the collaboration between the European Union , the European Parliament and the various programmes and institutions of the United Nations .
Not long ago a publication entitled ' Improving Lives ' , of which you have all received a copy , presented a summary of the collaboration over the years .
In recent weeks , we have seen the start of a difficult period throughout the world , in particular in relation to the financial crisis and its drastic effects on the world economy .
In this context in particular , the European Union 's fundamental values of multilateral understanding and solidarity are of great importance .
This also applies to our commitment to and responsibility for the developing countries .
The international conference on development financing which will be held in November will also play a decisive role in this respect .
Despite the fact that we are faced with considerable challenges , we must not lose sight of the interests of the developing countries .
1 .
Draft general budget of the European Union - 2009 budget ( vote )
- Before the vote
rapporteur . - ( DE ) Mr President , the explanation process is the same as it is every year .
Before the vote I need to inform Parliament about some technical adjustments .
I know that this is not very interesting for my fellow Members , but we need to record it in the Minutes .
Firstly , as already indicated in the voting list , the vote on amendment 783 to budget line 22 02 04 02 only concerns payment appropriations .
Secondly , the explanations concerning the global energy assessment do not belong on budget line 08 03 01 , where they have mistakenly been included , but on line 08 05 01 .
Therefore the vote on amendment 936 to line 08 03 01 must be made without the comments on the global energy assessment .
These will be included instead in amendment 938 to line 08 05 01 .
I know how enthusiastic everyone is about this .
Thirdly , the reinstatement of resources in the Preliminary Draft Budget for the decentralised agencies with their titles in lines 1 and 2 also includes , of course , the reinstatement of their establishment plans .
This applies to the European Medicines Agency , the European Chemicals Agency , the European Aviation Safety Agency , the European Maritime Safety Agency , the European Railway Agency , the European Environment Agency , the European Centre for the Development of Vocational Training , the European Food Safety Authority , the Community Fisheries Control Agency and the Community Plant Variety Office , whose establishment plans are not specifically included in the documents accompanying the amendments .
Fourthly , as the result of a comment from the Legal Services an explanation included on several budget lines must be slightly modified .
This concerns the sentence which begins ' The Commission may ' up to ' and to transfer to the internal auditor of the Commission ' in the following amendments : Amendment 994 to line 19 04 01 , amendment 1011 to line 21 02 01 , amendment 1015 to line 21 03 01 , amendment 1016 to line 21 04 01 , amendment 1026 to line 23 02 01 and amendment 785 to line 23 02 02 .
The correct version of the explanation is detailed in the voting list .
Fifthly and finally , the budget line 19 06 06 with the title ' Consular cooperation ' is not included in the amendments , although it was adopted as part of the amending letter No 1 / 2009 .
This new budget line will therefore be included using a token entry ( p.m. ) .
If none of my fellow members have any objections to all of this , the sittings service will include it all as we have decided .
Mrs Haug , as we have great confidence in you , we can now vote on this .
( Parliament approved the rapporteur 's proposal )
Before the vote on Amendment 111
- ( FR ) Mr President , I do not believe we have voted on the second part of 106 .
Please could you check ?
Yes we have , Mrs Guy-Quint .
Mr Dunstan has just told me that the first part has lapsed and we have already voted on the second part .
Before the vote on Block 8
rapporteur . - Mr President , there are no technical adjustments this time , so we can vote .
( Applause )
Then we can only congratulate the rapporteur .
2 .
Draft general budget 2009 ( Section III ) (
3 .
Draft general budget 2009 ( Sections I , II , IV , V , VI , VII , VIII and IX ) (
Voting time
The next item is voting time .
( For results and other details of the vote , see Minutes )
Welcome
Ladies and gentlemen , it is a great pleasure for me to welcome the members of the delegation from the parliament of the Republic of Moldova , who are here in Strasbourg on the occasion of the 11th meeting of the EU-Moldova Parliamentary Cooperation Committee which took place yesterday and today .
Ladies and gentlemen , the fact that you are with us in the European Parliament demonstrates that parliamentary dialogue is the best way of strengthening our relationship and finding solutions for the issues which concern the European Union 's eastern neighbours .
We wish you all every success in the elections next year and in your current and future activities .
A very warm welcome to you all .
( Applause )
1 .
Airport charges (
2 .
EC-Bosnia Herzegovina Stabilisation and Association Agreement (
3 .
Piracy at sea (
- On paragraph 4 part 2
( ES ) Mr President , I refer to the first part of paragraph 4 in the split voting .
I should like the vote on the first part of the original paragraph to be repeated .
I can see that the House agrees .
We will vote on this again .
4 .
Equivalence of accounting standards (
5 .
Impact of aviation security measures and body scanners on human rights , privacy , personal dignity and data protection (
- Before the vote
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , on behalf of the PPE-DE Group I would like to introduce a motion .
In Parliament , we quite clearly agree on two points .
On the one hand , we want to be involved in the procedure for these new technical variants and this cannot be decided without Parliament .
I would like to thank Commissioner Tajani , who has ensured that this is the case .
Secondly , it is clear to all of us that this new technical measure must be considered with a great deal of sensitivity .
We have a number of concerns about it .
The criteria for the possible application must be carefully controlled and everyone in the House agrees on this .
I would like to move on behalf of the PPE-DE Group that we give ourselves an extra four weeks and postpone the vote until November , because Commissioner Tajani has stated that there will be a major hearing on the subject in November .
The PPE-DE Group is of the opinion that we should hear all the facts before we come to a decision .
I hope that we will have a majority in favour of this .
This is why we are moving that the vote be adjourned until November .
on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to oppose this motion for the following reason .
It is true that Mr Tajani 's hearing will give us the opportunity to acquire additional information and to define our position .
However , what we are doing with this decision is to tell the Council , which has already reached a resolution during the last Council of Ministers of Justice and Home Affairs , that in our view , and this applies at least to my group , security and security measures are absolutely essential .
However , the use of scanners or display devices which show people completely naked is totally unacceptable .
This is a violation of human dignity and it is not accompanied by any increase in security .
( Applause from the left and from the centre )
This is the perfect example of the mania for security which is going on here .
With our decision we want to send a clear signal that we are opposed to measures of this kind , which are also extremely controversial on medical grounds .
We therefore ask you to reject Mr Weber 's motion .
( Applause )
Thank you very much .
The ALDE group has requested a roll-call vote on this motion .
( Parliament rejected the motion to adjourn the vote )
6 .
Stabilisation and Association Agreement between the EC and Bosnia and Herzegovina (
- On paragraph 22
draftsman . - ( DE ) Mr President , I have an oral amendment to paragraph 22 , which I have agreed with other fellow Members .
We must correct the text because it does not exactly represent the truth .
After the Missing Persons Institute and following the semi-colon , we should change the sentence .
I will read the change out in English now :
- ' urges the corresponding urgencies at the entity level to support the work of the state-level bodies by forwarding to them all the relevant information they gather ; ' .
( DE ) That is paragraph 22 .
I do not see any opposition , so we will vote on it .
( The oral amendment was accepted )
7 .
Commemoration of the Holodomor , the artificial famine in Ukraine ( 1932-1933 ) (
8 .
Annual report on the European Ombudsman 's activities in 2007 (
Before the vote on amendment 5
rapporteur . - Mr President , it is just to delete the words ' by the first European Ombudsman ' from the first part of the amendment .
( The oral amendment was accepted )
That concludes voting time .
Voting time ( continuation )
We will now continue with voting time .
Membership of interparliamentary delegations : see Minutes
Explanations of vote
Explanations of vote
( FI ) Madam President , first of all let me say that I am pleased that the budget package was voted on and got through .
Of course , as Vice-Chairman of the Committee on Culture and Education , I followed matters relating to this area in particular , and I am glad that one important project , the European Youth Olympic Festival in Tampere , was voted through .
It is important to ensure that we use the budget to press ahead with projects that are close to the public .
Then people can see and experience how the Union is working in their region .
The budget is a strong one , but it has to be said that under one Heading , which mentions the European Union as a global partner , that is , point 134 , I suspect that I voted wrongly , because I was following the group list and I do not agree with it in all respects .
It is perhaps worth pointing this out , but in other respects I can say that I am satisfied with this draft budget and I am happy that it went through .
Madam President , I abstained on vote 134 of the draft general budget for 2009 , as the intellectual dishonesty and cynicism of the movers of this amendment are preying on the genuine concerns and fears of many of our citizens by trying to imply that , at present - and in the past - EU development funds have been given to governments and organisations for programmes that include , I quote : ' coercive abortion , forced sterilisation and infanticide ' , all of which we would condemn outright .
That should not even need to be said .
So they justify the wording of this emotive amendment , the text of which is already being used with one eye on next June 's European election .
The amendment is being portrayed as , I quote : ' an attempt to exclude such projects from receiving EU funds in the 2009 EU budget ' .
As EU funds have never been used in such a way , but always according to the Cairo ICPD , and as there is no such proposal in this year 's budget to do so , the political mischief of the movers has to be acknowledged by all fair-minded and intellectually honest commentators .
( BG ) I supported the 2009 budget as well as the proposal to increase it compared to what had been proposed by the Commission .
Although it is not enough to meet the huge demands of all Member States , or to fully implement all priority policies , I believe that it lives up to the fundamental principle of the EU , which is solidarity .
By directing funds towards the more poorly developed countries and regions , the financial instrument has established itself as an important factor in achieving balanced development .
In this regard , the Cohesion Fund plays an important role , as it is aimed at those Member States which need to close the gap between the levels of economic and social development through this fund .
It is particularly important for the new Member States , which really do need the financial resources of the Community .
I do not believe that these resources should be subject to conditions which are any stricter than the approved rules and procedures of the European Union .
They are of great importance in helping Bulgaria catch up in its development and to reach the European Union 's average standard of living .
The vote against the proposal to put Cohesion Fund resources into a reserve is a good decision .
The proposal was tied to vague criteria , particularly regarding the reimbursement of withheld funds .
In my view , the European Commission and Parliament have sufficient control mechanisms at their disposal to ensure that the funds are spent effectively .
( NL ) Madam President , I have voted against the draft budget for 2009 , and the Commission 's budget in particular , for the very reason that I should like to make a political statement by not in any way approving of the Commission 's actions .
In general , I consider the Commission to be an institution which , by definition , as far as its principles are concerned , works in an undemocratic way , since it is made up of a board of purely politically appointed high officials , whose behaviour , despite this , is reminiscent of some sort of European mandarins who barely tolerate supervision and who , in effect , cannot be penalised either .
Politically , as far as the 2009 budget is concerned , I am , for starters , opposed to the Commission 's incessant efforts to continue , by hook or by crook , on the damned path of accession of the Islamic and non-European Turkey to the European Union .
I do not intend to endorse this policy .
Madam President , we voted to support the thrust of Mrs Sinnott 's Amendment 134 , on preventing Community assistance being given to any government , organisation or programme which supports or participates in the management of a programme involving human rights abuses such as coercive abortion , involuntary sterilisation or infanticide .
However , we feel it important to question Mrs Sinnott 's justification for proposing such an amendment .
In her press statement this week , she cited such countries as China and Vietnam , where she claims that EU funding , channelled through the United Nations Population Fund ( UNFPA ) , is presently being used for coercive abortions , involuntary sterilisation and infanticide .
I spoke to the Director of the UNFPA office in Brussels this morning , who said that the UNFPA , the United Nations population programme , does not support coercion or abortion .
It follows the mandate of the 1994 International Conference on Population and Development , which clearly states that reproductive health-care programmes should provide the widest range of services without any form of coercion .
In addition , the global community has decided that abortion should never have been promoted as a method of family planning .
China 's citizens have benefited from the presence of the UNFPA and the initiatives that it has brought to the nation .
In the parts of China - and other nations - where the UNFPA works , women are given more options for their reproductive health decisions , and more information about reproductive health care is available to them , as is the freedom of access to it .
Madam President , this was a complex vote and a complex budget .
I regret that Amendment 133 did not succeed , as it would have given more focus to the needs of children with disabilities who are in institutional care .
Our concern was the deinstitutionalisation of those children .
However , this issue has not gone away and we will continue to fight for their rights .
I hope that the President of the Commission responds to my letter in this regard .
- ( FR ) Madam President , I voted against the resolution on the draft general budget of the European Union because of a last-minute attempt once again , via an amendment tabled by the Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance , which the majority of my fellow Members have not even seen and of which they have not assessed the scope , to interpret the famous Cox package concerning the future status of MEPs in a manner that would render their voluntary pension fund meaningless .
This amendment does not reflect what is expressly agreed on in the Cox package .
It is therefore out of the question to deprive almost all of the Members of new rights .
This amendment cannot possibly have the slightest effect on the implementing provisions to be laid down in this regard .
We are going to make sure that this situation is redressed , because the vote has taken place without the Members ' knowledge , and they are all coming to see me now , stunned by the true scope of this amendment .
As vice-chairman of the pension fund , I will make sure it is redressed .
( NL ) Madam President , in the final vote , I voted against the draft general budget for 2009 for the different European institutions , including Parliament obviously .
I did so first of all because I am not convinced that all these European institutions , without exception , handle the huge pile of tax money economically and responsibly .
Quite frankly , I think the reverse is true .
The image which our voters have of the European institutions , and we should be well aware of this , is one of a gravy train where overpaid and undertaxed apparatchiks and MEPs form a kind of Soviet-styled nomenclature , where decisions are often taken over the heads of the public , and certainly against the will and the interest of the citizens .
This is an image that we have , which certainly does not apply to everybody and everything , but in which , I fear , there is some truth for a considerable number of European institutions .
In my opinion , we will need to put our own house in order for some time to come before we can send out a more positive image of our Europe .
- ( CS ) Allow me to explain why I voted for Mr Stockmann 's report on air travel fees .
On the one hand , I welcomed the obligation to state combined costs to travellers on airline tickets and in offers , inclusive of airport fees , as this will lead to greater transparency in the decision making of passengers and will encourage economic competition .
Most of all , however , I welcome the limit which unifies airport fees for the main national and larger airports , allowing the smaller airports to offer lower prices and thereby to compete in a market which is currently very much lacking in transparency .
This creates an opportunity for regional airports to develop and for the range of air travel services on offer to the public to expand .
- ( FR ) Madam President , I should like to say that , in view of the growing threat of sea piracy off the Horn of Africa , the draft motion for a resolution on piracy supports the will of the Member States to undertake a coordinated naval campaign .
Unfortunately , the amendments , for the most part , are pious hopes or merely point out the obvious , such as the collapse into anarchy of Somalia , events from which the full consequences must necessarily be drawn .
It will certainly not be possible to combat piracy effectively if the pirates ' bases are not destroyed .
It is regrettable , also , that this text does not point out the main cause of this resurgence of piracy , which represents the decline of Europe 's civilising influence in this part of the world .
Lastly , I believe that it is rather odd to want to demand that the Member States ' naval forces separate , as it were , the action of combating piracy from the actions being carried out - it is not too clear why - within the context of Operation Enduring Freedom , as if Bin Laden were escaping in some way from Afghanistan via Pakistan , in a dugout canoe , to make his way to New Zealand .
I understand that there is a desire to introduce this distinction , but ships in the area will naturally have to carry out both missions .
Madam President , accounting standards are the key element of the language of financial services .
For investors , the moves to converge the national standards of accounting to the International Financial Reporting Standards ( IFRS ) are a great step forward .
It means that companies will be able to publish accounts in one basic form , which should be accepted in the major economies around the world .
Canada , China , Japan , the USA - and now , it seems , India as well - are in agreement in the wish to converge their standards towards IFRS .
Although I welcome this , as the rapporteur for the transparency directive , I recognise that work to achieve actual convergence still has to be done .
This is why I and my fellow rapporteur , Margarita Starkevičiūtė , have approved the amendments to monitor the progress of this convergence process .
I trust that the Commission , in their discussions with various national authorities , can keep the momentum moving .
With regard to the USA , I am keen that a new administration can be trusted and relied upon to make the substantial progress that it is needed .
The Commission should keep pressure on this .
On accounting standards themselves , it is vitally important to keep the underlying approach , as agreed within the International Accounting Standards Board ( IASB ) .
The integrity of these rules will be tested by attempts to dilute them for national reasons .
This should be resisted strongly , and fair value accounting must be supported in the face of such pressure .
( NL ) Madam President , I abstained on the motion for a resolution on aircraft safety and body scanners , not because I object to the reservations it expresses with regard to the right of privacy for travellers , quite the reverse .
I too believe that body scanners cannot be commissioned without a clear scientific and medical evaluation of the possible effects of the use of the technology in question on the health of the users .
I can only bemoan the fact that the proposal to postpone the vote and to invite Commissioner Tajani in this connection to present a study which may enable us make a more informed decision regarding the use of body scanners has been rejected .
This is a very serious matter , involving , as it does , the safety of the citizens and the use of pioneering new technology .
This is why I find it very regrettable that we in our Parliament treat this issue so shoddily .
Madam President , as one of the co-authors of the motion for a resolution of the European Parliament on the commemoration of the Holodor , theartificial famine of 1932-1933 in Ukraine , allow me , as a member of the PPE-DE Group , to begin by expressing my thanks to all of my parliamentary colleagues who voted in favour of the motion for a resolution .
Under the leadership of the PPE-DE Group , a compromise was reached under which the word ' genocide ' was removed at the request of the Socialist Group in the European Parliament .
Following the discussion in your presence yesterday , however , filled as it was with high emotion and with the powerful words of Commissioner Tajani , nobody could be in any doubt as to what name to give this appalling act which destroyed ten million people .
It is now up to the historians , on the basis of fact and as long as there are survivors still living , to bring to an end the silence and the concealment of these events .
There must be books in our libraries bearing genuine witness to the famine in Ukraine .
By voting in favour of the motion for a resolution on branding the Ukrainian famine of 1932 - 1933 as a horrific crime against the Ukrainian people and against humanity , we have today pasted back into the annals of European history a page ripped out by Stalin .
Madam President , I voted for the resolution on Holodomor , the great Ukrainian famine .
The resolution rightly calls it an appalling crime against the Ukrainian people and , indeed , against humanity .
However , due to the position taken by certain factions , the resolution has avoided the term ' genocide ' , which would be fair and appropriate to be used in this case .
The Ukrainian Parliament and 26 states have defined this crime , which caused the death of at least four million people , as genocide .
Moreover , recital B of the resolution quotes the UN Convention on the crime of genocide of 1948 , which unequivocally covers the Ukrainian case .
So I very much hope that the European Parliament will soon join the position taken by these states .
- ( FR ) Madam President , we have commemorated the Holodomor , the methodical destruction of Ukraine 's farming community by famine , and our Parliament has recognised , as did our fellow Member a moment ago , that it was a genocide .
I should just like to stress the fact that the perpetrators of this genocide sat among the judges of civilisation at Nuremberg , a fact that should make it possible , today , to debate the composition , procedure and conclusions of the Nuremberg Trial .
However , intellectuals , who are holding this debate today in Europe , are being arrested , detained , hunted down , ruined , pursued and thrown into prison .
Worse , their lawyers , who are also presenting the same conclusions , are being hunted down in the same way .
In Mr Pöttering 's country , for example , they are being hunted down and arrested in line with procedures that resemble Stalinist trials .
We awarded the Sakharov Prize for Freedom of Thought to a Chinese dissident ; we could just as well have awarded it to certain Europeans such as , for example , the courageous German lawyer , Sylvia Stolz .
( DE ) Madam President , Doris Pack has , as always , submitted an excellent text , because she is not only an expert on Southern Europe , but also on education .
I welcome the fact that education is a particular area of emphasis in relation to the stabilisation agreement .
However , we must extend our approaches , firstly by focusing more closely on accelerating the visa liberalisation process and giving young people in Bosnia and Herzegovina the chance to find out more about Europe by studying and travelling here .
The second decisive factor is the establishment of a European multi-faith university in Sarajevo , which is supported by all three religious communities in the country and which will act as a European centre of tolerance and mutual understanding , not on the basis of indifference , but on the basis of people 's roots in each religion .
With our strong support for the European university , this will not only represent major progress for people in Bosnia and Herzegovina , but may also allow Bosnia and Herzegovina to send a signal to the whole European continent .
( NL ) Madam President , the report that is before us by the Committee on Petitions on the European Ombudsman 's report for 2007 was very positive on the whole , and I can certainly support this view for once .
I have therefore endorsed the report .
Nevertheless , I should like to note once again in this explanation of vote that it is remarkable that Parliament should congratulate the European Ombudsman on his conduct to ensure the correct and full application of rules and regulations , while law infringements and violations of the rules are occurring before our very eyes in this Parliament , so to speak , without Parliament intervening or even with Parliament 's cooperation on a daily basis and on a very large scale .
For example , the way in which the Commission and Parliament continue to build on the Treaty of Lisbon , which has died a political and legal death since the referendum in Ireland , makes a mockery of all legal rules .
I think it is high time we started to put our own house in order .
Written explanations of vote
The June List believes that the EU budget should be limited to 1 % of the Member States ' average GNI .
We have therefore chosen to vote against all the increases proposed by the European Parliament , at the same time as the June List has welcomed the few savings proposed in the form of amendments by either the Committee on Budgets or individual Members .
There are a number of unfortunate budget headings .
The June List particularly regrets the large amount of subsidy for the EU 's agricultural policy , the Cohesion Fund , fisheries and the budget headings containing support for various types of information campaign .
The June List also believes that something needs to be done about the European Parliament 's constant shuttling between Strasbourg and Brussels and that the European Economic and Social Committee and the Committee of the Regions should be disbanded .
in writing . - ( FR ) For twenty-seven countries to have a European budget in the region of EUR 130 billion - that is to say , the equivalent of Spain 's budget , and that alone - is , under normal circumstances , already rather strange .
Nevertheless , it is thus that , in a Europe that lacks high-speed rail links between Finland and Spain , and between France and Poland , as well as equipment and staff for the universities , research centres and retirement homes of a continent submerged by the geriatric tsunami , the worldwide crisis of interbank liquidity , of the real estate shock on several economies and of the decline in confidence of entrepreneurs and workers , a budget effort is required that is far removed from the usual European budget .
We therefore require exceptional budget programming for a major infrastructure plan , approved via a major ' European financial referendum ' .
By this I mean a European loan , of an amount equivalent to EUR 1 700 billion , raised by the banking sector .
in writing . - ( SV ) We Swedish Social Democrats regret that the EU should be funding tobacco producers , at the same time as investing large amounts of money in public health campaigns and anti-smoking measures in the EU .
We also consider it a scandal that the EU budget should be used to support bullfighting , which is a tradition we do not consider to be compatible with modern values and animal rights .
We also regret that all those types of export subsidy , together with milk quotas , should take up a portion of the EU 's budget .
We voted against all these proposals .
We also wish to clarify why we voted against the proposal for a pilot project in favour of children and children 's rights .
It was because this proposal was not contained in the compromise between the political groups involved in pilot projects .
Because we did not wish to jeopardise this sensitive compromise , we were not , unfortunately , able to support the proposal , with whose content we fully sympathise ( amendment 133 ) .
Finally , we wish to express our great disappointment about the fact that the amendments aimed at strengthening union cooperation and consultation between trade and industry and union organisations were not adopted in plenary .
in writing . - ( FR ) I voted in favour of the report by Mrs Haug on the draft general budget of the European Union for 2009 and amending letter 1 / 2009 to the preliminary draft general budget ( PDB ) of the European Union .
Like many of my fellow Members , I deplore the fact that the Council has further reduced an already meagre budget : the commitment appropriations of the draft budget represent a total amount of EUR 134 billion , that is to say , a shortfall of EUR 469 million with regard to the PDB , even though the payments stand at EUR 115 billion , this being a decrease of EUR 1.8 billion .
The payments are thus limited to 0.89 % of GNI , that is to say , an unprecedented level that is drastically widening the gap between commitments and payments and this is something that goes against budgetary discipline .


With regard to agriculture , I support the creation of three new funds - the fund for restructuring in the dairy sector , Eco-Aid to maintain sheep and goat farming in the EU , and the ad-hoc financial instrument for the adaptation of the fishing fleet to the economic consequences of the rise in fuel prices .
in writing . - ( NL ) The Haug report cannot count on my support , because the European Parliament is asking to spend more .
I do , however , support the new priorities in the areas of climate change and energy .
Many amendments aim to raise the profile of these priorities in the budget , which I welcome .
This also means , though , that we need to indicate the areas in which we want to cut costs .
Parliament 's position does not make any mention of this .
Furthermore , I should like to declare myself openly in favour of balanced support to the governments in the Middle East .
The issue of the Palestinian Authority requires our continued attention .
It is appropriate for us to provide aid , given that it now looks like Prime Minister Fayad is setting a course that deserves our support .
Finally , it is justified that the European Union should wish to give extra food aid to poor countries due to food prices soaring .
I agree with the rapporteur that this should not be funded from the budget for European agriculture , but rather from the budget for external policy .
in writing . - ( SV ) We support the basic principles behind the EU budget for 2009 and wish to emphasise that it needs to give people good value for money .
The budget 's framework should be respected , and we therefore welcome the fact that the budget will be kept well within this framework .
We want drastically to cut back on agricultural and regional aid and reduce the total budget .
We want to put more of our shared resources into research and development , growth , infrastructure and security .
On Thursday 23 October , the European Parliament adopted at first reading the European Union 's budget for 2009 .
This budget falls within the particular context of the narrow 2007-2013 financial perspective - which the French socialists , moreover , refused to vote in favour of in 2006 - of the financial crisis and of the preparations for the European elections of June 2009 .
A budget is policy expressed in figures .
Parliament has succeeded in restoring a satisfactory payment level , in spite of the Council 's desire to make bleak cuts in lines that nonetheless appear to be a priority for MEPs , such as the fight against climate change , aid for SMEs , growth and competitiveness , and citizenship schemes .
In this connection , I am delighted that we have re-established a satisfactory level of appropriations for communication initiatives concerning citizens and the media .
In order to prepare for the forthcoming elections and to make citizens want to take part in the vote , it is vital that they are made aware of European issues .
All initiatives undertaken by the Commission and by Parliament for the purposes of explaining Europe and its added value in terms of everyday life and of preparing for the future must be encouraged and provided with sufficient resources .
in writing . - I voted against amendment 134 because to vote for or to abstain would be to lend credibility to false allegations by Kathy Sinnott to the effect that the EU funds coercive abortion , involuntary sterilization , and , infanticide .
in writing . - ( PT ) As in previous budgetary procedures when we had many reasons to immediately reject them at first reading , we can say that , with regard to the draft general budget of the European Union for the financial year 2009 , we have even more reasons to reject it .
The Council clearly views the next budget in exactly the same light as it did the previous ones .
In other words , it plans to use this instrument to continue supporting the EU 's neoliberal policy .
We should not really expect anything else .
This budgetary procedure , once again , provides clear evidence of the EU 's intended response to the worsening capitalist crisis , triggered by the financial crisis at the very heart of the system , in other words in the US .
Neither the Commission , nor the EP , nor the Council have put forward any measures in the EU budget which will effectively respond to the needs and growing difficulties of workers and the general population , micro- , small- and medium-sized enterprises and a large part of the productive sector .
At the precise moment when the structural crisis in the European Union is getting worse , the Council has reduced payments to an ' unprecedentedly low level ' , by nearly EUR 9 billion compared to the forecast in the Multiannual Financial Framework .
This is why we have voted against .
in writing . - ( SV ) I abstained from voting because large parts of the outcome are a disappointment .
For example , it is mad for the EU to be funding tobacco producers , at the same time as investing large amounts of money in public health campaigns and anti-smoking measures in the EU .
It is also a scandal that the EU budget should be used to support bullfighting , which is a tradition I do not consider to be compatible with modern values and animal rights .
I also regret that all those types of export subsidy are still to take up a portion of the EU budget and that the amendments aimed at strengthening union cooperation and consultation between trade and industry and union organisations were not adopted by Parliament .
in writing . - We would strongly oppose coercive abortion , forced sterilisation and infanticide , and concur that these are human rights abuses .
We have abstained on the amendment as EU funds have never been used in this way and the amendment fails to clarify the importance of the international development work of credible organisations in supporting women in fertility management , specifically reproductive education , reproductive health-care services and family planning , and campaigning for women 's right to health care .
While we are voting in favour of Amendments 612 , 131 , 132 and 133 because of the importance of the issue , we feel it would be more appropriate to create a separate budget line on children 's rights , which would include the issues dealt with in these amendments .
in writing . - ( NL ) Budget item 05020812 and Amendment 169 have given sudden and unexpected importance to the topic of school fruit on account of proposals to spend more money on it in future .
There is currently a purchase agreement for which money has been set aside for years with a view to supporting the fruit growers .
This gives the bought fruit a useful purpose .
There are proposals in the pipeline which , from 2010 , could increase the budget for ' market regulation ' by EUR 90 million or more per annum .
Parliament can only have an advisory role in this .
It is the Council that makes the decisions , and the subsidiarity test does not apply , because this power has , pursuant to Articles 36 and 37 of the Treaty , been with the EU for a long time .
Our party , the Socialist Party in the Netherlands , considers this to be a bizarre state of affairs .
A school fruit arrangement may be useful in preventing children from becoming ever more obese and unhealthy .
The question is why the EU should get involved in this , rather than the municipalities that run education .
Payments are currently made from the EU fund to the Member States , which are obliged to add a sum to it , and it is then up to the municipalities to implement the scheme .
If nothing else , this way of working leads to a great deal of unnecessary administration and time-consuming red tape .
in writing . - ( IT ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I have voted in favour of the draft general budget of the European Union for 2009 , drawn up by Mrs Haug .
I am pleased to note the increase in resources for overall spending on transport in the preliminary draft budget for the next financial year , and the creation of a new budget line on Support Activities to European Transport Policy and Passenger Rights .
I must nonetheless express my disappointment over the reduction , although not excessive , of payments relating to this item .
Finally , I would like to draw attention to the opinion of the Committee on Civil Liberties , Justice and Home Affairs , of which I am a member , and say that I share Mrs Dührkop Dührkop 's satisfaction that the increased budget provided for the current year for Title 18 , Area of freedom , security and justice , has been retained for 2009 .
This reflects the great importance given to issues associated with security and safeguarding liberties , the management of migration flows and the external borders of the Union , which are becoming ever more critical , not least in the eyes of European citizens .
in writing . - ( SV ) As always when one votes on a budget the size of the EU 's , there are details about which one has reservations .
In the case of the EU , of course , it is mainly agricultural policy that sticks in the craw .
It may therefore appear strange to be voting in favour of a budget in which the dominant budget heading is one that we should have liked to have been one of the smaller ones - if it existed at all .
At the same time , there is a need to consider the whole picture , and the good news is the ever-increasing awareness that significantly larger resources need to be invested in what really is joint expenditure - in this case , on climate .
My vote needs therefore to be interpreted in the light of the fact that the annual draft budget involves something of a shift forward , not that I uncritically support the total content .
Two corrections to the voting protocol , for example concerning tobacco subsidies , have been introduced .
in writing . - Amendment 602 was supported by Parliament .
Again this is disappointing , as it continues subsidising tobacco producers in the EU .
Tobacco is the cause of death of half a million EU citizens each year .
It is a disgrace that there is still a subsidy available to grow a product which kills so many .
in writing . - ( EL ) The vote in favour of the EU budget for 2009 by the centre right and centre left forces of the European Parliament , with the participation of the Greek MEPs from the New Democracy , PASOK and LAOS parties , signals the intensity of the anti-grassroots policy against the workers .
Within the framework of the Lisbon Strategy and at a time of crisis in the capitalist system , the European Union is using the budget to make workers pay for this latest crisis , to speed up capitalist restructurings , to promote harsh anti-labour measures which undermine collective agreements , to generalise the application of flexible forms of employment and to privatise state social services and insurance systems .
The European Commission and the European Parliament are pushing ahead with the imperialist action of the EU and making more money available for the militarisation of the EU , in order to pave the way for the European monopolies to penetrate third countries .
They are using the political power of the stick and carrot to try and misdirect the labour movement and are strengthening their repressive mechanisms in order to strike at the labour grassroots struggle . At the same time , they are using social dialogue to try and wheedle the consent of the workers to the rationale of the European way forward .
The parliamentary group of the Communist Party of Greece voted against this deeply class-based budget and the imperialist plans of capital and of the EU .
in writing . - ( RO ) As part of the vote on the report approving the 2009 Budget Section III - Commission , I voted for paragraphs 14 and 38 of the report , which support the development of institutional skills for the Nabucco project .
I also voted for amendment 542 , which provides for an increase of EUR 5 million in budget item 06 03 04 ( Financial support for projects of common interest in the Trans-European energy network ) .
Although this sum is tiny in comparison with the size of the budgets required to implement energy projects , I believe that it is important for us to develop the institutional skills required to implement this project .
The supplementary sum is earmarked for the development of the administrative skills of the Nabucco project coordinator .
Europe needs to diversify its sources for providing energy .
In this sense , the Nabucco project is a strategic project for the European Union .
The majority with which these amendments were passed is recognition of the importance attached by the European Parliament to the Nabucco project .
Furthermore , we are expecting specific action to be taken , which will materialise in launching the construction of the Nabucco project .
in writing . - British Labour MEPs have long supported the reform of the CAP , especially reforms which save money , and thus do not support measures which increase costs unnecessarily .
In particular , the EPLP does not support subsidising the production of tobacco ; bullfighting ; new funds for dairy , sheep and goats and funds for publicising the CAP .
British Labour MEPs welcome any opportunity to help small and medium enterprises , as they are the backbone of our economy , providing the majority of jobs in the EU .
Consolidating funding under one budget heading will help draw attention to the needs of SMEs .
in writing . - ( FR ) I voted in favour of the resolution on the sections of the EU budget , excluding the European Commission 's budget , on the basis of the report by Mr Lewandowski .
Although none of the budgets covered by this report appear to present any major problems , I remain convinced that the European Parliament is not equipped with the resources to match the political responsibilities it has acquired by virtue of the development of the Treaties and the work of its Members , and , moreover , by virtue of its role in reducing the gap that has set in between European integration and the people , a gap that has been confirmed again and again by the various recent referendums .
Like the great majority of my fellow Members , I support the proposal to strengthen the European Court of Auditors ' audit capacity with the creation of 20 posts .
The costs associated with funding the extension of the Court building must be kept as low as possible for taxpayers , and it is a good idea to fund this expenditure directly from the budget over four years , rather than to conceal the significantly higher costs that would result from a 25-year rental-purchase option .
in writing . - ( SV ) The report 's starting point is increased interinstitutional cooperation by means of a general increase in services within the EU 's institutions .
The rapporteur believes that efficiency will be increased in this way .
For example , it is proposed that personnel resources for the political groups should increase by 53 services .
Moreover , a further two higher services are to be set up , in addition to the new services included in the draft budget .
The June List is very well disposed towards making the EU system more efficient , but does not believe that this is automatically achieved by means of more services .
In principle , we are opposed to an increase , both in the EU budget and in the number of services , because we believe that this would involve increased bureaucracy and less national self-determination .
When it comes to more services in the political groups , we maintain that this would be of most benefit to the large groups - a development that would make it harder work for other groups to conduct their own policies .
Moreover , the European Parliament has already in the past taken steps to introduce EU contributions to special ' EU parties ' and party-political foundations linked to these .
We believe that , in this way , more than sufficient advantage has been accorded , at taxpayers ' expense , to the big well-established political parties and their groups in the European Parliament .
The June List has therefore chosen to vote against the report .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I voted in favour of the 2009 draft general budget presented in Mr Lewandowski 's report .
Indeed , I believe that the European Union should adhere strictly to the financial regime in order to send out a strong message in this time of great uncertainty on the markets .
I would point out that there is still room for improvement ; ample work remains to be done in building stronger interinstitutional cooperation .
Lastly , I feel I have a duty to express my opposition to those amendments providing substantial cuts to European funds for the regions of southern Italy : this is not the way to achieve European integration , even if fund management in these areas could be better .
If a tap is leaking , the answer is not to turn it off , but to repair the pipe .
The concept is the same , with due proportion .
in writing . - ( DE ) With regard to amendment 4 to the Lewandowski report , I would like to state that the PSE Group has not signed this amendment due to an error , but has fully supported it and continues to do so .
in writing . - British Labour MEPs support the principle that the European Parliament should be knowledge based , but decided to abstain on the decision to increase the number of Group staff due to the current financial conditions and the need to save money as a result .
in writing . - ( PT ) As we have highlighted throughout this process , the aim is to amalgamate and deliberately confuse ' competition ' with ' transparency ' .
Obviously it is necessary to determine the relevant criteria for airport charges and what these charges actually represent .
However , this should not occur within a policy aimed at liberalising and privatising a strategic public service such as air transport , particularly by creating a ' truly competitive airport market ' , applying the ' user pays ' principle and requiring profitability in a public service .
Indeed , as we have previously highlighted , the aim even seems to be to remove the ' supervisory role ' from public control , by transferring this to ' independent ' supervisory authorities or bodies .
We would reiterate that previous privatisation in this sector has not resulted in added value in the services provided , but has helped to destroy jobs and reduce workers ' rights and , in some cases , caused technical and operational problems .
Despite the outermost regions not having been explicitly excluded from the scope of the directive ( by recognising the permanent natural and geographical disadvantages and constraints affecting these regions and by establishing adequate derogations from compliance with universal public service obligations ) , as we proposed , we welcome the fact that the directive 's scope has been limited to airports with more than 5 million passengers per year .
in writing . - Whilst British Conservatives recognise that the charges airports levy on their users should be subject to scrutiny on occasion , Conservatives abstained in the vote on the amendments at second reading on the draft airport charges directive .
This was because they still have concerns that the regulation of some regional airports is unnecessary and may affect their ability to operate competitively .
Conservatives were keen for the EU to adopt a percentage threshold at first reading .
The current threshold is arbitrary and does not take into account the competitive growth of the sector .
in writing . - ( DE ) I will vote in favour of the directive on airport charges presented by Mr Stockmann .
The report will make abuse more difficult and reduce the distortion of competition .
This will prevent airports from abusing their dominant market position and imposing excessive charges on the airlines .
I believe it is right that there will be greater differences in charge levels in future and that the new system will therefore also benefit the customer .
It is important for airport users to know in every case how and on what basis charges are calculated .
It is also important that the directive includes standardised regulations on the mutual obligation to provide information , the transparency requirements and the method of calculating the charges .
in writing . - ( DE ) I have not voted in favour of the directive on airport charges at the second reading , just as at the first reading , because what is being proposed here will lead to unacceptable discrimination against Luxembourg airport .
This is no way to treat a small country .
Applying the directive to Luxembourg airport , which has 1.6 million passengers per year , and the failure to apply it to direct competitors Frankfurt-Hahn or Brussels-Charleroi , which transport more than 3 million passengers , represents unacceptable discrimination in the internal market , simply because there is a national border in between .
It is not national borders which should be the decisive factor in this case , but objective criteria , if the directive aims to prevent possible abuse on the part of airports with a dominant market position .
In the case of a smaller airport , in particular when it is the only one in the country , there is no risk of abuse of this kind , even though the competitive airports , which are also home to low-cost airlines , are only a short distance away .
Luxembourg is so small that you can reach three neighbouring countries in only 30 minutes on the motorway .
This is a blatant violation of the principle of proportionality .
For this reason , once again , at second reading . I am voting under protest against this text , which is intended to be a compromise .
in writing . - ( GA ) The rapporteur and the Committee on Transport and Tourism have done Trojan work on this report .
The lack of amendments show that Parliament has taken a strong and unified position on this matter and that its Members recognise that it is important to progress the Directive on airport costs .
I am happy with the adoption at first reading of the provision of the Directive changing airport capacity from 1 million to 5 million passengers per year .
It is also commendable that environment provisions have been included in the common position .
However , I felt that specific elements were missing from the common position , but the rapporteur succeeds in rectifying this at second reading .
I therefore pledge my full support .
in writing . - ( PL ) The directive on airport charges will put an end to the long-standing conflict and debate between airports and airlines concerning the cost and quality of services .
The new provisions will also protect passengers against unduly high airport charges and will restrict the practice by large airports of imposing artificially inflated prices .
To date , the airport use costs imposed on airlines have been passed on to consumers .
The directive aims to increase transparency and the principles of collecting airport charges .
It also introduces more specific provisions on the quality standards of the services to be provided .
In addition , it establishes independent supervisory bodies Thanks to the new directive , airport charges will at last be linked to the real costs and discrimination between specific airlines will cease .
The directive in question will apply to the 67 largest European airports , handling over five million passengers per year . Warsaw 's Okęcie airport is one of these .
The directive will also apply to the largest airport in a particular Member State of the Union .
Ten more airports will be covered by the directive by 2010 .
in writing . - ( SV ) I have been opposed to the proposal ever since it was put before Parliament because I believe that the Chicago Convention , which at present regulates the basic provisions governing airport charges , should have the same significance for the Member States in the future too .
There is no reason to change rules that are generally accepted and thus can be regulated only by the Member States .
New EU legislation means that , in the event of a dispute , pricing can ultimately be interpreted by the European Court of Justice , and this was obviously one of the reasons why the proposal was put forward .
I nevertheless think that there is reason to be sceptical when the European Court of Justice has to interpret binding Community legislation .
I am worried by the reluctance to take account of national provisions where certain issues are concerned .
I think that , in the future too , there must be reasons to question the role of the European Court of Justice , especially on this issue .
I voted in favour of Mrs Pack 's report on the conclusion of the Stabilisation and Association Agreement between the European Communities and their Member States , of the one part , and Bosnia and Herzegovina , of the other part , because I am convinced that this step will help to establish a contractual relationship between the two parties that will facilitate Bosnia and Herzegovina 's transition to a fully functioning state .
This will cause the country 's economy to accelerate , enabling its legislation and regulations to draw gradually closer to the acquis communautaire of the European Union , which will strengthen the Stabilisation and Association Agreement ( SAA ) , given that greater efforts are needed to overcome ethnic divisions and to move towards real reconciliation between the parties .
I also agree in particular that these efforts need to be focused on the young generations , through common educational programmes in the two entities and through a common understanding of the recent tragic events that took place there .
in writing . - ( PT ) The European Parliament ' gives its assent to the conclusion of the agreement ' ...
Behind these nine words are 65 pages of an ' agreement ' which , among many other negative aspects , is ruled by the euphemistically termed ' principles of free market economy ' .
In addition to some worrying political aspects , the primary objective of the agreement is the integration of Bosnia and Herzegovina within the European internal market , as a way of ensuring that the EU 's major transnationals have control over its economy .
The agreement is littered with the terms ' free trade ' , ' free movement of capital ' , ' liberalising the establishment and supply of services ' and ' liberalisation of transport ' ( air , maritime , inland waterways and land ) .
Its aim is to ensure that , within six years , Bosnia and Herzegovina has ' properly implemented and enforced ' the Community acquis on free competition in the internal market and also ' other trade-related areas ' .
Obviously , we support the further development of friendly relations with other countries , but this must be in response to their real needs .
These relations must be mutually beneficial and contribute to reciprocal development and the principle of non-interference and respect for national sovereignty must be observed .
However , this agreement is contrary to this principle .
in writing . - ( RO ) Sea piracy is an issue which is as topical nowadays as it has been for a couple of hundred years .
However , it is far from being the romantic , noble ' profession ' depicted in adventure novels or in the ' Pirates of the Caribbean ' series of films .
Piracy causes victims and generates huge revenues for the practitioners of this ' profession ' .
According to some statistics , last year alone , pirates attacked more than 60 ships , capturing 14 of them and taking hundreds of sailors as hostages .
Acts of piracy in the Gulf of Aden have cost ship-owners between USD 18 million and USD 30 million , in the form of ransom fees paid to recover the ships and their crews .
Furthermore , piracy can lead to complicated situations , like the one when a Ukrainian vessel transporting more than 30 missiles fell into the hands of Somali pirates .
These weapons could have very well ended up with Islamic militants in Somalia or in other conflict zones on the African continent .
It is difficult to explain how , in the year 2008 , we still have piracy just like in the Middle Ages .
The international community in general and the European Union in particular have a duty to examine this historical anomaly and to develop mechanisms which will put an end to this for the benefit of the entire region .
in writing . - I fully support the resolution on sea piracy .
Currently two attacks a day are taking place around the Horn of Africa and pirates are disrupting trade flows and preventing international aid reaching Somalia .
This resolution calls for coordinated action between the EU , the UN and the African Union to isolate pirates in the region and ensure aid reaches this troubled region .
I support these recommendations .
in writing . - ( PT ) One of the most significant aspects of the EU NAVCO mission is the fact that this is the EU 's first naval mission .
However , it should also be noted that the EU , in taking action against this piracy , is clearly aware that it is defending its direct interests .
This awareness is undoubtedly bound up with the consequences of globalisation .
As the world gets closer and as the European economy becomes increasingly global , it is clear that our interests lie well beyond our borders and that their defence will also require resources that go beyond the geographical limits of Europe .
At the same , we should stress that these interests and their defence are , as a rule , common to Europe and its allies .
That is why the role played by NATO , among others , in the fight against piracy is vital and must be noted and included in our analysis of this changing situation .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I voted in favour of the motion for a resolution on piracy at sea .
The unhindered passage of vessels is an absolute precondition for the development of international commerce : the European Union cannot tolerate acts of piracy taking place against Community fishing boats off the coast of Somalia , a rich hunting ground for thieves operating at sea .
I welcome the call on the Somali Transitional Government , in collaboration with the United Nations and the African Union , to treat piracy and armed robbery committed from the Somali coast against vessels carrying humanitarian aid as criminal acts to be pursued by arresting the perpetrators under existing international law .
Finally , I applaud the joint action promoted by the Council , namely to extend the right of sea and air pursuit of these pirates to the territorial waters of the coastal states , provided that the countries concerned agree , as well as to develop a mechanism for coordinated assistance against cases of maritime piracy .
in writing . - I shall be voting for this resolution and I congratulate my colleagues on the Transport Committee for taking this initiative at this time .
Sea Piracy is a criminal act that not only threatens seafarers ' lives but also disrupts legitimate trade and even humanitarian aid .
Modern day pirates have no romance ; they are not Johnny Depp type characters swinging through the rigging .
They are desperate , dangerous criminals who need to be brought to book .
Piracy is a problem all over the world and especially off the coast of Somalia , where it has risen to epidemic proportions .
Now it is time for concerted international action to bring this type of activity to a standstill .
This resolution is timely , and I hope it will help our governments to work together as a part of that international effort .
in writing . - ( EL ) The motion for a resolution , which was passed by the large coalition of centre right and centre left political forces in the European Parliament , uses piracy as a pretext to promote new imperialist interventions by the EU in the area of Somalia and the Horn of Africa .
It exploits the cases of piracy in an area in which the imperialist aspirations of the ΕU , the USA , Russia and other forces clash to impose and safeguard the presence of EU military forces which , with a fistful of weapons , will promote its imperialist plans to gain geostrategic control .
The European Parliament welcomes the decision by the EU Council to set up and send a euro-unifying naval force , which is basically a strike force for the European monopoly business groups seeking greater penetration and redistribution of the markets for their own benefit .
This new imperialist operation will mean even greater plundering of the wealth-producing resources in the area , more exploitation of the people in order to safeguard monopoly profits and new dangers of opportunist wars on the battleground of the competing imperialists .
The people can repel these new imperialist plans and impose their inalienable right to determine their own future and fate on the basis of their own interests against these imperialist plans and ambitions .
in writing . - The British Conservative Delegation supports strong international naval action against piracy , but we do not believe this is an area where the EU can , or indeed should , be involved .
We therefore abstained on the Resolution .
A NATO Naval Maritime Group is already being deployed against piracy in the seas off the Horn of Africa .
The EU Member States that would have to contribute warships to the ' EU naval force ' are already contributing to the NATO response .
The EU has no additional assets .
It brings no added value , only complexity , confusion and duplication , when the situation demands coherence , an unambiguous chain of command and political control , and robust rules of engagement .
This is a job for NATO .
We also object to references to ' EU fishing vessels ' , ' EU fishermen ' ' Community fishing , merchant and passenger vessels ' .
The EU possesses no ships and none are flagged EU .
The number of acts of piracy recorded across the world between the years 2000 and 2006 was 2 400 .
This figure does not include the incidents transport undertakings fail to declare for fear that their insurance premiums will be increased .
The Australian Government has calculated that the real number of acts of piracy is two thousand per cent higher .
Piracy leads to losses of the order of USD 13-16 billion each year , and this figure is likely to increase significantly over the next few years .
Somalia is only the tip of the iceberg .
From 2000 onwards , the most dangerous waters in the world have been those along the coast of south-east Asia , along with the waters around Malaysia , Indonesia , Nigeria , Iraq and Tanzania .
Acts of sea piracy represent a serious threat not only for human beings , but also for maritime safety .
The European Union should make every effort to counter this threat .
The International Financial Accounting Standards ( IFRS ) are a sound basis on which to unify accounting standards across the world .
Generalised use of globally accepted accounting standards will improve the transparency and comparability of financial reports .
The benefits will be felt by enterprises and investors alike .
The United States only recognises financial reports prepared on the basis of the IFRS in the version issued by the International Accounting Standards Board ( IAS ) .
The United States has , however , indicated that , for a transitional period , it is prepared to accept financial reports prepared on the basis of the IFRS in the version adopted in the framework of Regulation EC No. 1606 / 2002 without requiring them to be adjusted .
I voted in favour of the European Parliament motion for a resolution on the impact of aviation security measures and body scanners , that is , machines producing scanned images of persons as if they were naked , equivalent to a virtual strip search , on human rights , privacy , personal dignity and data protection , because I agree with the rapporteurs that this control measure , far from being merely technical , has a serious impact on the right to privacy , the right to data protection and the right to personal dignity .
For this reason , I believe that it should be accompanied by strong and adequate safeguards .
Since conditions for a decision have not yet been met , given that essential information is still lacking , I would like to emphasise the need to ask the Commission , before the expiry of the three-month deadline , to carry out a fundamental rights impact assessment and to urgently draw up an opinion on body scanners by the beginning of November 2008 .
in writing . - ( PT ) I support the European Parliament motion for a resolution on the impact of aviation security measures and body scanners on human rights , privacy , personal dignity and data protection .
I am concerned about the proposed regulation which provides for the use of body scanners among the permitted methods for screening passengers at EU airports .
These machines produce scanned images of persons as if they were naked , which is equivalent to a virtual strip search .
This measure , far from being merely technical , has a serious impact on the right to privacy , data protection and personal dignity .
I consider that the conditions for a decision have not yet been met , that the European Parliament is still missing essential information and that the European Commission must carry out a fundamental rights impact assessment , consult the independent data protection authorities and carry out a scientific and medical assessment of the possible health impact of such technologies .
Taking a decision without doing all this will show a rashness that European citizens will not understand and will represent yet another step in the escalation of security in total disregard for fundamental freedoms and personal dignity .
in writing . - ( RO ) I abstained from the vote on this motion for a resolution because the European Union needs to have a much more mature reflection on the balance between security and freedom .
It goes without saying that both are core values for the citizens in the Member States and need to be protected in equal measure .
However , we need to be aware that the technology used by criminal gangs or terrorists is , in very many cases , more advanced than that which our law enforcement agencies have available .
The EU has no excuse for not using the most advanced technical resources available , if using them can mean avoiding the loss of human life .
in writing . - ( PT ) In recent years , stricter security requirements in air transport have increasingly led to questions about their compatibility with individual rights .
This need to harmonise interests traditionally arises in the area of freedom and privacy in particular .
These concerns have arisen once again in this case and demand an appropriate response which we believe can be given .
If we take into account , on the one hand , the level of invasion of current methods and , on the other hand , the answers provided by solutions which involve the recording of images and ensure a physical distance between the security person and the passenger being checked , it seems that some of these questions have been overcome or at least could be overcome .
There is , however , another question which I believe has not been sufficiently covered and which raises major concerns .
The health implications of this technology have not yet been adequately studied .
The value put at risk in this case , namely the health of citizens , demands that care be taken .
This will be difficult to ensure if measures are adopted without the conditions proposed by the original version of the text put to the vote .
I therefore voted against the amendment which aimed to remove these conditions .
in writing . - ( SV ) I am voting in favour of this motion for a resolution , demanding that the problems associated with body scanning be investigated before a decision is taken .
The resolution could have gone further , however .
I am opposed in principle to the use of body scanning , which involves too great an infringement of privacy and is disproportionate to what it is desired to achieve .
The current system is already on the verge of being an invasion of privacy and is sufficiently secure .
in writing . - ( EL ) The unacceptable EU motion for a resolution on the use of body scanners at airports has nothing to do with the security of aviation ; it forms part of the reactionary policy of the EU and is a grossly flagrant breach of the personal rights and freedom of workers , with painful consequences for their health and safety .
The demagogic references , reservations and objections to the lack of guarantees relating to body scanners contained in the joint motion for a resolution in question by the European Parliament pave the way for the application of this unacceptable and highly dangerous system .
The proposed measure , which is a vulgar insult to the dignity of man and his very personality and , at the same time , puts his health at serious risk , reveals yet again the real , repulsive face of the EU of capital .
The people must again draw their own conclusions .
Electronically undressing citizens , with or without ' guarantees ' , is totally unacceptable and it needs to be roundly and decisively condemned straight away .
Resistance , disobedience and insubordination in the face of the policy and measures of the EU are the only way for the people to safeguard their fundamental dignity .
in writing . - ( NL ) The large majority of all nations in the former Yugoslavia wish to join the EU .
This wish has been expressed not only by the Albanians and Macedonians in Macedonia , who only recently found a solution to their differences of opinion regarding the government of that country , but also by the Serbs , Montenegrins and Albanian Kosovars , who recently bade farewell to a common state , along with the Serbs , Croats and Bosnians in Bosnia-Herzegovina .
The EU would do well not to overestimate the significance of this .
The fact that they wish to work together within the EU says nothing at all about the state structure where they live .
This is in the hands of the people themselves , not the EU .
If they have to choose between regional self-governance and a transfer of powers to a central government , because that is what the EU wants , then they will opt for the former .
The war in Bosnia between 1992 and 1995 came about because the majority of residents did not want a central government , but a loose partnership at most .
Yesterday 's debate clearly demonstrated that a large majority of this Parliament would opt for more central government in Bosnia-Herzegovina rather than decentralisation .
Since this goal is unattainable , the EU condemns itself to an indefinite presence in that country .
This is why I will be voting against .
in writing . - ( PT ) This motion for a resolution forms part of the crude campaign to falsify history by equating communism with fascism , in the process disgracefully whitewashing the latter and placing those whose aim was to enslave humanity on a par with those who heroically fought for freedom .
As we have previously highlighted , this is a profoundly anti-communist campaign which aims to divide democratic forces by denying and falsifying the communist contribution to the anti-fascist fight and to the development of our civilisation .
It must not be forgotten that anti-communism was the ideological cement of several fascist dictatorships and a factor used by them to divide democratic forces .
This motion for a resolution also forms part of the attempts to hide the fact that it is capitalism which is sowing the seeds of misery and hunger in the world .
Just listen to the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations which recently reported that tens of millions of people will fall victim to hunger , a situation that already affects around a billion human beings in the world .
This motion for a resolution must be viewed in the context of the rise of nationalist forces in Ukraine , the attempts to whitewash the collaboration of Ukrainian pro-fascist groups with the Nazis , the pressure to enlarge NATO and the current anti-Russia campaign .
in writing . - Labour Euro MPs wish to state our strong support for the belief that the Famine of 1932-33 was an appalling , man-made human tragedy , and we believe it is important to promote remembrance and public awareness of the artificial famine , together with its importance in Ukraine 's history .
Britain 's Prime Minister Gordon Brown made a Joint Statement with the President of the Ukraine on 15 May 2008 in which Britain pledged cooperation in international institutions to promote remembrance of the Holodomor .
Although we do not officially recognise the events of 1932-33 as falling within the definition of the 1948 UN Convention on Genocide , we recognise that some academic opinion supports this view and are committed to following the debate and studying any emerging evidence closely .
in writing . - ( FR ) Our Parliament is at last recognising the horror of the extermination by famine - the Holomodor - instigated in the Ukraine by the Soviet regime .
It is regrettable , however , that it has not taken the Ukrainian Parliament 's lead and described this mass crime as a genocide .
Indeed , the famine , which killed millions of Ukrainians between 1932 and 1933 , did not result exclusively from the economic and social absurdity of communism ; it was the fruit of an extermination plan fitting the definition of a genocide , that is to say : ' the intention to destroy , in whole or in part , a national , ethnical , racial or religious group , as such ' , and also ' deliberately inflicting on the group conditions of life calculated to bring about its physical destruction in whole or in part ' .
At a time when , in France , in particular , a certain middle-class communist left extreme is benefiting from media support , recognition of a genocide such as this would make it possible to remember the horrors of Marxism-Leninism , which has been responsible for the deaths of 200 million human beings since the Bolshevik Revolution of 1917 and which is today still oppressing over one and a half billion people , in Cuba , in North Korea , in Vietnam and , above all , in China , where the most uncontrolled form of capitalism combines very well with communist totalitarianism .
in writing . - ( NL ) My group has not signed this motion for a resolution and the majority have voted against , the reason being that they believe that the emergence of the Soviet Union in what was then a backward Russia was a step forward and enabled many badly trained , badly paid and rightless people to have a better life .
I share this belief , but this cannot justify all the means that were used then .
Some in favour of modernisation , not least their leader Stalin , considered the individual right to life of people who hold different views completely insignificant .
This stance fitted into the framework of a long Russian tradition of oppression and violence .
All the bad means from the past were dusted down , this time to break any opposition to progress .
The original ideal of democracy and equal rights for all people was placed second to this .
The good that was pursued became the justification for the bad that was being done , based on the idea that history always judges in favour of the victors .
We are now 75 years down the line , and it is only right and proper that much attention should be devoted to what went wrong then and the many victims in this .
This is why I will be voting in favour of this motion for a resolution .
in writing . - I and my British Conservative colleagues support the work of the European Ombudsman and believe that many of the proposals for improving the operation of the role in this report are worthy of support .
With regard to recital B , I wish to make clear that the British Conservative MEP Delegation opposes the Treaty of Lisbon and the incorporation of the Charter of Fundamental Rights into that Treaty .
We believe that the ratification procedure on this Treaty should end following the decisive ' no ' vote in Ireland .
in writing . - ( PT ) In this report , the Committee on Petitions encourages the Ombudsman to continue the dual aim that he announced in his 2006 Annual Report , namely working with the institutions to promote good administration and increasing communication efforts so that all citizens who might need to make use of his services are properly informed of how to do so .
The increase in the number of complaints lodged confirms the importance of this information .
It should be remembered that the Ombudsman now has more powers , following changes adopted by the European Parliament at his request .
The total number of inquiries dealt with by the Ombudsman in 2007 rose to 641 .
Of these , 64 % concerned the European Commission , 14 % EPSO ( European Personnel Selection Office ) , 9 % the European Parliament and 1 % the Council of the European Union .
The main types of alleged maladministration were lack of transparency , including refusal of information , unfairness and abuse of powers , unsatisfactory procedures , avoidable delay , discrimination , negligence , legal errors and failure to ensure fulfilment of obligations .
In some instances , the cases were settled .
On 19 May 2008 the European Ombudsman , Mr Diamandouros , submitted his report to the Committee on Petitions .
In it , he presented a detailed account of his activities together with data expressed in terms of figures and percentages .
According to the report , the number of admissible complaints addressed to the Ombudsman has risen .
It increased from 449 in 2006 to 518 in 2007 .
Compared to 2006 , the number of inadmissible complaints fell last year .
The reasons for lodging complaints were various . They included lack of transparency , unsatisfactory procedures , avoidable delays , discrimination , failure to ensure fulfilment of obligations and legal errors .
Most of the complaints , as much as 65 % of the total , concerned the European Commission .
Only 9 % of the complaints lodged with the Ombudsman concerned the European Parliament .
The European Ombudsman also mentioned errors on the part of the European institutions .
Mr Diamandouros criticised the European Commission for failing to comply with the legal requirement to publish in 2006 the 2005 annual report on access to documents of the European Parliament , the Council and the Commission .
Corrections to votes and voting intentions : see Minutes
( The sitting was suspended at 12.35 p.m. and resumed at 3 p.m. )
Approval of Minutes of previous sitting : see Minutes
1 .
Venezuela
The next item is the debate on three motions for resolutions on Venezuela .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , Venezuela is a great country and the Venezuelan people have deep-rooted democratic traditions and sentiments .
However , they have unfortunately been living for some years in a terrible situation , which is getting worse , in which their fundamental rights are being violated .
That is why we are once again discussing this issue in this House and why we must condemn this situation .
We condemn the abuse of personal data in lists used for political persecution along totalitarian guidelines , such as the ' Tascón list ' , ' Maisanta list ' and ' Russián list ' .
The actions taken to disqualify dozens of citizens from standing in the regional and local elections to be held in Venezuela are unacceptable .
The expulsion of human rights organisations , such as representatives of the NGO Human Rights Watch , simply for having made pertinent observations , is unacceptable .
It is also shocking that the violence and intolerance being fuelled by the authorities has even produced young victims .
We therefore condemn and regret the assassination of a young student leader who died a victim of this climate of violence which is being fuelled by the authorities .
We demand the truth and that those responsible are prosecuted .
We Europeans have to be more active .
Just imagine if this were happening in our countries .
Would we accept , in our countries , the disqualification of citizens from standing in elections , as is happening in Venezuela ?
If not , then how can we close our eyes to this ?
How can we close our eyes and pretend that nothing is happening ?
How can we accept , for example , the attitude of the Portuguese Government - my country , unfortunately , for which I am ashamed - which is bowing down before the Venezuelan Government , which has a boot-licking policy and which has recently become the European receiving room for the tyrants ?
This is truly unacceptable .
It is vital that the Commission and the Council become firmer and clearer in their condemnation of these human rights ' violations .
Mr President , a detailed explanation of the circumstances surrounding the death of Mr Julio Soto in Maracaibo must be provided .
I would like to convey my condolences to his family .
We call for the perpetrators of this crime to be properly tried and punished .
The observations and comments made by Human Rights Watch merit our attention , especially as this is an independent organisation that does not receive subsidies from any quarter .
We wish to protest against the ban on the activities of this organisation .
We call for full respect for freedom of expression in the media and freedom of association .
We call for full implementation of the legislation to protect women against violence .
We call for the November elections to be run in such a way as to ensure that there can be no reservations about the conduct of the election campaign or about the election process itself .
Venezuela should be a democratic country where people enjoy the same degree of freedom as they do in each of the Member States of the European Union .
author . - Mr President , for several years the situation of the Opposition in Venezuela has been very difficult , and questioning Venezuelan democracy has been legitimate .
But what is happening at the moment is proof that Venezuela 's democracy and the rule of law are a mockery .
To use an administrative measure in order to ban people for 15 years from holding or running for official positions is unacceptable .
Only the courts should be allowed to take such decisions , and only after convicting perpetrators of serious crimes .
The perversity of this measure can be easily noticed when it is realised that the vast majority of those banned are from the political Opposition , a practice that most likely will not be used only for the elections this November but may continue for the elections which will follow .
It is not surprising that this political disqualification is happening at a time when human rights advocates who criticise the current government are being expelled from Venezuela and when very suspicious accidents , resulting in the deaths of people who expressed criticisms , are not properly investigated .
The European Parliament must send a firm message to public opinion in Venezuela that political disqualification is an undemocratic practice and is contrary to the very foundation of the rule of law .
We must strongly reject the allegations of the Venezuelan Vice-Minister for Europe that the European Parliament refused to vote on this resolution in September because it was seen as a vote against the anti-corruption fight .
Such a manoeuvre to manipulate Venezuelan public opinion is undignified for a minister for Europe .
We also strongly reject his accusation that what we are doing here constitutes an attack against a sovereign country .
This resolution is the expression of our concern regarding democratic evolution and respect for human rights in a country whose people we highly admire and respect .
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , the brutal murder of Julio Soto represents a provisional climax in the dramatic collapse of democracy and the rule of law in Venezuela , a country which for a while played a positive role in Latin America .
However , under the current regime it is not only the case that fundamental human rights are being totally disregarded , but also that a megalomaniac dictator is attempting to export his inhuman system of terror to the entire continent and even to Europe , if you take into account his links with Belarus .
For this reason , it is essential that we put a stop to his plans quickly , for the sake of his own population , but also for the sake of populations of other nations which he is attempting to buy or blackmail with his oil wealth , in order to impose his ideology on them .
If he should raise the argument of national sovereignty , I can only say that there is something which is far more important than any national sovereignty and that is fundamental and universal human rights .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - Mr President , there is no doubt that Venezuela has had a traumatic history in recent , as well as more distant , times , and endogenous causes are not the only ones to blame .
Indeed , exogenous factors are perhaps far more significant in this respect .
However , whatever , or whoever , is to blame , it has been mainly the innocent civilian population that has suffered .
The present government , headed by Mr Chávez , obviously has an axe to grind with the USA and its supporters and allies , but that must not lead to such gross violations of the Venezuelan people 's rights as the institution of so-called ' administrative disqualification ' from elections or the persecution and murder of opposition activists .
Mr Chávez must realise that if he wants his country to progress to prosperity , then he must make sure that his government functions strictly within the limits of democracy and respect for human rights .
Using violence and persecution against his own people can only lead his country to more national trauma and suffering , and this we must not allow to happen .
Mr President , the resolution on violation of human rights in Venezuela is based on facts and is an action worthy of support .
Unfortunately , for many years Venezuelan society has been experiencing polarisation of political forces .
I refer , for example , to the coup by part of the army , intolerance , stratification of society in terms of property , or racial differences .
President Chavez 's team is the most active in all this because pursuant to the presidential system he can exercise control over the administration and the armed forces .
As a result of this struggle over decisions taken , the structure of Venezuelan society is becoming similar to that of Cuba , namely socialism with historical and nationalistic features .
This could lead to changing the country 's flag and the national anthem .
The present changes have not had a significant impact on the standard of living , as Venezuela is immensely rich in natural resources .
The latter cushion the impact of the changes and make it possible to engage in populist action .
The situation is so serious that the resolution alone will not halt the process of further limitation of citizens ' rights in Venezuela .
The practical support of all the countries in the region is called for .
on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group . - ( PT ) Once again we are faced with an unacceptable and deplorable attempt by the European Parliament to interfere , which just happens to have occurred before the regional and local elections in Venezuela .
At heart , the inclusion of this debate on the agenda and the motion for a resolution are simply intended to respond to those who support and encourage an already long-standing and worrying attempt to interfere with and destabilise a democratic and sovereign state .
The aim is to blatantly promote interference in Venezuela 's internal affairs , by trying to meddle and exert pressure from outside in order to impose decisions that only the Venezuelan people have the sovereign right to take .
Instead of distorting the facts and trying to give Venezuela lessons on democracy , the European Parliament should have included on the agenda a debate about the EU 's attempt to impose a proposed European Treaty , which has already been rejected , in total disregard for the democratic decisions sovereignly taken by the French , Dutch and Irish people , and also bearing in mind the refusal to allow other people to give their opinion through referendums .
Instead of meddling in something which only the Venezuelan people can decide , the European Parliament should have rejected the inhumane return directive which disregards and violates the human rights of immigrants , many of whom are from Latin America .
What really bothers the sponsors of this initiative is the fact that the Venezuelan people have set an example which is causing problems for the major financial and economic interests that control the European Union .
They have set an example of how to affirm national sovereignty and independence , how to build a patriotic project of emancipation , progress and development , and how to develop anti-imperialist solidarity .
They have shown that it is worthwhile for a people to fight and that it is possible to have a fairer , more democratic and more peaceful country and world .
Reality shows that the best response to this attempted interference by the European Parliament is the enormous prestige and importance that the Bolivarian process has for the people of Latin America and the world .
As a result , they should stop claiming that they can preach to the rest of the world .
We are today debating breaches of human rights in Venezuela due to failure to respect the civil and political rights contained in the Venezuelan constitution , and denying these rights to opponents of the present government .
It is impossible for members of the opposition to stand in elections , there is no freedom of expression , and observers from international organisations are being expelled .
This debate is therefore a good opportunity for us to express our opposition to the democratic deficit in Venezuela and beyond .
The debate is also an opportunity to call for the truth in public and political life .
The President of Venezuela has succumbed to the temptation to seek absolute power . So too have the leaders of many other countries and empires seeking to subjugate people who think differently or who are poorer .
Mr Chávez 's new Left-Wing doctrine is known as Christian Socialism but it has little in common with the social teachings of the Church .
That is why representatives of the Venezuelan bishops have criticised the lack of democracy .
The Gospel story about the mote and the log often comes to mind in this context .
( LT ) Ten years have passed since Hugo Chavez became President of Venezuela .
The 1999 Constitution of Venezuela was a perfect opportunity to strengthen the rule of law and guarantee human rights in this country .
Today however , we have to admit that this historical opportunity has been missed .
We know that in Venezuela , the Venezuela ruled by President Chavez , discrimination of political opponents and critics is tolerated , even encouraged .
In the Venezuela ruled by him the judiciary is no longer independent , and we also know about the situation facing unions and the press in this country .
Our resolution today is one more reminder to President Chavez that the constitution is not just a piece of paper ; its rules must be enforced in real life .
- ( PL ) The House is about to debate the very dramatic and tragic situation in Congo , where the victims are counted in hundreds , or even in thousands .
In comparison , the situation in Venezuela appears far less serious .
It concerns violations of electoral rights and expulsions from the country .
The first murder has taken place , though . A student leader has been killed .
Even at this stage , however , it is very important to raise the issue , because we must bear in mind that every such process begins with the violation of democratic rights .
The first stage is always abuse of power for want of arguments , and this subsequently leads to murder .
The resolution makes sense , therefore .
It serves as a signal , or as a reminder that this dangerous process has been noted when we still have the chance to monitor it and prevent genocide .
( EL ) Mr President , it is obvious that , on the eve of the elections in Venezuela , a manifestly unacceptable attempt is being made to interfere in domestic developments in this country in the obvious aim of influencing the outcome of the elections .
The situation in Venezuela is a major and important victory for workers in Europe and in the world in general , because positive steps have been taken during recent developments in this country and workers ' problems are being resolved , despite the difficulties and the obstacles and despite the interventions of American imperialism .
The attempt being made is unacceptable and we wish to take this opportunity to condemn the action by the political forces intervening in the internal affairs of Venezuela with this resolution .
I should like to close by saying that it is unthinkable for seven parliamentarians to take the political responsibility during a sitting of the European Parliament of condemning a nation fighting for its freedom and to meet its current needs .
The right of a people to determine their own future is non-negotiable and we should all respect that .
Mr President , when one thinks of democracy , one thinks of human rights .
The importance of a voice and a vote at all levels of government is very understandable .
For years this has not been the case in Venezuela , a country rife with corruption and currently led by Mr Chávez .
Under his government , there is a history of intimidation of Opposition members , cases of Opposition party members being brutally murdered , and defenders of human rights and members of NGOs having been forcibly removed .
Additionally , Venezuela presently uses so-called screening lists not only to keep citizens from holding public office , but also depriving them from the right to vote freely for their preferred representatives .
What we , as a democratic body , should be seeking from Venezuela is compliance with international standards of democracy , allowing Venezuelan citizens to take advantage of the fundamentals , the freedom to freely and openly criticise those in power and the ability to change the government via election without fear .
Mr President , President Chávez has been something of a darling of the Left in Europe .
Most notably , in my constituency , he was championed by the former Mayor of London , Ken Livingstone .
This allowed his unsavoury image to be somewhat airbrushed with a veneer of spurious respectability .
President Chávez has , of course , presided over a diminution of the rights and freedoms of the Venezuelan people .
He has undermined political freedom , the rule of law , the independence of the courts , and the freedom of the media and organised labour .
Politicians like Mr Livingstone who endorse leaders like President Chávez undermine genuine democracy and reveal a great deal about themselves .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , the Commission is following the situation in Venezuela with great interest .
The country is in the process of preparing for the regional and local elections which will take place on 23 November .
It is worth noting that in the last few years several democratic electoral processes have taken place in Venezuela .
Some of them have been monitored by European Observation Missions which concluded that , in general , they complied with international standards and national legislation .
Others have not , as was the case with the last referendum , since we were not invited .
The Commission is aware of the concerns expressed by some of you and also many sectors of Venezuelan society about the constitutionality of the ' disqualifications ' .
These are believed by some to be intended to obstruct the full participation of the opposition in the November elections .
The Commission has taken note of the explanation provided on several occasions by the Venezuelan authorities , in relation to the constitutionality of these ' administrative sanctions ' imposed by the State Controller on a number of civil servants .
We stress the importance of guaranteeing the rights of all citizens who want to participate in the elections , in accordance with the Constitution and the rule of law .
We hope that the upcoming elections will strengthen democracy in Venezuela and that the results will reflect the views of the whole of Venezuelan society .
We encourage all actors to engage in the electoral process in a spirit of tolerance , civic-mindedness and respect for pluralism of opinions .
The Commission is also aware of the expulsion of the representatives of Human Rights Watch from Venezuela .
We have heard the voices which have condemned this decision as a measure which adversely affects the right to freedom of expression and an act demonstrating an intolerant attitude towards criticism .
In this context , we stress the importance that the EU attaches to freedom of expression and opinion .
Freedom of expression is one of the fundamental human rights , and constitutes the cornerstone of democracy and the rule of law .
I wish to assure Parliament that the Commission will continue to follow closely the developments in Venezuela .
The Commission 's commitments to supporting development of democracy and the promotion of human rights will continue to be reflected in our cooperation policies and relations with Venezuela .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place at the end of this afternoon 's debates .
2 .
Democratic Republic of Congo : clashes in the eastern border areas
The next item is the debate on six motions for resolutions on the Democratic Republic of Congo : clashes in the eastern border areas .
author . - Mr President , the conflict in the Democratic Republic of Congo ( DRC ) is profoundly traumatising for Congolese society .
Amongst other atrocities , rape has been used for many years as a weapon of war and tens of thousands of women and girls are suffering .
Our empathy is not enough .
Without any doubt , there is an ongoing genocide against women in Congo , and we can no longer afford to turn a blind eye to this dreadful situation .
Words are not enough to describe the horrors these women have to endure .
Undoubtedly , the clashes of the rebels in the eastern provinces will bring more and more violence , including sexual violence .
How many women and girls have to die , be gang-raped , butchered , enslaved , contaminated with HIV , rejected by their communities , until we decide at am international level to engage seriously and with a long-term view on this subject ?
There should be no tolerance for the sexual violence against girls and women .
The impunity of the perpetrators must come to an end and the rule of law has to be restored in the eastern provinces of the DRC .
We all have to acknowledge that this situation demands a multifaceted approach .
Peace needs to be achieved , the rule of law established and society saved from the poverty trap in the eastern provinces of the Democratic Republic of Congo .
This implies that the exploitation of Congolese natural resources must follow the rule of law as well .
author . - ( FR ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , firstly , please accept the apologies of my colleague , Mr Hutchinson , who could not be with us today .

5 400 000 people - that is the number of victims of the conflict in the Democratic Republic of Congo since 1998 .
Every day , 1 500 people die .
These people are women who do not survive the mutilations inflicted upon them ; they are rebels or soldiers from the Congolese regular army ; they are also child soldiers , snatched from their parents ; they are little girls whose short time on Earth will have been a nightmare .
The violence of the words I use is nothing compared to the violence that has been taking place in the Democratic Republic of Congo for too long , violence that has increased and spread over the past few weeks , and all this amid the total indifference of the international community .
The reports we have gathered are , however , damning : damning for the soldiers , in various rebel factions on the ground ; damning , too , for the government forces which , instead of protecting the population , represent a threat to them ; damning , even , for the UN , which is incapable of guaranteeing the protection of civilians .
It follows that the resolution that we are debating is designed to alert international public opinion to what is going on and puts forward a series of very practical demands along the lines of ensuring a swift and lasting resolution to this conflict .
Among these demands , the Socialist Group in the European Parliament lays particular emphasis on several points : firstly , strengthening the UN mission with European personnel capable of communicating with the population ; and secondly , we are calling on Congo 's highest political and military authorities to do their utmost to ensure that soldiers from the Congolese army put a stop to their atrocities once and for all .
author . - ( ES ) Mr President , I should like to emphasise some of the aspects already mentioned in relation to the situation in the Democratic Republic of Congo .
The first is obvious .
The conflict that we are talking about has many causes .
We are talking about a problem that concerns access to resources .
We are also talking about the impunity with which these resources are exploited , the impunity with which certain people ' wander ' around the region committing atrocities without being prosecuted either by local authorities or by international forces and , thirdly , the impunity resulting in the constant presence of international arms which keep arriving in the region .
I feel that these three elements , and the link between them , are fundamental because they firstly highlight the need for an in-depth review of the United Nations ' presence in the region .
Secondly , we must very closely study the issue of violence perpetrated against women , particularly sexual violence .
This is an issue that we have discussed before in this House .
We should take this opportunity to again insist that both the United Nations and the European Union demand that rape and in particular recourse to the torture and abuse of women as a sexual weapon are regarded as war crimes .
We have been calling for this in all the appropriate arenas for a long time .
There is also a third aspect that I feel should be highlighted : this whole problem stems from one of the greatest sources of wealth in the world , namely diamonds .
The consistent and precise application of monitoring mechanisms such as the Kimberley process is absolutely fundamental to this basic issue .
Please allow me to remind you that , next week in the United Nations , a debate will begin on the adoption of an international treaty on arms exports .
I believe that this is a golden opportunity to stress that this is absolutely vital in contexts such as the Democratic Republic of Congo .
author . - ( NL ) Mr President , it is becoming increasingly important for the residents in Congo to find a way to survive , even if it remains impossible to create a central government .
We should , as a matter of urgency , try to prevent all circumstances that expose them to violence and exploitation , forced displacement or famines .
Why is Congo the sum total of everything that can go wrong in Africa ?
Congo started out as a colonial mining project in the poorly accessible interior of Africa .
There was no Congolese people with shared interests and prospects , only a multitude of peoples in isolated areas .
When Congo gained its independence nearly 50 years ago , the then warring politicians became household names the world over .
Tshombe and Kalonji , closely connected with mining interests , sought to split their south-eastern region , with considerable natural resources , from the rest of the country .
The only visionary who took pride in giving the country as a whole a serious future , Patrice Lumumba , was promptly silenced .
After this , the military dictator Mobutu ran the country like a private company , one that was completely subject to his whims , for a long time .
The hope that the death of Mobutu would finally herald the beginning of progress in Congo has been dashed .
The second President since Mobutu , Mr Kabila , has failed to inspire or control large parts of the country .
Congo 's present options are determined by failed elections , whose outcomes have been controversial from the word go and have certainly not been universally accepted , by mass migration from the eastern neighbouring countries , regional rulers with mining interests and rebel armies .
It remains to be seen whether a unified solution for an undivided Congo is still on the cards .
author . - ( PL ) Mr President , some Polish clergymen are currently in Congo , along with clergy from other countries .
In their missions , they are working to protect the civilian population , mainly women and children , against violence .
The Polish armed forces have also been involved in the peace missions .
I therefore feel personally affected by the dramatic events in Congo .
Particular concern has been expressed about the situation in North Kivu and about peacekeeping in the Ituri region .
For many years now , horrific massacres , the rape of women and girls , plus conscription of children into the army have all been everyday occurences in this country .
We call upon the governments of the Democratic Republic of Congo and of Rwanda to engage in constructive dialogue that will enable Congo to emerge from this humanitarian disaster .
I would like to make a very important point .
The real reason why this conflict stalled was that South African workers refused to unload Chinese weapons .
We call upon governments in the Great Lakes region to engage in a dialogue to halt the violence in Congo .
I appeal to the European Commission to step up medical assistance to the civilian population in Congo .
In particular , aid is needed for women and children infected as a result of rape .
on behalf of the draftsman . - ( DE ) Mr President , the Democratic Republic of Congo ( DRC ) is currently in the same situation as Europe after the Thirty Years War , when the rule of law collapsed .
However , Congo is suffering to a far greater extent .
Bands of uniformed men are roaming the country , some of which refer to themselves as the ' official army ' and others the ' private army ' .
In reality they are all bands of criminals who are plundering the country and murdering , raping and robbing the civilian population .
Peace will not return to Congo until at least a semblance of the rule of law is re-established at a regional and national level .
For this reason , our task in the European Union is firstly to provide humanitarian aid , but secondly to ensure that the country has a minimum level of national security .
We are far from being able to do this and the intervention which took place in Congo , and we do need to be self-critical at this point , was obviously not as successful as we would have liked .
For this reason , it is essential that we begin to plan straight away how we can bring stability back to this country at the heart of Africa with all the peaceful and , if necessary , military means at our disposal , or even using peacekeeping troops .
We have not reached this point yet , but we must discuss it .
When you look at Congo , and I have had several opportunities to fly over the country , you realise that Congo touches all areas of Africa in a way which is not the case with any other African country .
We cannot have a stable African continent without a stable Congo and therefore we have very strong obligations in this respect .
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - Mr President , in fact we are extremely concerned about the resurgence of violence in the eastern provinces of Congo .
We therefore call on all participants to return immediately to the peace process to which they committed themselves in January .
I would like to make three points .
First , the Congolese Government has to take special responsibility to put an end to the widespread sexual violence against women and girls used as a weapon in this internal warfare .
Second , international pressure should be put on the governments of both the DRC and Rwanda to make them restart a constructive dialogue .
Third , we call on all EU governments to provide special assistance immediately to the population of eastern Congo .
on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( ET ) Ladies and gentlemen , today we are discussing a very complicated region , and it seems to me that we are discussing it mainly in order to emphasise how bad the situation is , and not because we have a clear idea of how to resolve the situation .
I would , however , like to make a few comments , although I will be repeating what previous speakers , including Mr Kelam , have said .
The most important thing is to support the government of the Democratic Republic of Congo in order to find a solution to this crisis .
Violence only engenders new violence , and I would not like to say that men 's lives are somehow less important or that violence against men is permissible , but the situation of women and children in Congo is truly awful , and special attention should be devoted to them .
I appeal to the international community , to the UN Security Council for improved assistance , to the Council and Commission for the provision of medical aid - above all to the greatest risk group - and also specific assistance from the Member States is definitely important .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - Mr President , the eastern region of the Democratic Republic of Congo has in recent years been the site of massacres , as well as a variety of immensely cruel and sadistic crimes against human beings , mainly involving innocent civilians , including many women and children .
The African Union , the EU and the UN have proven themselves to be shamefully incapable of making a determined effort to establish peace in that region .
This has been mainly due to the lack of provision of the resources necessary to be effective in protecting the local population and in providing it with much-needed special assistance , and in truly helping to bring about an eventual political solution to the prevailing conflicts .
Let us hope that this resolution will help to beef up peace assistance to Congo and , not least , perhaps to deter those evil-minded governments around the world which continue to provide armaments to the warring factions in Congo from continuing so to do .
Mr President , the peace agreement reached in Goma on 28 January 2008 did not resolve the problems nor did it bring about peace in the eastern territories of the Democratic Republic of Congo .
The raping of women and even small girls continued , as did looting and the forced conscription of civilians and children into the armed forces .
All sides in the conflict committed atrocities .
I could mention the rebel groups , the fighters of the Democratic Forces for the Liberation of Rwanda , and the Congolese army .
The clashes resumed , proving that the war which began over four years ago is continuing and intensifying .
Worrying information has recently emerged from North Kivu , concerning hundreds of dead bodies dumped in rivers and around one hundred thousand displaced people .
Not only is the war causing fatalities , but it is also resulting in devastation , more acute hunger and widespread demoralisation .
The Congolese authorities and army will not be able to resolve the region 's problems on their own .
International assistance is required , including assistance from the European Union .
Material aid in the form of food and medical aid is also urgently needed .
The Union for Europe of the Nations Group fully supports this resolution before the House .
The well-being of every individual and his or her right to life and peace must triumph .
Mr President , the atrocities endured in the Congo are unimaginable to those of us who live in peaceful civilised societies .
How can we offer practical help to people such as the Congolese ?
Direct military intervention and humanitarian aid must only come from international effort under the auspices of the United Nations , but time and time again we see the leaders of these types of failed states being allowed to plunder their countries and enjoy their wealth in the Western world .
The stable and peaceful countries of the world should unite to ensure that vast amounts of wealth cannot be stolen and then deposited in western banks with impunity .
International agreements should be reached to ensure that leaders of such states cannot live off their ill-gotten gains .
This would be at least one small element of an overall solution to help develop stability in countries such as the Congo .
Mr President , renewed combat in the eastern part of the Congo is making a mockery of human rights and is silencing democracy .
Despite the signing of the Goma peace accord in January of this year , the abuse of the most fundamental of human rights has continued : women of all ages being raped , massacres committed and child soldiers being gathered up .
A situation of such fragility cannot be ignored .
We must use our position as one of the strongest voices in the international community to call for peace , cooperation and stability in the region .
We can also use this voice to condemn the recent statements of Laurent Nkunda , who called for the overthrow of the elected and legitimate government of the Congo .
The Congolese army alone does not have the human , technical or financial resources to carry out its tasks in eastern Congo .
But a global statement , like the signing of the Child Soldier Accountability Act this month in America , reminds us all that help can be offered to such countries and authorities in bringing violators of human rights to justice .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , the Commission shares the concerns about the degraded situation in the eastern Democratic Republic of Congo , which is causing further stress to an already seriously affected population .
It is also particularly worried about the widespread human rights violations in the region , including violence against women and the continuous mobilisation of child soldiers in the conflict .
The Commission restates its conviction that the current crisis involving Kinshasa and the Congolese rebel groups has no military solution .
Hence , we encourage all parties to this conflict to rapidly resume dialogue and promote courageous political compromises , taking into consideration the commitments agreed upon in January 2008 , the so-called Actes d 'engagement de Goma .
In this context , it is extremely important to restore acceptable confidence levels amongst all Congolese stakeholders directly involved .
As a preliminary step , all parties without exception should abide without delay by an effective ceasefire with a view to implementing the military disengagement plan provided by the United Nations .
In addition , it must be borne in mind that the underlying root causes of the conflict also include the dramatic problems posed by foreign armed groups in Democratic Republic of Congo territory , in particular the Rwandan FDLR , an issue where most of the DRC commitments taken in the Nairobi communiqué have still to be put into action .
Given the multiple challenges which still lie ahead in the Democratic Republic of Congo , the Commission strongly advocates that the UN 's peacekeeping mission mandate should be renewed and , where possible , strengthened in order to ensure effective protection for the population and support to the Congolese army in tackling the foreign armed groups .
In addition to the relentless efforts of the EU facilitation team , it is important to ensure the broader participation of African diplomacy ( including the African Union ) in the resolution of the eastern DRC conflicts , especially in areas where a sustainable solution would be greatly facilitated by close cooperation between neighbouring countries , in particular the Democratic Republic of Congo and Rwanda .
As regards our support to the population in conflict-affected areas , the Commission will continue to provide support via both our humanitarian and development cooperation .
More specifically , regarding health services ( an issue raised by all the resolutions ) , it is important to stress that the Commission has been active since 1994 in the health sector in the Democratic Republic of Congo , which is today one of the focal sectors of our cooperation .
In addition to humanitarian aid , we are currently providing strategic and financial support to the Congolese authorities to improve the quality of medical services and the qualifications of medical staff .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place at the end of this afternoon 's debates .
3 .
Burma
The next item is the debate on six motions for resolutions on Burma .
Mr President , the Burmese military junta has not succeeded in keeping the promises it made to the international community after the so-called sapphire revolution .
It has not succeeded either in improving the situation for its society , which is rebelling and claiming its legitimate rights .
Democracy and development will not be crushed by the brutal repression of widespread protests in September of this year , or by mass imprisonments .
Burma must move towards complying with democratic principles , and ensuring freedom of expression , freedom of association and meeting , a multi-party system and release of political prisoners .
It must also develop an independent judiciary and discourage ethnic cleansing .
Burma needs assistance .
More involvement is therefore needed on the part of the United Nations , its Secretary-General , the International Committee of the Red Cross , the European Commission , and the governments of countries with influence on the Burmese authorities .
In the name of the Union for Europe of the Nations Group , on whose behalf I have taken the floor , and on behalf of the authors , I would like to express support for this resolution , which I commend to Members of the House .

author . - Mr President , this is the sixth European Parliament resolution on Burma in the last two years , but the monstrous Burmese military junta seems to have taken no notice at all of what the EU thinks or says .
Meanwhile , the ordinary citizens of Burma continue to suffer oppression , persecution and poverty , all of which are the result of the brutal , anachronistic and shameful stance taken by the brainless military regime controlling that country .
The dictators , of course , continue to get richer and to lead a lavish life at the expense of their citizens ' suffering .
It seems that resolutions have little effect on these military criminals and , in my view , the most significant reason for this is the fact that countries like China , India and Russia continue to support Burma economically and politically .
It seems to me that our attention should now be directed not at Burma itself , but at those three countries .
It should be made clear to them that they must stop aiding the heartless and mindless military generals of Burma or their relationship with the EU will suffer severely and irreversibly .
author . - ( PL ) Mr President , Burma has become almost a permanent subject of debate in this House .
We return to the situation in Burma at every session of the European Parliament in Strasbourg .
The forthcoming ASEM summit is an opportunity for the European Union , represented by the French Presidency , to raise certain fundamental issues with the Burmese authorities .
The first is the release of political prisoners .
According to Amnesty International , there are currently some 2 100 political prisoners in Burma .
The second is an end to the torture of those held in prison .
There is a constant risk of suffering torture in Burma .
Thirdly , the Burmese army must behave professionally .
It must respect human rights during military action against ethnic minorities , notably against the Karen people at this time .
The European Union cannot tolerate violence and crimes against humanity .
Finally , the European Union 's policy has to produce tangible effects .
We need to consider whether sanctions impact most on Burma 's leaders or on its people .
Our policy needs to be a wise one .
The European Union must reconsider its policy on sanctions against Burma .
On the one hand , therefore , we must insist on respect for human rights and democratic freedoms .
On the other , the international community must adopt an effective policy towards Burma .
author . - ( ES ) Mr President , tomorrow 's Asia-Europe Meeting ( ASEM ) in Beijing affords an excellent opportunity for the attending Heads of State or Government of the European Union to once again raise the worrying situation of human rights in Burma .
As already requested in a letter from Amnesty International , it would be absolutely appropriate for the President-in-Office of the Council , Nicolas Sarkozy , as joint chair of the ASEM , to express Europe 's very great concern about the more than 2 100 political prisoners and also to demand their immediate release .
Another source of concern is the current military offensive against the Karen populations in the east of the country , where the biggest military operation in a decade has taken place .
The operation 's direct target is the civilian population and has led to the internal displacement of 150 000 people .
In June 2006 , Amnesty International proved that this type of practice did in fact constitute a crime against humanity .
Furthermore , as requested by Burma Campaign Spain and Burma Campaign International among others , the fundamental political problems will be discussed for the first time during the planned visit in December of the Secretary-General of the United Nations .
The Secretary-General has already recently visited the country on two occasions , following cyclone ' Nargis ' earlier this year .
We have certainly never before had such a seemingly broad consensus among Europeans and Asians on combining forces and putting pressure on the regime to release all political prisoners .
That is why the meeting which will begin tomorrow is so vitally important .
It is regrettable that the United Nations has for so long ignored , and sometimes even believed , the lies of the regime , as proven by the fact that , following 37 visits made by the UN Envoy , no significant progress has been observed .
That is why I must add my voice to those calling on both the European Heads of State or Government - obviously including the Spanish Prime Minister , José Luis Rodríguez Zapatero - and the United Nations to show that they truly support a change in Burma .
It is therefore vital that they call for the immediate release of those detained .
The opportunity available as from tomorrow must not therefore be lost and the Heads of State or Government must respond in line with expectations .
I trust that these Heads of State or Government , in particular President Sarkozy , will be able to rise to the occasion , that they will be particularly aware of the gravity of the situation and that they will act accordingly .
If the European Union truly wants to be a credible political player , with a foreign policy based on the defence and promotion of human rights , and if it does not want to appear , as so often happens , to simply be serving the economic interests of major companies such as Total and Chevron , then this is the moment to prove it .
It is in situations such as these that we can gain this credibility .
Many lives are depending on these actions .
author . - Mr President , tomorrow marks the 13th anniversary of the unjust incarceration of Aung San Suu Kyi , Burma 's most revered political prisoner .
This timely Parliament resolution condemns her continued detention and insists upon her immediate release .
Aung San Suu Kyi 's latest five-year term of house arrest was extended in May for a further year .
Article 10b of the Burmese state protection law 1975 stipulates that a person judged to be a threat to the sovereignty and security of the state and the peace of the people can only be detained for up to five years .
Therefore this prolonged detention is illegal .
Suu Kyi has spent more than 13 years of the past 19 years confined to her Rangoon home .
I also deplore the fact that the number of political prisoners in Burma has increased from 1 300 to over 2 100 since the Saffron Revolution of September 2007 .
The military junta has clearly failed to deliver on promises made to the international community in this regard .
Whereas the release of veteran journalist and National League for Democracy ( NLD ) secretary U Win Tin and six other leaders last month was a step in the right direction , further moves must be made to free Burmese political dissidents .
I call on the Secretary-General of the United Nations to press ahead with a second visit to Burma in December irrespective of the prevailing conditions in order to make an urgent personal appeal for the release of all political prisoners and the full inclusion of the National League for Democracy in preparations for the 2010 elections .
Finally , I call on leaders at the ASEM summit beginning tomorrow in China on the 13th anniversary of Suu Kyi 's detention to understand their responsibilities regarding ongoing oppression in one of their neighbouring countries and to take decisive action accordingly to condemn the Burmese military junta for their continued suppression of political dissidents .
author . - ( FI ) Mr President , Commissioner , Burma has no respect for human rights or civil freedoms .
As many here have said , it is not for the first time that we are adopting a position on a the lack of freedom of expression , suppression of information , a ban on freedom of assembly , a violation of very basic principles of the rule of law , and a ban on opposition .
The Burmese nation 's worst enemy is its own country 's leadership , which , with the support of the army , by force of arms and through violence , forces its people to be controlled by its state monopoly .
The junta 's prisons hold more political prisoners than ever .
The junta also works against its own people , by preventing international emergency aid from reaching areas where natural disaster has struck .
The international community is powerless as it witnesses the Burmese people perish because of their leaders , who are repressive but do nothing at the same time .
In our statement we appeal to the ASEM Summit , so that the other countries in the region might exert pressure on the junta to work towards the release of political prisoners .
We are being a little sanctimonious in insisting on this , of course , as we know that Burma is not the only country in the region where human rights are being trampled into the mud .
Our group supports the joint resolution .
Mr President , Commissioner , one year after the brutal crushing of the protests by Buddhist monks , the international community remains divided on the issue of how to act towards one of the most repressive regimes on earth .
The United States and Europe are imposing stricter sanctions and loudly proclaiming their outrage at violations of human rights , as indeed we are doing today in this Chamber .
On the other hand , Burma 's neighbours in the region , namely the ASEAN countries , along with China , India and Russia are refraining from open criticism of the Burmese regime on the pretext of not interfering in that country 's internal affairs .
That is why I wish to endorse what Mr Matsakis said earlier .
The European Commission should be bolder and raise this question more openly in discussions with China , Russia and the ASEAN countries .
A further difficulty relates to action at the level of the United Nations , which has proved totally ineffective .
Prior to the last General Assembly , a breakthrough on Burma was forecast .
No such breakthrough has taken place .
The European Commission and the Member States should take determined action to ensure that more is done at international level on the issue of Burma .
on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( PL ) Mr President , less than four months have gone by since the last European Parliament resolution on the dramatic situation inside Burma .
The military regime in power has not kept any of the promises it made to the international community following the uprising last year .
If the situation in Burma does not improve , there is a danger that the Secretary-General of the United Nations will call off his visit in December .
The number of political prisoners has risen to two thousand .
They are still being held in inhuman conditions and deprived of access to medical care .
Mrs Aung San Suu Kyi , has been under arrest for 17 years .
She is both a Nobel and a Sakharov laureate .
The Burmese regime is still restricting fundamental human rights and freedoms , including access to independent sources of information .
The Karen minority is being persecuted by the authorities and has sought refuge in Thailand where it is living on the verge of poverty .
The same is true of people affected by the hurricane .
The regime did not allow humanitarian aid to reach them , thus putting thousands of its own citizens at risk of death from starvation .
We should require the Burmese authorities to lift all restrictions on the provision of humanitarian aid , and to restore fundamental freedoms in the country .
Strong efforts must be made to ensure that the UN Secretary-General 's visit to Burma goes ahead , and that the National League for Democracy is involved in the process of preparing for the 2010 elections .
China and India should exert political and economic pressure on the Burmese regime by refusing to assist the Burmese army .
The international community should impose economic sanctions , and also freeze the assets of government members and persons connected with them .
on behalf of the IND / DEM Group . - Mr President , Burma is a country which is steeped in corruption .
With 2 000 political prisoners under arrest , access to free media impeded by the authorities and widespread slavery in industry , the people of this country need serious help .
However , in spite of more than 37 visits by UN envoys in the past 20 years and six resolutions in this House , there has been not a single reform made by the military junta .
I would agree with Mr Matsakis that it is not good enough to point to Burma : we must point to Burma 's supporters and main supporter , especially China , its most powerful economic and military ally .
Yet a smiling Mr Sarkozy represented the European Council at this summer 's Olympic Games .
Did he press China 's top officials , who stood with him , about the Burmese , about the Sudanese , about the people of Tibet and about China 's own persecuted people ?
I particularly also want to mention the misuse of aid funds that go into Burma , because we still try to reach the ordinary people of Burma and , yet , these goods are often given to favourites of the Burmese Government to resell at high value .
( PT ) Mr President , Commissioner , tomorrow marks the 13th anniversary of the unjust incarceration of the Burmese leader , Aung San Suu Kyi .
This is therefore a good time for the European Union and the President-in-Office of the Council , who are in Beijing at the Asia-Europe Meeting , to very formally declare that the situation in Burma is unacceptable , to exert the necessary pressure , particularly on China , as has already been suggested by several Members , to follow the example set in particular by the US in 2003 , and to refuse to keep importing clothing made under conditions of abject slavery .
In addition , sanctions which are absolutely clear and consistent must be imposed .
If this could be done , I believe we would finally start to see changes in the Burmese situation .
Mr President , I should like to thank the Commissioner for listening to us .
Along with colleagues such as Glenys Kinnock , I have long looked forward to the day when resolutions on human rights in Burma and elsewhere do not have to be considered in this Parliament , but we continually have to return to this .
I can only agree with colleagues around the House that , when we look at the attempts , time and again , to make changes in Burma , we see nothing but failure instead .
We need to expose those countries that aid and bail out this corrupt regime with trade .
We have announced the names of some of those countries and should do more at European level to make sure their exposure leads to real change .
We need to see changes in Burma leading to freedom of assembly and association , the release of prisoners of conscience and a full transition to a multi-party democracy .
We have seen off juntas in Europe .
We need the world to see off the junta in Burma .
- ( PL ) Mr President , if only a single individual voices opposition to the authorities , that voice will barely be audible .
If all the Members of this House raise their voices , however , and are joined by those in other countries , then the citizens of countries enduring repression will realise it is worth telling the truth and standing up to such regimes .
They will realise that their efforts will eventually bear fruit and their morale will be strengthened .
Nonetheless , it is also the case that specific measures are needed in addition to mere words , in order to demonstrate to the junta that it is not worth persevering with oppression to the bitter end , because of its impact on the nation and on the authorities themselves .
Two determined actions must therefore be taken and seen through to the end .
I am convinced that the truth will win through and that , as more people proclaim the truth inside Burma , so they will gather strength .
Mr President , earlier this year we saw the failure of the Burmese Government to deal with the consequences of a natural disaster in that country .
Considering the amount of money spent by the military on its own upkeep and the tight hold it has on national life , one might at least have expected it to be able to respond to the needs of its own people in a humanitarian crisis .
It did not , because it has no real function , except to perpetuate its own existence and stranglehold on power .
Referring back to what I said in my previous remarks on the Congo , I wonder how many of the military junta have bank accounts in Western banks and enjoy shopping trips to London , Paris and Rome .
A direct way of showing support for the Burmese people would be for democratic countries to stop them coming until human rights and democracy are practised in Burma .
( LT ) I have been following this discussion intently and would like to draw attention to two ideas .
I think that Mr Matsakis quite rightly stressed that the key to the situation in Bu