Resumption of the session
I declare resumed the session of the European Parliament adjourned on Thursday , 27 March 2003 .
The final draft agenda as drawn up pursuant to Rules 110 and 110a of the Rules of Procedure by the Conference of Presidents at its meeting of Thursday 3 April 2003 has been distributed .
The following changes have been proposed :
Monday
As regards the report by Mr Medina Ortega ( JURI A5-0443 / 2002 ) on the Commission communication on simplifying and improving the regulatory environment , I have received from the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian-Democrats ) and European Democrats and from the Group of the Party of European Socialists a request to refer this report back to committee pursuant to Rule 144 ( 1 ) of the Rules of Procedure .
Mr President , following the discussion in the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market and furthermore as a result of the presentation of new Commission documents on the same issue of improving Community regulations , my group believes that the report should be referred back to committee , with a view to presenting a proposal in plenum which can receive the widest possible support .
As no one wishes to speak against this request the matter is duly referred back to committee .
Wednesday
I have received from the Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance a request to include Council and Commission statements on humanitarian aid to Iraq .
Mr President , the proposal presented by our group last week that we should debate humanitarian aid to Iraq was rejected with arguments such as ' it is hasty ' , ' we have not thought about it ' , or ' perhaps when the war is over ' .
Mr President , I frankly believe that this is not a serious approach .
Our group believes that this debate should begin as soon as possible .
Mr President , I remember that very recently this Parliament approved a joint resolution stating that this crisis was unprecedented and required urgent action .
And it is not just necessary from a humanitarian and solidarity point of view , but also from a political point of view , because we must also re-establish the European Union 's unity of action in the face of this conflict , this crisis and this war .
And the best way to do this would be to talk and to reach an agreement on humanitarian aid .
I should like to confirm that at a recent meeting of the Conference of Presidents it was decided that a delegation would be sent to the next hearing , which is on the 25 April 2003 .
I shall follow that matter up in the light of your comments .
Mr President , last week , at the Etaples cemetery , the graves of British and Irish soldiers were desecrated in response to the instigation of war in Iraq .
Mr President , I hope you will be able to associate yourself with the feelings of horror and concern that this desecration has already inspired , coming as it does at a time when British soldiers are fighting a war which , whatever the controversy over its instigation , sets democracies against totalitarian fascism .
I am not speaking solely as a Frenchman and an anglophile , but as a European militant who , one year away from the centenary of the Entente Cordiale , would like you , Mr President , to associate our institution with the commemoration of an event that led to a century of community , blood and glory and which is thereby a founding event of the European Union .
Mr Nordmann , I am pleased on behalf of the House , and from the Chair , to associate myself and the Presidency of the House with your remarks .
Mr President , on a point of order , I also wish to associate myself with those remarks .
However , what I wish to raise is the threat from SARS that may arise in Europe in the absence of any power at European level to deal with this matter in a concerted and coordinated way .
I realise there will be a debate on this matter , but unfortunately I will not have the opportunity to express an opinion on it .
I urge the Council to convene an urgent and informal meeting of European ministers for health to seek to coordinate a European response .
I ask this House and all the Member States to support the initiative by Commissioner Byrne to amend our Treaties so that we at least have the same powers to deal with human disease as animal disease .
I am sure , Mr De Rossa , that in the absence of your participation in the response to the Commissioner 's statement , the Commission will happily take note of your comments .
Mr President , I would like to draw your attention , as corroborated by accounts in the Israeli and foreign press , to the fact that the Tulkarem refugee camp was invaded early on Wednesday morning by Israeli forces .
The soldiers ordered all men and boys between 15 and 55 to leave their homes and congregate at two locations in the camp .
There they were kept for many hours and interrogated one by one .
The army detained 11 men who were said to be wanted terrorists .
The other men and boys were then loaded on to buses and lorries which took them several kilometres outside Tulkarem , where they were told to get off and forbidden to go back to their homes for the next three days .
The army left them there with nothing but the clothes on their backs , making no provision of any kind for their three days of enforced exile .
Meanwhile some of the women of the Tulkarem refugee camp came to bring food and basic provisions to their husbands , brothers and sons , but then found that the soldiers would not let them back into the camp and they too became displaced .
An Israeli army colonel has taken public responsibility for this action , which is obviously against the fourth Geneva Convention , to which Israel is a signatory .
He has declared it to be a good and successful action with satisfactory results .
I will take note of your comments and will raise them with the Israeli authorities and communicate the results to you .
Mr President , on a point of order , I wish to draw your attention to an article in the Spanish newspaper El País , dated 30 March and headed ' Eavesdropping on half a dozen countries at Council headquarters .
EU alleges Israel was spy . '
Mr President , I am not naive enough to think that this incident is unique , and recognise that it is common practice for intelligence agencies worldwide to gather information for their governments .
Nonetheless , I should like to ask you what measures Parliament 's security services have taken to detect similar bugging and spying devices within the newly-built Parliament offices .
In view of the committee report on Echelon , we should address the issue with some urgency .
As regards control measures , in the light of your question we are consulting the other institutions to establish whether there are things which remain to be done .
To the best of our knowledge , no one is eavesdropping here , since we try to conduct our business in public .
Nonetheless , we will continue to take whatever measures and precautions we can .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , regardless of the agreements we may reach next Thursday on the resolution on Cuba , I would ask you to take urgent personal action to deal with the situation of the 78 people arrested , accused of conspiracy on the basis of Cuba 's 1999 law on the protection of national independence and the economy .
According to a Spanish newspaper the main accusation against one of the people arrested , Raúl Rivero , is conspiracy by means of a subversive French agency , Reporters sans Frontières .
This demonstrates the current paranoia of the Castro dictatorship .
Since , furthermore , they are subject to entirely summary trials , I believe it is urgent that you intervene so that the situation and conditions being experienced by the accused may improve .
This group has been referred to on more than one occasion in this House in the recent past , by Mr Salafranca Sánchez-Neyra amongst others .
I have written to the Cuban authorities in very clear terms on the matter , but have not yet received a response .
I shall communicate the response to Members interested in the issue if and when I receive a reply .
We have already tried to intervene in the matter .
Mr President , we cannot but condemn the disdainful attitude of the US Secretary of State towards his European partners in ? ? ? ? and the European Union in refusing to descend from his throne and receiving the European Union troika and his other counterparts at ? ? ? ? headquarters as the new sovereign .
Mr Powell called for the dirty imperialist war to be sanctioned by the United Nations Organisation after the event and for the central role of the USA in sharing out the booty of the Iraqi people to be ratified .
In exchange , he offered the countries of the European Union and ? ? ? ? a few crumbs from the bloodstained spoils of Iraq , provided they fund so-called humanitarian aid .
The Council owes us an explanation as to why no one in the meeting with Mr Powell uttered a single word in condemnation of the war .
What is this new role for the United Nations Organisation to which the Greek Presidency is already referring ?
It must explain to us if , despite the constant , mass demonstrations by the people of Europe , the European Union is prepared to play the role of undertaker and follow the instructions of the USA to the letter , as leading government officials have given us to understand from their public statements .
This sort of political stand , which directly serves the interests of big business , will provoke even greater grass-roots reaction .
Mr President , the Committee on Foreign Affairs , Human Rights , Common Security and Defence Policy has decided - as Mr Gasòliba i Böhm mentioned earlier - to ask for questions on Cuba to be put orally , so that we can discuss with the Council and the Commission the problems in that country , and to enable us , in an appropriate setting , to address the arguments in depth and come to our conclusions .
Mr President , a majority in my group have therefore already expressed their objection to a topical and urgent debate , as we believe the situation in Cuba to be so grave and so important that three-minute debates are not an appropriate place for taking decisions on the subject .
Mr President , I am familiar with your statement on the recent arrests in Cuba , and also with the Council 's condemnation of Cuba 's actions .
This is one reason why we believed that this issue should be dealt with in this context rather than in a topical and urgent debate .
Your response to the present situation was indeed the right one .
I want to ask whether we will actually have this oral question session .
It seems to me that the House has already spoken on the matter of the debate on breaches of human rights and the rule of law .
That debate will be held , but I do not think it should prejudice the possibility for a more detailed reflection by colleagues in the Committee on Foreign Affairs , Human Rights , Common Security and Defence Policy , if the committee wishes to do so with a view to organising an exchange of views with the other institutions .
Mr President , please allow me to express here in this House - which I have considered my home for ten years - the horror I feel at the death and mutilation of innocent victims in Iraq .
They all have names , just like you and me , and they are in no way mere statistics .
I wish to express my anguish because , although victory is being claimed , we do not yet know how this disaster is going to end ; and shame , because this Parliament has not been able to reflect the views of millions of Europeans who are speaking out against this war throughout Europe .
I very much regret that this Parliament has not been able to draw up a resolution which says something very simple : ' Stop the war . Stop the killing ' .
I would also like to express my horror at the fact that for some days we have seen the United States ' Government blatantly and obscenely distributing the booty in the form of profits from reconstruction .
I think it is shameful that this Parliament has not even condemned this : this disgusting obscenity of the booty being distributed over the dead bodies not just of Iraqis but also of young British and American soldiers who are also losing their lives .
Mr President , I had no choice but to express these feelings .
I am bound to say that I share your general sense of disappointment that the House was unable to agree on any one of the multiple options available .
In terms of our preparation of these debates , perhaps it commends an appropriate degree of serenity , as well as the determined passion and commitment that we bring to these issues .
Mr President , I would just like to respond to the contribution from Baroness Ludford , who commented on the fact that in my capacity as chair of the EU Turkey delegation , I am supposed to have requested that no delegation be sent to Leyla Zana 's trial .
That is incorrect .
I wrote a letter to you , Mr President , asking for the delegation to be postponed , not for it to be cancelled .
That is an important difference , because I , too , realise how important this delegation is .
Only it is also important to know when such a delegation will be going and who is going with it .
It is not true that only the Christian Democrats , the Socialists and the Greens thought that 28 March might not be a particularly good date .
Much more important was the fact that Mrs Zana herself let us know through her lawyer that it would not be a good thing to attend her trial on 28 March .
I find it slightly odd that there are groups in this Parliament , and now Baroness Ludford too , who want to go whatever the cost because Parliament has decided to go .
On the other hand , what the person we are visiting and want to support thinks about such a request is , in my view , very important .
She has repeatedly told us that it would be much better to go at a later date with the full Parliament delegation .
That is how the matter stands , and I think it is a pity that the Baroness has not put these things in a good light .
Mr President , on a lighter note , it is traditional for Parliament 's spring part-sessions to be pleasantly besieged by schoolchildren , by groups of pupils and students from all over Europe .
It is the season for organised school trips .
However , not everybody is equally able to take advantage of this great opportunity which we could be offering to all our European young people : indeed , the pupils and students from the furthest , outermost regions cannot come for reasons of money , because of the costs involved .
Up until a few years ago , Parliament gave tangible assistance and funding to schools and schoolchildren throughout Europe , but then , in order to save money , this funding was stopped .
I have looked into the matter briefly and discovered that some funding is given to the Regions - to the regional authorities - but that it is up to the Regions how they administer it .
It does not seem right , Mr President , that schoolchildren who come from far away should not have the same opportunity as those who live nearer to come and see how we work and what we do , as they would have had in the past .
I feel that , out of all the money we might spend on groups of visitors , the money spent on young people is , without a doubt , the most important and such as to warrant a small financial sacrifice too .
Mr Santini , I shall ask the services to prepare a note for you on the evolution of the different budget elements in recent years .
In my role as President , having met a good number of school groups , I know that we continue to invest heavily in the Euroscuola programme for children from schools within the Union .
This will soon be extended to children in schools in the candidate countries .
I will ask colleagues to communicate with you on other changes and see if this is an issue we should consider .
Mr President , on behalf of my group I have always made an effort to support dialogue between this Parliament and the Cuban authorities and people .
But I believe , Mr President , that this Parliament should not fail to raise its voice in these circumstances , when there has been a wave of arrests of peaceful dissidents , of defenders of human rights and independent journalists , such as Raúl Rivero and Ricardo González Alonso , for whom the prosecutor is asking for sentences of between 20 years and life , within the context of a summary trial , which neither the press nor diplomatic representatives accredited in Havana have been able to attend .
Mr President , my group and I are aware of and we support the initiative presented by the Committee on Foreign Affairs , Human Rights , Common Security and Defence Policy to hold a debate on this situation in May , but I believe , Mr President , that this Parliament would not be doing its duty , and would be doing little to serve the cause of freedom , unless it raises its voice to condemn these events and all acts of violence which have taken place or which may take place in Cuba , to communicate its solidarity with the families of the victims and the people arrested , and to be very firm in its fundamental demand for freedom .
As regards your suggestion for a date in May , I am glad to see that your group 's president , Mr Poettering , was listening .
Such a proposal should come from your group or any of the other groups via the Conference of Presidents .
Mr President , a number of Members have expressed concern about the humanitarian situation in Iraq .
What we can say with confidence is that the situation of the people of Iraq will be enormously improved with the removal of Saddam Hussein and his tyrannical regime .
This House should congratulate the actions of the coalition armed forces , in particular of the United States and the United Kingdom , who have been instrumental in bringing about the downfall of that ghastly regime .
I am sorry that Saddam 's supporters in this House have been confounded .
We should congratulate the coalition armed forces for their restraint and their great success .
Mr President , I would like to insist that the seriousness of the events taking place in Cuba requires an in-depth debate , and I would therefore be delighted if we could pursue the idea of an oral question with an in-depth debate on the issue .
I would also like to insist , however , that one issue does not cancel out the other .
I therefore believe that the seriousness of the summary trials which have taken place , the seriousness of the arrests suffered by people who have simply exercised their right to free expression , or the right to employ the law in force to create areas of freedom , requires that this House immediately speak out in order to send a message of hope to these people who are currently experiencing great suffering and worry and I believe it would be very positive if on Thursday we can condemn what is taking place in Cuba .
Mr President , I too would like to ask you to send a message to the President of the United States , Mr Bush , and to the United Kingdom Prime Minister , Mr Blair , recognising the remarkable achievement that , after only two weeks of war , we are now beginning to see the long-suffering Iraqi people being freed from one of the bloodiest tyrants in the world today , and with such a low level of civilian and military casualties , all things considered , in view of the enormity of the task involved .
Every loss of innocent life is a tragedy , but Saddam Hussein has executed and tortured more people in the last two weeks for desertion and for welcoming our troops than the alliance may have killed accidentally as a result of the military hostilities .
War is never without a price in terms of human suffering , but human freedom and global security for all of us here today has no price .
The next item is the Commission statement on severe acute respiratory syndrome ( SARS ) .
Mr President , I am pleased to have this opportunity to inform this House of the circumstances surrounding the condition known as Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome , or SARS , to use the acronym .
It can be divided into a number of different questions .
What is it ?
Where does it come from ?
How does it spread ?
How can we stop it ?
This syndrome is a respiratory disease that has recently been reported in Asia , North America and Europe .
The illness usually begins with a fever , sometimes associated with other symptoms such as chills , headache and body aches .
After two to ten days SARS patients may develop a cough that might progress to difficulties in breathing .
In 10 to 20 % of cases patients will require mechanical ventilation .
It is estimated that in 4 % of cases SARS proves to be fatal .
At present no treatment beyond good intensive and supportive care has been consistently shown to improve the condition of persons with SARS .
In relation to the causative agent , the scientists have detected a previously unrecognised virus belonging to the family of coronaviruses in patients with SARS .
While the new coronavirus is still the leading hypothesis for the cause of SARS , other viruses are still under investigation as potential causes .
On the question of transmission , the principal way SARS appears to be spread is through respiratory secretions called droplets , namely , when someone with SARS coughs or sneezes droplets into the air and someone else breathes them in .
Nevertheless , other ways of transmission cannot be ruled out , such as direct close contact with an infected person .
In particular , health-care workers or household members of a SARS patient have been known to be affected .
But concern has been raised on other potential ways of transmission .
On the question of the origin : recently a WHO investigation team has been authorised by the Chinese Government to travel to Guangdong province .
Scientists currently speculate that the SARS virus either jumped to humans from an animal species or mutated into a more virulent form .
In its continuing work , the WHO team is expected to visit Foshan City , where the first case of SARS was reported .
On the question of numbers in the European Union , all 15 Member States have reported to the Commission a total of 46 cases - 19 probable and 27 suspected - with no deaths .
It is also important to note that there has been no local transmission within the European Union .
In the candidate countries , EFTA and other European countries , 14 countries have reported data , a total of eight cases - three probable and five suspected - with no deaths .
In the other countries , to date a total of 2396 cases have been reported , including 89 deaths .
The unknown factors combined with the global spread of this disease have inevitably prompted extensive media attention .
However , we should not lose sight of the fact that although SARS is often referred to as a ' killer pneumonia ' , estimates indicate that it kills fewer people than ' normal ' influenza .
SARS , however , demonstrates very clearly that we are living in a truly global environment , where the increasing mobility of people also enables diseases to move ever more freely .
Because of the ease and extent of modern travel , an increasing level of preparedness is required across borders to deal with the threat posed by communicable diseases .
In the European Union , surveillance and coordination at Community level need to be strengthened to address the threat to public health .
I have been stressing this need for some time now , and in the European Convention , the report prepared by Mr Katiforis has recognised this and I hope the Convention will take this up in its discussions .
The EU Communicable Diseases Network started its work three years ago to detect and control communicable diseases in people , irrespective of the cause and means of transmission .
This Network serves to survey and investigate the outbreaks . This also involves identifying the cause and defining control measures .
The Commission 's role is to coordinate and support these activities .
This SARS outbreak puts to the test the real capacities of the two pillars of the Network - epidemiological surveillance and early warning .
The Network committee has , together with the Commission , defined and put into operation an effective surveillance system .
This system picks up all suspected SARS cases and gives a complete and clear picture of developments during the outbreak .
Obviously we have to be cautious , and err on the side of safety .
This approach seems to be working : most of the suspected cases turn out to be something else .
However , this does not give grounds for complacency .
The European Union surveillance strategy on SARS is fully connected to the global surveillance coordinated by the World Health Organisation .
The second element of this strategy is prevention .
We must work together to reduce exposure to the disease .
Unnecessary travel to affected areas should be discouraged or postponed .
Hong Kong and the Guangdong province of China have been identified in this respect by the WHO . This is under constant review and further advice will be issued if the situation in other regions warrants travel restrictions .
Similarly , all would agree on the importance of health screening on departure from the affected areas and the provision of information to passengers and flight crews .
The Commission is playing its role of coordinator , and encouraging common approaches and criteria .
During the last three weeks my services have tried to integrate national measures with global ones , through regular meetings , audio-conferences and consultations with the Member States , candidate countries and the WHO .
SARS , of course , entails other dimensions in addition to public health implications .
The SARS outbreak has already made a political and economic impact .
Travel advice has had an impact on air travel and tourism in Asia .
Now , industry exhibitions and meetings have been postponed and it is predicted that Asia 's economic growth may be affected .
Obviously , earlier notifications to the WHO by those affected could have mitigated many of the effects .
This is a key lesson for the future .
I must stress that the capacity of the Commission to extend its coordinating and facilitating role any further is currently at its very limit .
In the absence of new arrangements to pool the existing expertise we will not be able to go beyond our current efforts .
I have referred on many occasions to our plans to strengthen our capacity to deal with communicable diseases .
In my view , the most effective way to strengthen Community activities is to set up a European Centre for Disease Prevention and Control .
As many of you will be aware , we are well advanced in the preparation of the enabling legislation which I intend to table in the next couple of months .
My proposal will be to establish such a centre by 2005 .
The centre will enhance surveillance . It will coordinate and facilitate common responses , and collaborate with Member States , third countries and international organisations , in particular the WHO .
It will not replace existing national capacities , but rather hook them up to act as a reference and coordination point both in routine and crisis situations .
This will also play an important role in an enlarged Europe .
On a multinational level the SARS situation can be said to be under control , but not improving , as had initially been expected .
In Europe the situation still appears to be manageable . However , the strict control procedures will have to continue .
In the fight to beat this disease it is crucial for anybody who believes they have the symptoms and have travelled in the affected areas to consult their doctor .
We must not neglect the support that the EU and its Member States can give to the affected countries in their search for the cause and the remedy .
There is still an ongoing discussion whether the responsible agent is close to the common cold or coronavirus .
We must continue to support the WHO in its endeavours in this regard .
Finally , I can assure you that the Commission will continue with the Member States , and in close collaboration with the candidate countries and the WHO , to do everything within its powers to defeat the spread of SARS .
In response to what Mr De Rossa said earlier , I can say that there have been preliminary discussions with the Council to organise a meeting of the Council in the near future to discuss this issue further .
Mr President , we have an excellent opportunity today to debate and understand certain basic public health issues and advance them at European Union level .
As I had the honour of acting as rapporteur on public health for the European Union , may I say that it is extremely important that one of the three lines of approach of this programme over the next five years is to develop a rapid response to health hazards .
I have two or three comments and then I will come back to what the Commissioner said about a centre , which is essential now , if we are to be able to deal efficiently with health hazards .
As I am sure you all well know , the mobility which exists today , with millions of people travelling to all corners of the planet , has boosted infectious diseases enormously .
We have seen as much in the case of severe acute respiratory syndrome . It started in a province of China and there are now cases even in Europe .
The second important point is that there are sudden epidemics of new diseases .
Over the last twenty years , there have been reports of thirty new infectious diseases , or variations on old diseases caused by mutating viruses , or even the re-emergence of old diseases such as tuberculosis , to give but one example .
Consequently , all this calls for constant vigilance , constant monitoring and a response , an organised , coordinated response .
Then there is the known resistance to antibiotics which bacteria are developing .
Nowadays , you go into hospital to be treated for some illness or other and suddenly the whole hospital is contaminated , sometimes very , very seriously .
So these sorts of bacteria , which we cannot treat with antibiotics , are also a hazard and we need research to deal with them .
Finally , one last point : biological terrorism .
Biological terrorism , where terrorists use bacteria spores or viruses or some other means , is also a threat that calls for a coordinated and proper response .
To come back to what the Commissioner said earlier , what I have just said bears out the need he mentioned for a centre at European Union level which will have the facilities , a network of laboratories , to study and monitor and coordinate these responses , so that we can investigate diseases quickly and quickly establish both their causes and how to treat them .
Consequently , we need to have the courage to promote this centre .
A symposium on this centre was held at the European Parliament in November under the aegis of the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats , attended by thirty of the most eminent epidemiologists .
Allow me to read you the conclusion in English , which dates from November , in other words before SARS .
It says :

Mr President , I fear that I must disappoint Mr Trakatellis , something that is relatively easy when he hopes that the members of the Convention are now listening and will suddenly start regarding health policy as a priority .
I do not believe that they will .


Having listened attentively to Mr Byrne and Mr Trakatellis , I agree with them , and , whilst much of what they have referred to is of course necessary , what we have done so far is not enough .
The European system for the epidemiological monitoring and control of communicable diseases that we already have can only be as good , in terms of quality , reliability and speed , as the national systems , and these differ in every respect .
That is why I agree with you that we should set up a scientific research centre .
That , though , will be but a drop in the ocean .
I am sure that you , Mr Trakatellis , want more research , and equally sure that Mrs Malliori will endorse that , but that is not what we really need .
The European Union has hitherto specifically excluded the possibility of harmonising legislation .
It is specifically laid down in our system for combating communicable diseases that national legislation will not be harmonised .
You stated earlier , Commissioner , that the most important thing now is prevention , that we must , for example , reduce encounters with certain diseases and exposure to them .
What about if plague returns to Europe or breaks out again anywhere ?
What about if polio , infantile paralysis , again becomes widespread ?
Are we prepared for those eventualities ?
I can tell you plainly that , no , we are not prepared .
An epidemiological system that results , for example , in it being recommended in some countries - but not in others - that one should not travel to certain regions , and in observation being carried out at airports in some European Union countries , but with nothing of the kind being done in others , is no use whatever .
So I have to tell you , very plainly , that the only thing we have to do - although we all have to agree on it - is to incorporate in the Treaty a competence for health policy .
Mr Trakatellis , I would be the first to applaud enthusiastically if you were to get your group to accept that .
I have not read any great number of statements on the Convention in which that desire was expressed , and I am quite certain that Mrs Grossetête has not either , but as for you , Mr Poettering - and I see that you are listening - do you say that there has to be a Community competence for health policy ?
We are eager to find out !
It might well not have done so at the highest level , but my group has clearly stated that we want no more centres serving as alibis .
The European Union is meant to have proper competences to deal with such problems .
What will we be saying to people at next year 's European elections ?
Do we really have equal standards - at least minimum standards - of hygiene , which enable us to fight disease and beat it ?
You asked , Mr Trakatellis , whether people in hospitals can get even more ill .
They can indeed , because we have no comparability between hospitals ' standards of hygiene .
Is that the European Union that we want our citizens to live in ?
No !
We want not just competition and the internal market , but also social security and health care .
So far , we have not achieved them .
If we now take this case , of SARS , as an example and want to make something of it , we must succeed in gaining a mandatory competence at European Union level for health policy .
I ask you , Mr Byrne , as a matter of urgency , to support us in this and bring our need for a Community competence to the ears of the Commission and Mr Prodi - who has always told us that he has an ear open to the soul of the people , something that the examples of the European Food Agency and the Food Safety Authority have brought to our notice .
Mr Byrne , I will support you if , in the forthcoming Budget debates , you demand more personnel and double your budget estimate .
When it comes to summoning up the courage to do that , though , you are on your own .
Madam President , for the past few weeks it has seemed as if we were succumbing to a completely new threat that can be compared with other unpredictable new illnesses like AIDS , Ebola and legionnaire 's disease .
However , we have been able to prepare ourselves .
Since the flu epidemic in 1918 , which claimed an unprecedentedly large number of lives in Europe , we have known that the composition of the flu virus can constantly change .
Preventative vaccination against flu only protects against known and expected forms of flu and not against deviant , new forms .
Many epidemics have traditionally developed in central China and then gradually spread across Eurasia towards the West .
The only new thing now is that it is not spreading gradually by land but rapidly via air travel from Hong Kong and Singapore .
A few years ago , a flu virus of unknown composition threatened to spread from Hong Kong all over the world .
Even then it was assumed that the composition of the virus was partly influenced by a bird disease .
What we were able to avert in time then is happening today .
People who may be at risk of contracting this disease are not being examined and isolated in time , and travel to the sources of the infection has continued for too long .
It would probably not have been possible to prevent this virus from developing , and it would probably not have been possible to prevent it spreading within China to begin with .
The fact that cases have been discovered not only in Asia but also in Europe and Canada , however , has everything to do with a policy that is too laissez faire and too tolerant .
Business interests that result in intensive contact with East Asia must be subordinated to the combating and containment of this disease .
I would like to ask the Commission to consult with the Member States on restricting air travel and imposing strict quarantine regulations on those entering Europe from infected areas .
SARS is a very serious problem .
Nearly a hundred people have died , and thousands more have been infected .
Antibiotics do not work and there are , as yet , no antiviral drugs , so we must be extremely cautious .
On 19 March the European network on imported infectious diseases stated that SARS could be transmitted only via direct contact .
We do not , however , know that for sure .
The precautionary principle must be applied .
The pattern in which SARS is spreading raises many questions .
It is therefore high time the European Union took action .
My group , the Greens , suggests four measures .
Firstly , all airlines flying into Europe carrying passengers from China , Hong Kong , Vietnam , Taiwan and Singapore must have all passengers examined by doctors before they travel to Europe , and if there is any doubt , passengers from these countries must be barred from departing for Europe .
Secondly , the European authorities must strongly advise people not to travel from Europe to these countries .
Thirdly , the Greek Presidency must call a meeting of the European Ministers of Health very soon for additional consultations on how to tackle SARS .
Fourthly , as health problems - like environmental problems - do not respect borders , health care must be a European competence , just as the environment is .
A European centre for combating infectious diseases is not enough .
Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to make a number of points on behalf of the UEN Group .
A year and a half ago , I tabled a question to the Commission stressing that such incidents can occur , for viruses , bacteria and toxic substances are used and manipulated throughout the world without our knowledge .
The present viral infection , known as SARS , has caused a veritable wave of panic throughout the world in case it spreads quickly .
The fears derive , first and foremost , from the fact that we know little about the infection at present or , at any rate , not enough to be sure that we will all escape infection .
The source appears to be in the Guadalong province of China , from where the infection spread to the major cities of the Far East : Hong Kong , Singapore , Bangkok , Shanghai and Bejing , and then throughout the world , causing infection and death .
As you all know , there is not much control in these areas in terms of either hygiene or the use of appropriate drugs to fight these diseases .
We do not know the causative agent of the viral infection in question . It was probably formed when an animal virus , a coronavirus , mutated .
It is thought that a virus escaped when a scientist was manipulating it to create the vaccine or modify it . It appears that the scientist died from the virus .
What we do know about this syndrome is that infection takes place by - take note - direct transmission but also environmental transmission .
The only way of diagnosing the syndrome is as yet symptomatic , for there are no clinical diagnosis kits available .
There is no applicable treatment .
Infected patients can only be given adjunct treatment , since doctors have not yet identified the active antiviral agents which would be able to fight it .
Clearly , since it is not yet possible to identify the causative agent , the people of the European Union and the rest of the world are faced with major difficulties in terms of what action to take , not least in view of a number of major factors which are responsible for the spread of the virus .
The source of the spread of the virus appears to be one of the largest financial centres of the Far East , through which large numbers of people and a lot of goods pass : China , a country which has only consented to take part in the exchange of information today - there is no Internet connection between Cuba and China .
For all these reasons , we call upon the Commission to take a number of measures .
Firstly , to set up a task force of experts - not a body or a committee - to monitor the spread of the disease within the EU .
When I go into the operating theatre , I choose a deputy and an assistant ; I do not want a school .
Secondly , to define , together with the WHO , a standard isolation procedure for suspected cases in EU citizens , to be applied in all the Member States , so that the Member States are not all left to decide on their own national procedures .
Thirdly , to call upon all the Member States to set up a database of people who have passed through or stayed in the areas at risk in the last three months , monitoring their state of health , so to be able to take prompt action should they prove to be infected .
Fourthly , to lay down , together with the WHO , procedures and time frames for quarantining and disinfecting people , animals and goods coming from the areas at risk , thus avoiding different levels of protection being adopted in the different States .
Fifthly , to establish an emergency health fund similar to the funds which used to be set up in respect of natural disasters , so that each Member State can equip itself to face this potential epidemic .
These organisation and information strategies are essential if we are to be able to take immediate , focused action when a vaccine becomes available .
Madam President , Commissioner , as if the war were not enough , another reason for increased numbers of victims has appeared at the same time .
Severe acute respiratory syndrome has so far attacked 2 416 people of all ages and has caused 89 deaths , mainly in Asia .
Of course , what is important is that the authorities in China , where the epidemic first broke out , have allowed experts from the World Health Organisation , albeit somewhat belatedly , to visit the south of the country and help investigate the factors which cause the disease and how it is transmitted .
The speed at which the epidemic is spreading proves how important it is for every case to be reported at once , which is why I believe that the European Commission should exhaust every means at its disposal to persuade third countries to inform all the competent agencies at once and cooperate efficiently , regardless of whether or not they have signed a cooperation agreement with the World Health Organisation .
There have been 46 cases within the European Union , affecting people who have travelled to one of the countries in which the disease is endemic , but so far there have been no reports of any cases of secondary transmission or deaths .
I trust that these encouraging factors are due not just to the early warning system , which was a great help in allowing precautions to be taken , but also to the high level of health care in hospitals .
Further cooperation between the Member States and the World Health Organisation will allow a continuous two-way flow of information , so that any additional measures considered necessary on the basis of new information can be taken , not that this can be considered adequate .
You will understand that I refer purely to the public health aspect of the problem . I will not dwell on the economic repercussions caused by restricting air travel and tourism to high-risk areas .
Commissioner , as we have said in the past , the emergence of new threats to public health means that we urgently need to set up systems which can respond promptly , immediately and efficiently to daily dangers and challenges .
There are a number of actions which are considered advisable along these lines , in tandem with existing measures . They are :
the immediate creation and operation of a European centre to control and monitor infectious diseases , similar to the CDC in the United States .
It is important within the framework of this centre to operate a network of laboratories to investigate epidemics and conduct related research ;
the creation of a team of experts , a task force which could take action in the event of epidemics with natural causes rather than as the result of deliberate action , as has already been set up for biological terrorism and , finally :
the provision of appropriations for technical support for the aforementioned actions .
As you know , Commissioner , the Greek Presidency is trying to strengthen the legal basis in the field of public health .
I trust that this unfortunate situation will make this need clearer and convince those who disagree .
Madam President , I should like first to apologise to the Commissioner for having been called out of the Chamber while he was speaking .
Eighty years ago there was a link between major wars , disasters and a pandemic .
No one knows at this stage exactly what will be the nature , and the possible spread , of the SARS disease .
It appears to be resistant to treatment by antibiotics , to have a variable development and not necessarily to follow the course one would expect in terms of the vulnerability of the patients concerned .
Healthy people are succumbing as fast as , or faster than , the very old and the very young .
In these circumstances you , Commissioner , are now facing for the first time on the human front what you have faced three or four times in terms of animal diseases .
Most of us in this House , like Mrs Malliori who has just spoken , will be looking now in this grave crisis for the setting-up of something like a rapid alert system bringing together all the preventive measures which the European Union countries can carry out themselves .
As Mrs Malliori has just said , if - despite all the tragic possibilities - we can see this as an opportunity to bring closer together in some form of European health centre the process of monitoring and analysing this threat , which is certainly more serious and less known than anything we have seen in recent years , then that at least will mean that some good comes out of this problem .
Thanks to the analysis of the data from Asia which have come to the Commissioner so far , we now know sufficient about the nature of the outbreak in Guangdong province last year , and the degree to which that may have gone through a cycle of its own which can now be analysed , to have some idea of how the disease should be captured and isolated here in Western Europe .
It looks as though there are a number of peculiarities to this disease and I would hope that , being still relatively free from it , we can analyse in depth the cases that have arrived in the European Union .
We are better placed than most to turn this into an epidemic which is curable , and not a pandemic which threatens us all .
Madam President , as a member of Parliament 's Delegation for relations with the People 's Republic of China , I welcome the statement and reassurances given by Mr Byrne .
The Commission statement and our debate today highlight a very important problem that the whole world - indeed mankind globally - should take an interest in .
We should be alert to and aware of the dangers of sudden outbreaks of highly infectious and dangerous diseases which can suddenly spread on a global basis .
Given modern transport systems , we should all be aware of the potential problems .
It can be very difficult - especially in the early stages in remote areas - to identify a dangerous outbreak that has global implications .
Nevertheless , we should congratulate the Chinese authorities on cooperating with an international organisation , the WHO , in its investigations into the specific characteristics of the disease and the particular modes of transmission .
We look forward to further enhanced cooperation by the Chinese authorities with regard to this matter .
As with all outbreaks of this kind , lessons must be learned .
We would call in particular on the Chinese authorities to set an example to the world and hold a full , public and transparent inquiry into the outbreak of this disease and its means of transmission .
We hope they will involve fully , where appropriate , international bodies , in particular the WHO , and ensure that the whole world learns lessons from China 's experiences in dealing with this incident .
We can expect to see further incidents of this type in future .
Sudden and rapidly spreading epidemics of poorly understood diseases are certain to occur elsewhere and at other times .
It is in Europe 's interest and the whole world 's interest that China shows the world what must be done in these circumstances .
Madam President , it is particularly appropriate that we are having this fairly in-depth discussion in Parliament on this issue today , World Health Day .
I shall respond to a number of issues which you have raised .
Specifically , Mr Whitehead asked me about the need for a rapid response system .
We have such a thing in place - the communicable disease network - which does valuable work in this area and has been doing valuable work in response to this particular outbreak of SARS .
We are in very close contact with the World Health Organization , not just from institution to institution .
Since last year , a transfer of experts has taken place , with some WHO people working with us and some of our people working with them .
This assists greatly in the transfer of information and knowledge between the institutions .
The WHO has a team presently in place in China , carrying out the important work of determining what further needs to be done .
I will review all of these issues with Dr Brundtland , the Director-General of the WHO , when I meet her at my next meeting on 6 May .
It is also particularly appropriate that many of you asked about the extent to which we may need to extend the competences at EU level .
I am a little more optimistic about this than some of the speakers in this debate .
I have discussed this with a number of Members of this House , and with a number of government ministers , for quite some time now .
I am happy to say that this idea has found its way into a number of different fora , not least in the committee chaired by Mr Katiforis in his report that was presented to the Convention some weeks ago .
That report contained a number of recommendations , the weight of which was that there should be something in the Treaties creating an extended competence for public health which would provide us with a legal base to bring forward harmonising legislation in the area of public health .
As someone said earlier in the debate , we have far greater powers in relation to animal health than to human health .
I know that a lot of people in the House are concerned about this . I am also concerned about it .
We need to change that . I have raised this matter a number of times at Commission meetings .
I am very happy to tell the House that it is Commission policy that we pursue this issue in the Convention .
We have already pursued it in Mr Katiforis ' committee and elsewhere .
One of the issues I am currently working on in my own directorate-general is the shape of a new Article 152 , which it would be desirable to include in a new constitutional treaty ; this would provide the kind of legal base which , as many of you have argued here this evening , is necessary to establish a sufficient base for harmonising legislation in the area of communicable diseases and other areas .
I have some cautious optimism that the Convention will take these ideas on board , that they will find their way into a final report and ultimately be discussed in an IGC and , I hope , eventually take their place in the final shape of the Convention that we ultimately put before the people of Europe .
Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , now that we have reached second reading stage , the Common Position , thanks to the good support from the Commission and its staff , but also to Members ' willingness not to trip the discussion up with details , has , in my view , resulted in something very positive , and something that we can put to the vote tomorrow .
I see the directives on basic skills - as they are now termed - and training as being all of a piece with driving and rest times , driver attestation and now vocational training .
I would in some ways call it a package of social measures in road transport , guaranteeing on the one hand proper liberalisation , whilst on the other hand also having the effect that these limitations on work are not at the expense of safety , work quality or training .
Knowing as we do how tough competition is , particularly in road transport , we attached the highest importance to these regulatory measures .
Here in Parliament , we saw the Common Position as largely satisfactory .
Whatever else it did , it did adopt two-thirds of the proposed amendments , which were dealt with at a rate and with a timetable quite astonishing for some sorts of work in this House .
The overlap with the driving licence has been done away with , which means that those with proper training for their driving licence no longer need to have these basis skills certified .
What was very important to us was that it was not the drivers ' country of origin that was to be the decisive factor , but the place where they drive , the firm or business or its country of origin in the fifteen countries .
People from third countries are also to acquire these basic skills .
The programmes are no longer so rigid .
Even in in-service training , learning objectives have been laid down .
The seven hours per annum rhythm is a good solution for both in-service training and from the businesses ' point of view .
It can also be assumed that this was harmonised with the new provisions on admission to the occupation , which means that , in this respect too , there are no weak points left .
We find it regrettable that there is no guarantee of mobility during training .
We will shortly be discussing a project which will call on students to study the length and breadth of Europe , whilst drivers will not do so .
Speaking as an inhabitant of a border area , I greatly regret this , but I can understand that there might still be problems with controls in certain cases .
In any case , I am not abandoning hope , for , at the end of an evaluation that should be carried out over two years , the Commission , supported by the Council , may well come up with the idea of providing for a bit more mobility .
What we saw as worse than this was the fact that provision was made for a test without training , to be opted for not by the candidate , but by the country .
We hope , however , that this will be re-examined in the course of the evaluation , for I believe that this amendment that we have tabled is an important one .
After two years ' implementation , there is not only to be an evaluation of to what extent this is applied in the Member States , but also of to what extent the objectives have been achieved , and , as this is to do only with examinations , this will of course be a very important aspect .
The change that we are proposing is the one that I have just mentioned .
It is of course also about the training of drivers covering criminality in the broadest sense of the word , as they can very often be the victims of certain criminal acts .
The training centres must be of high quality ; my colleague has already incorporated this requirement into the recitals , and I believe it to be important that reference be made to this .
Turning to time limits , it is the desire of us all that this directive be transposed as quickly as possible , but , on the other hand , I believe that things must be looked at in a pragmatic light , as , in our experiment with the drivers ' licence , the time limits may perhaps seem very long .
I will ask , though , that the time limit should not be shortened whatever happens .
Flexibility is important , and the bottom line is that , no matter how good these directives may be , and no matter how much we agree to their enactment , they will yield nothing if - as has become almost a recurrent theme in this Parliament - there are no subsequent controls and if they are not properly implemented .
We therefore again urge the Commission , and , through them , the Council and the Member States that , if we want to create this liberalised European transport area , in which , however , this job can also be done under proper conditions , in which working conditions are right , and in which training will now also be right , these texts will remain nothing but fine words if the Member States are not willing to systematically implement them .
I will close with a reference to ECMT licences .
I hope that we will soon be able to take certain steps at this level as well , where unfair competition continues , so that , in certain cases , all the good preparatory work that we have done can be taken into account .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I would firstly like to congratulate Mr Grosch on his excellent report , which demonstrates that we all share the same opinion on the training of professional drivers and the need to improve safety on our roads .
The adoption of this directive will be an important step forward and will contribute to the harmonisation of social conditions , a better quality of professional driver and better road transport standards in general .
The Commission believes that the Council 's Common Position , which to a large extent takes account of Parliament 's first reading , is a well-balanced attempt to achieve these objectives , and we should therefore try not to spoil this balance and try to adopt this directive at second reading .
Some of the amendments proposed improve on the Council 's Common Position and the Commission takes a positive view of them .
There are certain amendments , however , which the Commission cannot accept , such as No 3 , No 4 , No 8 and No 9 .
Amendments No 3 and 4 must be rejected for two reasons : firstly , because they are not viable in practice .
In fact , in 13 Member States there is currently no obligatory training and only around 5 to 10 % of the drivers in question would be able to be trained , and it would therefore be impossible for these 13 countries to transpose the directive correctly in two years .
In certain countries , particularly those with a federal structure , the transposition of such a complex and new piece of Community legislation would be practically impossible for procedural reasons , and would only lead to infringement procedures for lack of implementation at a later date .
Furthermore , if these amendments are adopted , we could end up in a conciliation procedure with the Council , with the prospect of achieving transposition into national legislation just one year before , of which six months would be lost through conciliation and from which ultimately nothing would be gained .
Amendments Nos 8 and 9 were both proposed by the European Parliament at first reading as well .
They were rejected by the Commission and the Council did not take them up in its Common Position either .
Amendment No 8 intends to authorise an individual to obtain the initial qualification or periodic training in the Member State of their choice .
This could allow drivers to avoid the most demanding rules .
Amendment No 9 lays down control by the competent authorities of the setting of tests .
This means that the tests can be carried out by authorities other than the competent authorities .
The tests should be carried out by the competent authorities or by bodies which are under their direct control .
Therefore , the control requested is not necessary .
Therefore , ladies and gentlemen , I would appeal to you not to let these two amendments cause us to miss the opportunity to approve this legislation at second reading and therefore not to delay its adoption by this Parliament and the Council even further , as well as its subsequent transposition .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , your vote tomorrow will have a great influence on the legislative process . It will facilitate a speedy adoption of the directive and consequently an improvement in the conditions of millions of lorry and bus drivers who work in our Member States .
I am counting on your support in order to achieve this .
I would like to say to the rapporteur that he is absolutely right , that the effectiveness of all these measures will be assessed according to the Member States ' capacity for control in their various areas of responsibility .
To this end we are analysing the possibilities for further convergence of the types of control carried out in the different Member States with the rules and requirements that we have agreed at Community level .
The rapporteur is well aware that this is a complex task , but I would like to say to him that - as I have repeated on various occasions - I hope to present a proposal on this area to Parliament and the Council as soon as possible .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I too would like to express my gratitude to Mr Grosch - for whom I have a high regard - for this quite excellent report .
A few weeks ago , ladies and gentlemen , we discussed in this plenary the Transport White Paper and voted on what position Parliament should take in relation to it .
This Transport White Paper has lofty objectives , one of the most essential of which , apart from the reduction of environmentally harmful and unhealthy emissions such as greenhouse gases and noise , is that of raising the standard of traffic safety overall .
We are all aware that it does this against the backdrop of 41 000 fatal traffic accidents per annum in the European Union as a whole , to which we have to add a multitude of people injured , some being left with permanent and severe disabilities .
All these things are the result of road traffic accidents .
If we really want to achieve the objective of increased safety on the roads , we need a multi-faceted strategy .
Vehicles must of course be made safer , but that will be of little use unless their drivers are safer too .
Those who work in the transport sector , that is , those who drive vehicles , have to be better trained .
This will make manifestly superfluous the establishment of a Road Transport Safety Agency , which a majority of the plenary called for when the Transport White Paper was debated and which , I might add , I regard as absolutely nonsensical .
What distinguishes the road transport sector from other transport sectors - such as sea or air transport - is the large number of people working in it .
The essential element in road transport safety , namely the way individuals drive , cannot be regulated by any one European agency , and so this draft on the training of professional drivers in goods and passenger transport is much to be welcomed .
I am from the Ruhr , a densely populated region , indeed the most densely populated industrial region in the European Union , and one where there are innumerable motorways and an enormous amount of traffic .

I myself travel by car a very great deal , as my electoral district is a large one , and I am also obliged to be always driving to Brussels and Strasbourg .
Anyone who spends as much time travelling on motorways and other roads as I do , and as many of my fellow Members do , knows what they are like .
For example , anyone who has observed how much freight traffic by road has increased in the last three to four years alone , and how many HGVs are using the roads , will know that situations in which lives are at risk are all too frequent .
This does , of course , also have to do with the central and eastern European states being about to join the European Union - in part .
The drivers from our own Member States are not absolutely safe either .
A very large number of vehicles from the candidate countries are already on the move right across the European Union , and there are worrying indications that the amount of goods traffic on the roads is increasing .
They are worrying especially for a transit country like Germany , and that is why we need to be certain that drivers know what they are doing , to be certain that they are continuing their training , that that training is tested , and that road traffic generally is better controlled at national level .
When we are , a Road Traffic Agency will become quite superfluous .
Madam President , I should like to begin by thanking the rapporteur , Mr Grosch , for his excellent cooperation both during the first reading and now during the second reading .
This directive is important for several reasons .
I should like us to make a leap of imagination and imagine that we were about to develop a road transport system today .
Would that transport system look like our present one ?
I hardly think so .
We would have significantly more stringent safety requirements , we would construct our roads differently and we should definitely require road construction workers to be properly trained .
That is why this directive is important , for we must first of all be able to make certain demands of drivers of road vehicles for the carriage of goods or passengers , making of course stringent demands in terms of , for example , safety .
Secondly , our directive would raise the status of their profession .
That , I believe , would mean a very great deal , for quality would be guaranteed by those who do the work .
Thirdly , well trained drivers would obviously do work that was better from a safety point of view , because they would be more aware of , and more involved in the consequences of , different situations .
That too is reflected in the directive .
Like the rest of the Group of the Party of European Socialists , I would hope to avoid conciliation when it comes to this directive .
I should have liked it if training could have taken place during working hours .
We have tabled an amendment to that effect , but it was unfortunately not accepted .
Following mature consideration , we have accepted the possibility of choosing between tests and courses , for we are aware of the fact that there is an extremely large number of people to be trained .
What is important now is that we have high-quality training courses and that there are authorised training centres .
It is therefore important that Amendment No 8 not be accepted , for it would involve a danger of social dumping where training conditions were concerned , with the shortest courses being chosen and in those places that are most convenient .
If we agree to being able to choose between tests and courses , we cannot , unfortunately , agree to being able , at the same time , to choose in which country the courses are to be taken .
That is not possible .
It would be just too risky .
I do not therefore believe that we can accept Amendment No 8 .
Finally , I hope that we can avoid conciliation .
I understood from the Commissioner that the road safety programme would come on stream quite soon , something for which I am most sincerely grateful .
We have waited a long time for this and shall examine it with great interest .
I would first of all like to thank Mr Grosch for his efforts in the context of this report and his efforts to gain , within Parliament , real support for the approval of certain amendments or for their withdrawal .
It looks as if compulsory professional training for drivers will soon become a reality .
It is high time professional drivers took and were obliged to take follow-up training in addition to passing their driving tests .
Road safety for drivers and other road users is important .
Unfortunately accidents involving lorries often result in fatalities .
It would be nice if we could reduce this percentage in future .
The vote on this directive tomorrow will give a significant impetus to driving as a profession .
Experience in the Netherlands has taught us that drivers who undergo professional training see their job satisfaction levels increase substantially .
Driving a lorry is a profession with its own challenges .
It is important for the sector that people who decide to become professional drivers remain in the industry .
This continuity will increase if drivers become aware of the great social significance of their profession .
The sector is itself looking for good professional drivers .
After all , without transport , the economy will grind to a halt .
I myself had submitted two amendments to this report on behalf of the Group of the European Liberal , Democratic and Reform party , relating to control of the quality of training and the opportunity to train in other EU Member States .
I am withdrawing these amendments out of my concern that certain Member States will use this to follow a mediation procedure after all .
I think that the fact that the report will be accepted tomorrow and will in fact be implemented is much more important .
I hope that it will be possible to put it into force quickly .
My proposals now simply go too far .
Like Mr Grosch , I hope that the vote at the plenary session tomorrow will be favourable .
Madam President , first of all my thanks to Mr Grosch for smoothing off the rough social edges of liberalisation in order to combine these two elements with each other once and for all .
I think that the aim of the directive is very clear .
We want to improve road safety .
We also want to try to improve the environment on our roads by means of training , because if drivers know how that works , they will be able to influence it .
Ultimately , of course , it is also a social package .
I will not go into all the details .
I think that it was a good thing that Mr Vermeer withdrew a couple of amendments , otherwise it may have resulted in the social dumping we have been talking about .
There is , however , a catch , and I would like to speak to the Commissioner briefly about this .
It is as follows . Over the past few days , the case of hauliers Willi Betz has shown us that there are problems with the CEMT licences .
We all know that the driver 's certificate that Mr Van Dam worked on , and which is based on community licences , came into effect on 19 March .
It is still possible to evade the CEMT licences , as Mr Grosch mentioned at the end of his speech .
I would like to ask the Commissioner how we can get the CEMT to pay attention to the specialist training and follow-up training we are aiming towards for members from Member States and drivers working for companies registered in those Member States , otherwise we will be left with an unresolved problem .
For this reason , I would like to ask you to give your attention to this .
Secondly , I think that we are dealing with social matters here , and I will soon be raising the issue of whether we should really be dealing with this via the RETT or the EMPL .
I will be coming back to this .
Madam President , some months ago we discussed the Markov report on driving times and rest times in the road haulage industry .
One of the motives for limiting driving times is that driving a vehicle for long periods of time can create risks to road safety .
Honesty compels me , however , to say that it is not only mental and physical fitness that contributes to road safety but also properly developed professional skills .
That is why we support the proposal to lay down minimum requirements for the training of professional drivers .
So far only two Member States have this kind of training .
Extending this to all Member States will significantly promote the professional quality of drivers and safety on our roads to a comparable level .
It is important that such training relates as much as possible both to the qualities of the individual driver and to day-to-day practice .
This requires the training programme to be flexible .
In that regard , therefore , I am happy with the different training methods proposed by the Council .
Whereas the emphasis in the original plans was on attendance , it is now actually on demonstrating personal skills during the examination .
The supervisory bodies who have to guarantee the quality of these exams therefore have an important task .
It is also important to keep abreast of developments in training techniques .
During the training it will most likely not be possible to cover every conceivable traffic situation . Combining numerous traffic situations in a simulator is therefore a step in the right direction .
The use of simulators in training should therefore be encouraged in order to prepare drivers as thoroughly as possible for all possible situations .
We should not only be paying attention to road safety but also to the personal safety of the drivers .
On 14 and 15 October , the Justice and Home Affairs Council stated that heavy goods vehicles carrying valuable commercial goods are increasingly becoming an easy target for criminal organisations .
The signals from insurance companies on this are clear .
This brings with it considerable risks for the drivers .
In order to fight these criminal activities , attention must also be paid in training courses to preventive measures .
Not only to protect the cargo but also the driver .
In conclusion , we regard the common position , including the proposed amendments , as a good basis for driver training right across the European Union .
It will enable Member States to set up and maintain practice-oriented training .
Many thanks to the rapporteur for his excellent work .
Madam President , I too would like to start by congratulating and thanking the rapporteur , Mr Grosch , for his work at first and second readings and for his willingness to listen to colleagues ' suggestions , achieving a result which would appear to have won broad backing and which therefore has excellent chances of being adopted in tomorrow 's vote in plenary .
Ladies and gentlemen , we are discussing an issue which never ceases to be very tragic and relevant .
Once again , in my country , last Saturday , on Saturday night , there was yet another case of what we call Saturday-night carnage . Four young people were killed on the roads .
These incidents have become regular now , occurring with tragic frequency , and they have rightly led to an increase in social alarm at the unnecessary carnage on our roads .
There is no doubt that one of the most effective solutions lies in training .
Like Mrs Sommer , I expressed my opposition to the creation of a European Road Safety Agency when it was discussed .
Indeed , we do not need any more centralised bodies , which would probably mean more red tape - we need road safety policies .
There is a difference .
Today , I am pleased to say that , with this directive , we are making progress in one of the key areas towards the goal we must all set ourselves : the goal of safe roads .
Why is this one of the key factors ?
Because , as has already been reiterated by many of the Members , this directive of ours makes training ongoing , as it needs to be .
The requirement to pass a driving test is no longer a sufficient safeguard : we must ensure that especially those whose jobs consist of driving , such as goods-vehicle and professional drivers , are constantly monitored , for their own safety , first and foremost , but also in the interests of the safety of other road users .
I would also like to thank the rapporteur and the Commission , which I see has already undertaken to cooperate , for if we are to have training , we all have to agree on what we mean .
It must be a serious undertaking , not a formality , and so the structures which our States are to certify as capable of performing training and to accredit with the necessary authorisation must be responsible centres whose professionalism is proven and consolidated .
In this regard , in my country at least , the experience possessed by driving schools is a very useful factor which should be exploited .
In this way , I believe that the directive will help to achieve effective training and so make our roads safer .
Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I too wish to thank Mr Grosch for the purposeful , excellent work he has done in preparing this important report .
The directive will serve to improve the professional skills of drivers as well as road safety , as has been said here .
Harmonised regulations concerning initial professional qualifications will raise the social status of drivers and furthermore heighten the esteem the profession is held in .
Improved basic training will also enable the Member States to reduce the minimum age limit for drivers of many classes of vehicle , which will make the profession more attractive and improve the supply of labour in the transport sector .
As the Council has taken the committee 's amendments very much into consideration in the common position , we should proceed without conciliation and swiftly move this issue forward .
In my opinion , we should still think carefully about the aim to bring forward by one year the deadline for the transposition of the measures into national law .
The Member States have highlighted the problems arising from a tighter timetable , since the directive will mean a great deal of reorganisation with regard to training .
The Member States therefore need time to implement this .
Madam President , first of all I would like to congratulate the rapporteur on his report .
Compulsory training for lorry drivers is something that we really need and something that we should have had in place a long time ago .
I am sometimes surprised at how far behind Europe is in the area of road safety .
After the problem with driving times , this problem therefore also needs to be tackled urgently . If a number of problems are to be solved , we have to approve the report tomorrow .
Firstly , the transport sector can become more professional .
Better drivers should be driving on our roads .
The profession of lorry driver should be made more attractive and also respectable .
There is absolutely no room for cowboys on our roads .
Secondly , training courses for drivers should also pay attention to the rational use of energy .
Experiments show that even experienced drivers can permanently cut their fuel consumption by up to 30 % after just one day of additional training .
This is not insignificant for a Kyoto-sensitive sector .
Thirdly , and perhaps the most important point : safety on our roads will also improve .
I am thinking here about training in the use of the obligatory blind spot systems and other safety technology on board lorries , as well as teaching a more defensive driving style which will benefit more vulnerable road users in general and cyclists in particular .
Madam President , Members of this House need no formal training , no examination and no specific qualifications , yet in this instance they are pronouncing on the qualifications required by other people who do a job for which they themselves are unqualified and which most of them could not do .
In any regulatory system not all controls have equal impact .
As regulation increases in complexity and breadth , the law of diminishing returns kicks in .
As control further increases it then becomes counterproductive .
The case has not been made that these controls , already applying in France and the Netherlands , will make goods vehicles safer .
In fact some countries which do not require these additional qualifications already have higher safety values .
At the very least therefore , the law has reached the point of diminishing return .
In my own country , as the ordinary driving test has become more stringent , it becomes harder for working class youngsters to afford .
As a result , driving legally has become the privilege of the sons and daughters of the wealthy , while the number of people driving without any licence is estimated at over one million .
With increased training and education requirements , driving goods vehicles will similarly become the exclusive domain of the privileged middle classes or of those who are fortunate enough to work for employers who feel obliged or are possibly legally bound to pay all of their training fees , plus the cost of replacement drivers while they take time off work to complete their training courses .
For small employers , that would be a considerable financial burden which could lead to bankruptcy and subsequent job losses .
In the United Kingdom most employers agree that their drivers have already taken strict tests , have undergone thorough medical examinations , and consider themselves quite rightly to be the elite amongst drivers on our roads .
They would be insulted by a requirement to constantly improve their driving .
Safety is of course paramount , and limits on permitted driving hours make good sense , but that is a completely different subject .
Thus what we have here is reverse social engineering .
This House is contributing to the process of making more and more jobs unattainable for those who traditionally did them and benefited from so doing .
If it carries on in this way , we had better increase the number of places in this House , since that will be the only occupation left that unqualified people would be allowed to do .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to thank you for all your speeches , particularly the Members who have agreed to withdraw a series of amendments so that this text can be approved at second reading .
I would once again like to thank the rapporteur , Mr Grosch , for his wonderful work , which , amongst other things , has allowed for the consensus which we will probably have in the vote tomorrow .
I would also like to say that I have taken good note of what Mr Bouwman suggested in relation to the regulation within the ECMT .
I believe that is where we should address the demands and proposals we are making here in the European Union , but I would like to say that through this proposal , and the one we made previously , we are applying all the requirements not just for drivers from any of the European Union countries , but also for third-country drivers who operate in the European Union , in European Union companies .
This type of regulation seeks greater safety - and this is my response to the second question raised .
The Directorate-General for Transport essentially deals with this kind of issue from the point of view of safety .
This Directorate-General deals with safety aspects , not social aspects , except insofar as they relate to safety .
In this particular case , in Parliament , if it had only dealt with social aspects , it would have fallen to the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs and not the Committee on Regional Policy , Transport and Tourism .
I hope that tomorrow there will be an agreement which allows this text to be approved at second reading , improves safety and prevents unfair competition in road transport .
I would like once again to thank all the speakers , the rapporteur and those Members who have withdrawn amendments in order to allow for this agreement tomorrow , and I take good note of the comments you have addressed to me during this discussion in terms of the Commission 's future proposals .
Thank you , Commissioner .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 11.30 a.m.
The next item is the debate on the report ( A5-0087 / 2003 ) by Mrs De Sarnez , on behalf of the Committee on Culture , Youth , Education , the Media and Sport , on the proposal for a European Parliament and Council decision establishing a programme for the enhancement of quality in higher education and the promotion of intercultural understanding through cooperation with third countries ( Erasmus World ) ( 2004-2008 ) ( COM ( 2002 ) 401 - C5-0360 / 2002 - 2002 / 0165 ( COD ) ) .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , in this difficult time in which we are living , I believe that the Commission 's will to make a knowledge-based Europe a strategic priority of the Union , which has been reiterated on many occasions over several years , is more relevant now than ever before .
The Erasmus World programme , which we are discussing this evening , is perfectly compatible with this objective .
It is therefore very good news for Europe .
The programme has two main goals , which are closely linked : to enhance the attractiveness of European higher education to students and university teachers from other parts of the world and increase links between European universities in order to improve the quality and competitiveness of European higher education .
In fact , it is by developing links with one another , on the one hand , and links with the rest of the world , on the other , that our universities will improve the quality of the service they provide .
As Mrs Reding has said , Erasmus World is the instrument that Europe needs , both internally and externally , in order to respond coherently to globalisation in the education sector .
By opening up our universities to the world , we are also opening them up to Europe .
With regard to the title of the programme , we propose that this programme should henceforth be entitled Erasmus Mundus .
This would make it possible to respect and maintain the principle of cultural diversity , which we all consider to be of the utmost importance and which is a driving force of our Union .
This programme covers the period 2004 to 2008 .
It proposes four actions which are all very specific .
First of all , the creation of 250 Masters Courses , which we shall call Erasmus Mundus Masters Courses .
These courses will be selected for a period of five years and will have to involve at least three higher education institutions from three different Member States .
They will lead to officially-recognised degrees .
These Masters Courses will be open to students and university teachers from third countries and I would like them to be widely available to students and university teachers from the European Union so that they can also take advantage of this ' European tour ' .
The qualification of Masters Courses will , of course , be awarded according to the quality of teaching provided , but it should also take account of the quality of hosting facilities for students .
The selection procedure must be carried out by a high-level selection board comprising leading figures from the academic world .
By the end of their course , students must have learned or used at least two languages .
Language-learning must , in fact , remain a priority for the European Union .
As Mr Prodi pointed out , language-learning is one of the main ways of promoting genuine understanding between different cultures .
We must continue to encourage the promotion of language-learning by all possible means , and this programme provides us with an ideal opportunity to do so .
Secondly , the establishment of a scholarship system .
Substantial scholarships will be offered to 4 200 students from third countries , either directly or as part of a partnership programme between their own university and universities participating in a Masters Course .
Scholarships will also be offered to 1 000 third-country university teachers , who will be invited to Europe for teaching and scholarly assignments with an average length of three months .
Thirdly , the creation of partnerships to strengthen and promote intercultural understanding .
Higher education institutions will thereby be encouraged to establish cooperation with third-country universities .
Lastly , the final action is the international promotion of European higher education .
A specific website will be created for the programme to provide up-to-date information on Erasmus Mundus Masters Courses .
In order to achieve all these objectives , we felt it appropriate to provide ourselves with the necessary means .
That is why we have proposed to increase the budget to EUR 300 million , whilst ensuring that existing programmes do not suffer and taking account of the appropriate resources and conditions to be determined by the budgetary authority .
On all these points , we have enjoyed extremely productive cooperation with the members of the Committee on Culture , Youth , Education , the Media and Sport , as well as the draftsmen of opinions .
I would like to thank them for that .
In conclusion , I would like to express the wish that , in future , young students , university scholars and researchers from the European Union and the rest of the world will find our continent a source of learning , training and mutual understanding .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to congratulate Mrs De Sarnez on her excellent report and thank her for her good and constructive cooperation .
The Erasmus Welt programme , which is so important to the future of the European Union , shows how important and sensible it is that Parliament 's committees should cooperate well with the Commission .
The Commission proposal is supplemented by the amendments tabled to it , which also put it on a broader foundation , especially in financial terms , with EUR 300 million instead of the proposed EUR 200 million .
New programmes , especially in the fields of education , culture and youth , which represent important investments in our future , raise again and again the key issue of where we are meant to get the money from if there is none under the heading provided for that purpose .
Where is the money supposed to come from if we are disinclined to cut back other similar programmes under the same heading ?
This question has to be put and answered in this plenary more than once , and I can see the same problem arising with Mr Mauro 's report on eLearning .
Our Parliament has the traditional policy of defending existing programmes .
In its legislative capacity , the Council can indeed see how important these programmes are , but as a budgetary authority , it is unwilling to allocate more funds to Heading 3 .
The current Financial Perspective , which still has until the end of 2006 to run , leaves an extremely small amount of foreseeable room for manoeuvre .
That will , in any case , affect the first three years of the Erasmus World programme .
The Lisbon strategy , though , which we are pursuing , might well make this a good opportunity for us to show our colours . What priorities do we want to set for the distribution of the funds available , if we want to achieve the transformation into a competitive , dynamic and knowledge-based society , as was reaffirmed , yet again , by everyone at the Brussels Summit just over two weeks ago ?
With this in mind , we should be putting the case for this important new programme to receive appropriate funding , to the tune of EUR 300 million .
Let me then repeat my urgent appeal to the Council to join with us in looking forward and going ahead with this .
As a member of the Committee on Budgets , I have to reiterate that the present situation will very probably result in a redeployment of the funds under Heading 3 in order to guarantee compliance with the financial upper limit .
It might make sense , in the first instance , to reallocate funds from those action programmes for which no financial framework has yet been laid down in the Financial Perspective , or for which such a framework is to be decided on by way of codecision after 2007 .
Mr President , I would first like to convey to Mrs De Sarnez my most sincere congratulations .
In the Committee on Culture , Youth , Education , the Media and Sport , we all caught from her an enthusiasm for this new and important project , and let me say loud and clear that our discussions of it brought us joy because we had a sense of playing our part in shaping the future .
So , as well as extending congratulations , let me also thank the Commission , and Commissioner Reding , for submitting this programme to us , so that together we are making a contribution to investing in Europe 's future and in that of the younger generation .
I believe that Erasmus World is the logical continuation of the Erasmus programme , with which we are all familiar , and which has helped generations of young Europeans to get to know the other countries of the European Union as well as their own .
Erasmus World is now going one step further , both inwards and outwards .
Its inward dimension involves something that , even a few years ago , we would have thought impossible , namely that the European Union , and its Member States in particular , are willing , on the basis of their own decisions , of the Bologna Process and the Lisbon resolutions , to cooperate more intensively at university level .
An EU quality mark for Masters ' courses - excellent !
This will bring us closer together , and , together , further forwards .
That makes this new programme an important step for us all in improving the situation as regards a shared European education .
In its second step , Erasmus World opens the way for postgraduate students from third countries to study at European universities .
That is what we want a forward-looking intercultural dialogue to involve .
Has there ever been a time when a contribution to this intercultural dialogue was more needed than in the present days and weeks ?
So let me conclude by appealing to the Council in these terms : you cannot , in view of the terrible conflicts in Iraq , afford not to provide the necessary funds for this programme - which amount to at least the EUR 300 million that Parliament has called for !
All of us here are duty bound to take an especially responsible approach to investing in this area .
Mr President , Commissioner , first I wish to thank the rapporteur , Mrs De Sarnez , for her exhaustive survey of the Erasmus World programme and for her excellent cooperation , although we did not succeed in reaching consensus on quite everything .
What is most important , however , is that the Committee on Culture , Youth , Education , the Media and Sport has managed to deal with the Commission proposal swiftly .
I also hope that consensus can be quickly reached with the Council so that the programme can be got fully under way from the start of next year .
There is a clear need to make Europe a more attractive place and to strengthen the identity of European higher education .
At present , the majority of international exchange students go to the United States of America .
That country has a long tradition of receiving foreign students , in the form , for example , of Fulbright scholarships .
Each year over half a million young people from other countries study in the United States .
In Europe , the corresponding figure for the number of students from countries outside the Community is around 400 000 .
More than three quarters of them come to the United Kingdom , France or Germany : to the three big Member States .
The opportunities offered by European universities are thus hardly being taken up at all at the present time .
The same goes for the added value that could be achieved through university networking .
The Erasmus Mundus Masters Course programme aims to rectify all these failings by establishing a European Union Masters degree for students from third countries in partnership with three European higher education institutions .
In the Committee on Culture , Youth , Education , the Media and Sport we pay a great deal of attention to linguistic diversity in Europe .
It is perhaps for that reason that the majority on the committee wanted to add the paragraph to Article 4 stating that the purpose of the programme is the ' promotion of language skills , in particular by the use of two languages spoken in the countries in which the institutions involved in the Erasmus Mundus Masters Course are located ' .
I fear the worst , in that such a stringent rule will go against the basic aims of the programme .
Erasmus Mundus is not a language programme : its purpose is to enhance the attractiveness of European higher education .
Let us for example consider the case of a degree course in biotechnology under the Masters programme , to be undertaken in partnership with higher education institutions in Finland , Latvia and Estonia .
I am sure a requirement to study the language of these countries would do little to enhance the attractiveness of the programme in the minds of young people interested in biotechnology .
This is not a problem that just concerns the northern fringe of Europe , but just as much Portugal and Greece , for example .
I certainly hope that this requirement , so precisely defined as it is , will be deleted in the vote in plenary .
Mr President , although I wonder whether it is really so important whether the programme proposed by the Commission should be called Erasmus World or Erasmus Mundus , I would like to thank Mrs De Sarnez for her thorough report .
The Commission 's proposal has come at exactly the right time .
Europe wants to become the most competitive knowledge-based economy in the world , so it is good that it is emerging as a continent in which the standard of university education is high , so that it is worthwhile for foreign students to come and study here .
Promoting mutual cooperation can only benefit the universities .
Although some parties in my country are suggesting that it is not really necessary to learn two foreign languages , I would like once again to emphatically express my support for the European Parliament 's proposal to give third-country students the opportunity to learn the languages of two host countries via this programme .
You only have to look round in this Parliament to see how necessary that is .
A knowledge of languages not only helps graduates to be more competitive in the labour market , it also increases their cultural stock-in trade .
I would , however , like to make a comment about this report .
The programme is intended for students and universities all over the world , and I would like to urge that we pay extra attention to universities in the developing world .
Education is the best weapon in the fight against poverty .
By giving students from the developing world the opportunity to complete their knowledge in the European Union , we can contribute to the distribution of knowledge in their own countries .
We must , of course , ensure that they do not stay in Europe , because the programme is not intended to boost the brain drain .
If European universities are prepared to work together with universities from the developing world , that will be sufficient reason for students to want to return to their own countries and to pass on the knowledge that they have acquired to their compatriots .
In this way , we can , via this programme , make a significant contribution to improving the standard of living everywhere , including the developing world .
Mr President , Commissioner , Mrs De Sarnez , ladies and gentlemen , I am glad that this programme is entitled ' Erasmus Mundus ' .
I am glad because it refers back to a shared root , from which sprang the cultural and linguistic diversity of the European Union .
On the subject of diversity , I would like to emphasise how close to our heart it is that this long-standing objective of the European Union should be reflected in the requirement for written and oral competence in two EU languages in addition to the mother tongue .
This is an objective that we should consistently pursue .
My fellow-Members have already mentioned so much : equality of opportunity and the fight against poverty are goals towards which the European Union is expected to strive .
What else is still expected of this Union of ours ?
For what can we still be a motor ?
What do we expect of ourselves , and what do we have to offer ?
Here too , I am repeating myself and merely saying what has already been said , but we must again lay stress on one fact . It is that we can offer an area of tolerance , a space full of respect - something that cannot work without education - as well as a space for intercultural dialogue and intercultural competence .
That cannot work without education .
That too leads me to appeal to the Council , for it can work only if we are ready , right now , to invest , if we replenish Heading 3 rather than simply capping it and saying that we will squeeze it out of something else .
Whilst we are not meant to be debating what that ' something else ' is to be , it is something that we still have to talk about .
As Mrs Wenzel-Perillo said , this question has to be put here more than just once .
We have to show our colours !
The investment in education that we are making today will bring forth a harvest that will bring gladness not only to us within the EU , but also beyond its borders .
That is what is expected of Europe !
Mr President , one of the European Union 's key achievements has been the ability to promote educational cooperation programmes .
There are now European-wide programmes operating in all elements of our education system .
We live in an internal market where there is free movement of people .
If the European Union as a political entity is to grow and prosper , we must ensure that its schoolchildren are given opportunities to learn different languages , to experience the education systems of other countries within the European Union .
Promoting social and educational interaction between students can only serve a positive function .
From an Irish perspective , investment in education has made it possible to tackle unemployment and emigration and allowed our dynamic young workforce to participate in a meaningful way in the work of economic development .
The EU Erasmus programme is one of the most popular educational programmes operating within the European Union .
It has been in existence since the mid-1980s , and provides educational opportunities for students from within the European Union and the applicant states to study in different Member States .
Since the EU Erasmus programme was originally set up , over one million students in Europe have already taken part in this important educational initiative .
In fact over 100 000 different students now participate in this programme on an annual basis .
The report which we are dealing with today relates to the setting-up of a new Erasmus World initiative which is due to come into operation in the year 2004 .
The European Commission has proposed a budget of over EUR 200 million for the administration of the EU Erasmus World initiative for the years 2004 to 2008 .
The key elements of this initiative , as has been outlined , include provision of educational exchanges between colleges in Europe and other educational colleges from around the world .
Moreover , financial support will be given to both students and educational staff members who are participating in the Erasmus World initiative .
Funding will also be provided for conferences and seminars so as to promote educational and student mobility between the European Union and colleges around the world .
This initiative is yet another clear example of the European Union seeking to bring forward proposals which will help to promote and increase the standard of education within the European Union and beyond .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I would very much like to underline the fact that Mrs De Sarnez , by using the title ' Erasmus Mundus ' has found the right expression , and I am glad that she has .
It needs no explanation ; that this is a better description than Erasmus World is self-explanatory .
For ' Mundus ' shows that we have a multiplicity of languages and do not express ourselves in only one language , the so-called lingua franca , English .
So I am glad that we have chosen the Latin word .
Mrs De Sarnez ' report takes up three points that are of great importance to us on the Committee on Culture , Youth , Education , the Media and Sport , and also in my group .
The first is the European dimension and the European value that the opportunity of mobility adds to education .
Secondly , Europe is given an enhanced presence on the international stage , becoming more attractive and also more competitive - particularly in the field of university education .
The third point is the accent on language learning , and here I want to contradict all those who have said that this is not important .
I am glad that this additional amendment is there , for it is the learning of our region 's languages that helps the people who come to us to grasp its cultural diversity .
Fourthly , the increase to EUR 300 million reflects the desire to create a real European educational area .
If , on a Sunday , I talk about how important that is , if I make statements about it in Bologna or in Lisbon , only , on Monday , to fail to make the money available , then the written word is worthless .
That is why we should remind our masters in the Council that they now have to make their contribution , in order to do justice to the high expectations they have of themselves .
The stunning success of the Socrates / Erasmus programme , on which I was the rapporteur on more than one occasion , is the inspiration behind this new programme .
Erasmus has enabled a million students to study , and both programmes , which are mutually complementary , make it possible to gain an additional qualification abroad .
They also facilitate access to European languages , to European culture and to European values .
They are indispensable in terms of cultural understanding and dialogue , both of which have been mentioned a number of times today .
This means that the limited budget that we have must be replenished .
That is an obstacle .
There is also a lack of demand on the part of teachers , for whom there is the hindrance that what they do abroad is often not recognised at home .
With the new programmes , that are soon to follow , in mind , we have to give some thought to how we can really harmonise these programmes with each other .
I would also like to make another appeal that has not so far been heard today .
It is an appeal to the Convention , that these measures - Socrates , Erasmus , Erasmus Mundus - should not be merely support measures , but rather supplementary competences , which we value , and which constitute the heart of the European Union .
That is something you could find out if you were at last to talk with the public instead of constantly peering at your books !
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , as we have heard today more than once , it is important and a matter of urgent necessity that we should make every effort in order to boost Europe 's attractiveness as a knowledge base and thereby draw closer to the Lisbon objectives .
At the moment it looks more as if we are moving away from them .
Erasmus World can be an opportunity to make up this deficit .
It is the exchange of knowledge between Europe and third countries , rather than the concentration of knowledge in Europe that is the basis on which we will reach our objective .
The programme is aimed widely , at institutions of higher education and postgraduate students all over the world , at students within the European Union , who can go abroad , and at scientists and academics from third countries .
I do believe , though , that it is important for our students who go abroad that the necessary recognition of academic achievements and degrees should be pushed through and improved , and that Erasmus students should have study abroad improved and made easier for them .
I would also like to emphasise that I am very much in favour of equality of opportunity or a balance in men and women 's participation in this programme .
Neither in terms of the countries ' participation nor of the academic disciplines do I want this to be treated as secondary .
If we do not pay attention to equality of opportunity from the very outset , we will have problems with making it a reality later on .
I would also like to briefly address the issue of multilingualism .
On this , opinions differ , but I do not think that participation in this programme can be dependent on it , as the Masters ' courses have their own priorities , and the students accommodate themselves to them .
I do indeed think that linguistic diversity has a part to play during courses of study , and I also believe that people must have the opportunity to participate in language courses , but that they should not be considered to be admission criteria for the bursary .
Let me just say something about the financial arrangements .
We are glad of the EUR 300 million , but it is not acceptable that this should be deducted from other programmes .
If this is not to go against the idea of promoting a knowledge-based society , there must be additional funding .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , at present our thoughts cannot but be with the people of Iraq being slaughtered by the British and American invaders , under the complicit gaze of the European Union , which is only interested in how to acquire a share of the spoils .
However , we are required to take a stand on other issues , such as the issue we are examining .
The proposal for a decision which we are debating introduces the Masters Course of the European Union and , secondarily , funds access to it for students and teachers from third countries .
The first , in blatant violation of Article 149 of the Treaty , is yet another step towards the imposition of a specific higher education model , which is none other than the notorious Bologna model .
The programme has not been opened up to third countries in order to help them develop their manpower .
It is being used as a cover to push through the Masters Course and as a mechanism for cultural penetration by the European Union , as the prerequisite to economic penetration and the strengthening of its political influence at international level .
Typically , the text states that Europe 's political and commercial success in the world depends on a better understanding and the ties which future decision-makers in third countries will have with Europe .
The basic objective of the European Union in the field of education is to supply the European monopolies with cheap labour which , rather than knowledge , merely has the skills required at the time .
That is the reason for the need for convergence in the structure of studies on the basis of the Bologna standard , with three years ' undergraduate study for the large mass of students , two years ' specialisation for the select and a three-year doctorate for the crème de la crème .
In Greece in particular , which has still not officially assimilated undergraduate degrees with three-year degrees , adopting the proposal which we are examining would speed up the relevant reforms .
In addition , the European Union is trying in the proposal for a decision to promote the European higher education market within the framework of competition with the United States .
This , of course , depends on the creation of such a market and the adaptation of European universities to its laws and priorities .
The result will be the complete commercialisation of education , a sign of which is the quality mark for courses referred to in the text , as if they were cars or oranges .
The quality assurance and evaluation mechanisms under consideration are merely mechanisms for education to respond to the needs of industry .
The Communist Party of Greece is categorically opposed to the proposal for a decision because it interferes with curricula , it strengthens the privatisation and commercialisation of higher education and it promotes the splitting of undergraduate studies into two cycles , in accordance with the Bologna model , and the subjugation of post-graduate study to the demands of the multinationals , contrary to the interests of students , lecturers and the people of the European Union .
The least we demand is for action one , the European masters , to be removed , and I have submitted a proposed amendment to that effect .
Mr President , I would like to welcome the Commission 's proposal to set up a programme to encourage student and scholar mobility around the world .
I also wish to congratulate Mrs De Sarnez on her work on this report .
European universities have much to offer the world in terms of their scientific and teaching excellence .
I therefore welcome a programme which will enhance and strengthen the attractiveness of European higher education .
Moreover , it will allow this sector to compete with other countries , particularly the United States and Canada , in attracting talented and motivated students and scholars from third countries .
In this respect I welcome the proposal to increase the multiannual budget from EUR 200 million to EUR 300 million .
That is very important as long as it does not impede and take money away from important programmes such as Socrates and Leonardo da Vinci .
Nevertheless , the Erasmus Mundus programme should not only benefit European universities but also contribute to the improvement of standards of living , to the development of human resources and the raising of poverty thresholds in third countries .
I reiterate the point made by other speakers that it is very important for us to develop the linguistic capacities of our students throughout the European Union .
There is no point in talking about a Europe of diversity unless we provide people with the proper skills in languages that will enhance that goal .
Mr President , there is a degree of latent conflict between the principle of competition and the principle of cooperation .
The European Union wants to see its university system compete with that of the United States , not only in terms of standards of excellence but also in terms of attracting students from third countries .
The more it is able to do so , the more it will improve the balance between a crucial transatlantic alliance and western civilisation itself . It will also further strengthen the bases of democracy .
To my knowledge , North American universities ' policies for attracting and retaining the finest minds are designed more to assure their own interests than those of the countries in which these minds originate .
Cooperation , in this case , takes second place to competition .
The Commission 's ideas in this field are somewhat more cautious , because they refer to encouraging ' cooperative approaches ' , in other words , approaches that ultimately seek to ensure the ' refoulement ' of third country nationals who come to study for degrees in Europe .
There are other aspects , however , that have given a clear advantage to the United States , since if we are to resolve the same problem in Europe particular attention must be paid to these aspects .
Amongst others , these are the language , the quality of teaching and the reputation of the institutions and programmes , the variety of subjects these programmes cover , the recognition of diplomas awarded in the country of origin , legislation on residency , enrolment costs and the availability of scholarships .
The use of only one language , the enormous competition between university institutions and the enormous variation in quality , the constant concern to attract and retain the finest brains to which I have just referred , and the great variation in the cost of enrolment and course fees , which are as a rule quite high , characterise an education system that attracts many more students from other countries than the European university system does .
In Europe , another problem arises immediately as a result of the disproportionate number of students applying to universities in the United Kingdom , France and Germany compared to those applying to universities in the other Member States .
Around three-quarters of these students apply to universities in the three countries to which I have referred .
To this we should add the issue of Europe 's linguistic mosaic - for which , where higher education is concerned , a universal and satisfactory solution has still not been found - in order to ensure the balanced distribution of potential students .
It goes without saying that language learning for university students is not the same as simply learning the basics of the language of the host country .
However many courses in the language of the host country might have been provided before students attend an advanced course , however many parallel courses the universities open to their foreign students , it is clearly unrealistic to think that in a short space of time , we can reverse the trend that currently benefits the United Kingdom , France and Germany .
This relative scepticism , Mr President , is not a reason to vote against the excellent report by Mrs De Sarnez , or to fail to applaud the excellent initiative by the Commission .
It is a reason , however , to attempt to develop a solution to the set of problems to which I have referred - a solution that is still far from satisfactory - and also , for this very reason , to attempt to ensure that this set of problems is given an appropriate budgetary allocation .
Mr President , Commissioner , the number of students on the move is greater now than ever before , but the present situation is that the majority of international exchange students do not necessarily choose Europe as a place in which to study .
I believe that one reason for this is that we have not yet entirely succeeded in combining the individual strengths , the diversity of the education we have to offer , and also our wide experience in networking .
It is my opinion that this ' Erasmus Mundus ' programme can help here .
Promoting cooperation with third countries will also improve still further the quality of university education in Europe .
What is also lacking , in my view , is a recognisable and clear-cut European identity for higher education .
That is perhaps why many graduates and scientists prefer to do their research and studying in America .
I think this attractive programme for high-quality education will do something to counteract this tendency .
I would like , at this point , to extend sincere thanks to the Commission , and also to the rapporteur , Mrs De Sarnez , for this initiative .
Mrs De Sarnez also deserves special thanks for having managed to negotiate an acceptable compromise with the Committee on Budgets , so that ' Erasmus World ' is not funded to the detriment of already existing programmes .
We have heard it said so often that young people 's education , being an investment in the future , is no place for austerity measures .
Mr President , I would like to congratulate the rapporteur , Mrs De Sarnez , on the excellent work she has done .
Ladies and gentlemen , I believe that the Erasmus report represents a further step forward because , at the moment , although there is free movement of workers , we do not have free movement of students in the European Union .
I say this because we must face the fact that students from one country cannot move to another country to continue studying or to work because of differences in school curricula or because their studies or qualifications are not recognised .
The Erasmus mundus programme is finally going to try to overcome these obstacles , contributing to the development of quality education and allowing freedom of movement within the European area .
Furthermore , this is going to contribute to improving two vital aspects for the citizens of the European Union : understanding of our different European cultures and the very important issue of knowledge of languages .
With regard to cultures , we must be aware that if we want a united Europe we must invest in it .
There is nothing free in this world .
And we must reflect this in the budgets of the European Union by investing more in the education and the culture of our young Europeans because , let us not forget , they represent the future of the European Union .
With regard to languages , I agree with certain fellow Members that it is essential that the future citizens of the European Union speak one or two languages , apart from their own , so that those people will then be able to move freely from one country to another without having to deal with the obstacle of not being able to speak the languages of other countries .
Therefore , Erasmus mundus is a great step forward , it takes account of different cultures .

The mobility of students will promote understanding between different cultures and improve knowledge of languages ; it will prepare citizens to be able to work within a global society ; it will create an employment exchange within each institution - this is very important since it will help young people to find their first job , which is always so difficult to do ; it will also put the European Union on the map in terms of advanced studies , because certain other countries were ahead of us in this respect .
It will also involve the business sector , which I believe is very positive , since many of these young people will later have to start work within the company world .
I would therefore like to congratulate the Commission on its initiative and the rapporteur , Mrs De Sarnez , on her excellent report and for all the work she has done so that it can come to fruition .
I only hope that the success of the Erasmus mundus programme marks the beginning of the success of many more programmes in the future .
Mr President , I would firstly like to congratulate the Commission , because I believe that this project - which we are now christening Erasmus mundus , thanks to Mrs De Sarnez 's fortunate idea - is coherent with the rest of its policy , since it opens up the world to us , it recognises that there is a form of globalisation which we must confront through active and positive policies , and at the same time , it recognises the importance that postgraduate studies are taking on , and must take on , in Europe , as well as European Masters degrees .
I believe it is an important and reformist document .
I would also like to congratulate Mrs De Sarnez on her common sense and her open spirit , because that is the best way for us to work together .
There are certain points which I believe are interesting , but which concern me .
In this regard I do not agree with my friend , the communist Member Konstantinos Alyssandrakis .
I believe that European Masters and postgraduate programmes should help the universities to create partnerships amongst each other ; so that they can make free use of the world scene to come together , without external controls , except quality indicators .
I believe that no police authority can determine the limits of knowledge and partnership .
Furthermore , I believe that at such a dynamic time for society , we cannot work if we do not allow the people to work in partnership and for the universities to meet , to seek common ground and make decisions .
We must simply ' bless ' - to use a very classical term - their actions .
What do worry me - and I address this to the Commission - are the quality indicators , because I am afraid of borders of States and countries .
In this regard , I would go as far as to suggest that we should give more support to the establishment of European universities and institutions of a European nature , which , together with the States , would serve as experts , as ' stake holder ' bodies and as genuine beneficiaries of the programme .
These bodies must truly cooperate on these projects and in this way they will also ease the Commission 's burden .
Furthermore , I believe it is very important to create institutional incentives .
For this programme we must not just support students , but we must also reward those universities which work and meet together , and those which carry out the greatest number of exchanges with third countries , because we must create enthusiasm ; we must stimulate this process which , by means of the Erasmus programme , has been a success , even if it has been very slow .
We will only succeed if we accept the difficulties faced by universities in implementing this policy of approximation and if we help them in this new experiment .
Finally , I also believe there should be more help for the poorest students , since many of them are not able to join in with the programmes .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 11.30 a.m.
The next item is the report ( A5-0080 / 2003 ) by Mr Mauro , on behalf of the Committee on Culture , Youth , Education , the Media and Sport , on the proposal for a decision of the European Parliament and of the Council adopting a multi-annual programme ( 2004-2006 ) for the effective integration of Information and Communication Technologies ( ICT ) in education and training systems in Europe ( eLearning Programme ) ( COM ( 2002 ) 751 - C5-0630 / 2002 - 2002 / 0303 ( COD ) ) .
Mr President , before focusing on some specific points , I would like to say an informal ' thank you ' to the European Commission , in the person of Mrs Reding and her colleagues , and the Greek Presidency , in the person of the Minister for Education , and Mr Tsiakaris , the chairman of the education committee .
It is their availability , in particular , during these two months of intense work , which has enabled to us to respect the timeframes we set ourselves for the adoption of this report , which , I have to say , has been produced in a very short space of time .
I would also point out that the amendments to the European Commission 's proposal have been agreed with both the Commission 's services and the Council representatives .
We are all quite aware that our greatest achievement in adopting this programme will be precisely launching the related calls for proposals in a short space of time .
A lot of progress has been made with regard to eLearning since the Lisbon Council in March 2000 , and we have now moved from the proposal for action to implement new technology in the field of education to a legislative resolution which will lead to a genuine multi-annual programme .
As I pointed out previously during the work on the Commission 's first communication , particular emphasis has been placed on the role of teachers as a channel enabling the development of digital literacy in our schools .
This is why the issue of training teachers or , in any case , equipping them to make use of the new technologies , is an absolute priority , and the endeavours which can be glimpsed in some pages of the Commission proposal must certainly be rewarded and supported .
I nonetheless consider it advisable to make some changes to the Commission proposal , particularly as regards the multi-annual budget .
The question I asked myself at the start of our work was : what should be regarded as an ' appropriate ' budget for an ambitious multi-annual programme such as this ?
It is not easy to answer this question because resources for culture and education always seem to be particularly limited .
What encouraged me and prompted me to persevere in this matter was the proposal made by the European Commission itself in the 2003 budget : budget line B3-1000 has been allocated EUR 18 million in commitment appropriations for the preparatory actions in the 2003 budget .
The reasoning behind my decision to amend the Commission 's current proposal of EUR 36 million is this : would it not be unusual to spend less each year on a multi-annual programme than on the preparatory actions which preceded it ?
In this sense , I think the Commission should be grateful to me for pointing out to it that , actually , EUR 18 million multiplied by three equals EUR 54 million , which would appear to be a more appropriate figure .
The question of the distribution of the budget warrants further emphasis .
Initially , in the Commission 's proposal , 25 % of the budget was dedicated to fighting the digital divide .
I want to clarify why I have called for this amount to be reduced in my amendment .
I am absolutely convinced of the need to fight the social causes of the digital divide .
I am equally convinced that the funding should be sought within other Community instruments - the Structural Funds , the European Social Fund and the Leonardo da Vinci programme - because , if we were to wait in order to use the eLearning funds to respond to the need to bridge the digital divide , even then providing essentially only the most basic of responses , almost the entire budget for the eLearning actions would be used up .
As regards the E-twinning of European schools , in line with the objectives adopted in the European Parliament 's previous resolution , I wish to stress that training teachers remains a priority within the programme .
I want us to reflect on the fact that , on average , 90 % of primary schools , 98 % of secondary schools and 99 % of vocational and technical schools in the Member States were connected to the Internet in 2002 . However , only 39 % of primary school teachers , 50 % of secondary school teachers and 58 % of teachers in vocational and technical schools used the Internet as a teaching instrument .
These averages actually conceal dramatic differences between Member States : while the average for Denmark is approximately 75 % , the corresponding figure in Greece is not even as high as 9 % .

These figures , which are clear enough in themselves , point to two conclusions .
The first concerns the use of the Internet as a teaching tool . It is not just a matter of the availability of infrastructure or educational equipment ; sometimes the problem concerns the training of teachers and educational organisation .
The second conclusion concerns the use of technological resources . The goal can really become that of exchanging methodological and didactic good practice between teachers in various Member States , or the start-up of ' virtual training rooms ' .
For these reasons , I consider that the Commission proposal should give greater weight to finding the most effective ways for teachers to integrate use of the Internet into their teaching and to encourage the dissemination of good practice in this sector .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the Mauro report does indeed contain proposals for making this programme even more effective .
It was already very good the way the Commission had proposed it , but the proposals Mr Mauro has made improve it still further .
Above all , I believe that the apportionment of funds - as he envisages it - enables this programme better to meet the demands that we make of it .
I cannot see how these paltry resources are meant to enable us to bridge what is called the digital divide , which is for real and consists in the fact that , in some countries , many schools are equipped with computers , while , in others , very few have them .
That is why we have tried something for which I also thank Mr Mauro , namely to make you more aware of this .
Our amendment is among the twenty-four that aim to get schools communicating with each other and more money spent on equipping them with computers .
The other question , as to how we can close this digital divide between one nation and another , cannot be answered on this occasion .
This is a gap that can perhaps be filled by using money from the Cohesion Fund or from the Social and Regional Fund .
This approach to the eLearning Programme must , as you said , be increasingly directed towards the creation of synergies between existing programmes and the eLearning Programme .
If we attach particular importance to schools being linked up to each other through a network , that is something that can be firmly tied into the ' COMENIUS ' programme , and which actually has been hitherto , probably without any support .
I have seen this in many schools that I have visited in connection with the COMENIUS programme .
I believe , then , that this is where we have to forge a new partnership , one that promotes eLearning as an aid to language learning , as well as intercultural dialogue , above all in schools .
When we talk in terms of a virtual campus , that of course relates to what we were discussing earlier in connection with the De Sarnez Report .
There must be a close connection with Erasmus and Erasmus World .
If we are to achieve the best results , we have to combine virtual mobility and physical mobility .
I would like , moreover , to underline what Mr Mauro said earlier .
There is a massive shortage of teachers , and the attempt must be made , with the help of this programme , to compensate for it .
Teachers should not lag behind their pupils , but really should be a bit further ahead , so that they can inject greater stimulus into this area . The eLearning Programme - as at present envisaged - is an important addition to all the educational programmes currently in existence .
Again , sincere thanks for all the work you have done .
Mr President , Commissioner , I would like again to refer to the Lisbon Summit , which seems , after all , to have achieved a certain amount in the educational sphere , with new programmes being created in order to enable the Union to make good its claim to be the most competitive and dynamic knowledge-based economic area in the world .
Among many equally important means to this end is greater and better use of information and communications technology .
The eLearning Programme , as we have just heard , is now to promote still further access to European educational and training programmes in order to improve their quality and accessibility .
The enormity of the gulf between one country and another is demonstrated by the statistical data that Mr Mauro has just enumerated .
There is good provision in schools , but the equipment is underused and the teachers lack the necessary skills , so there are grave deficiencies here , not to mention the gap between North and South .
The fact that there is almost 90 % use in Denmark , and only some 11 % in Greece demonstrates to me that there is a great divide between these two countries and thus within Europe .
The proper response to this digital divide is integration into the other European instruments .
This is where primary and secondary schools make up a very important target group , one in which I therefore believe greater investment to be needed .
We can therefore wholeheartedly agree to this proposal for 40 % , which should be the percentage in elementary and secondary schools .
In conclusion , let me stress that the success of educational policy is not dependent on the number of programmes , but rather on their being implemented and funded in a realistic way .
This makes it necessary to increase funding from EUR 36 million to EUR 54 million , without adjustments taking funding away from other programmes . That is the only way , Commissioner , that we will achieve the Europe for small citizens to which you have just referred .
Mr President , I too should like to congratulate and thank Mr Mauro for the report now before us .
We are talking about a small programme , and a cheap one , even though it would cost EUR 54 million , but it is a step in the right direction , and it is high time it were taken .
The new information and communications technologies are exciting and important , and it is very important that they be integrated into the European education and training systems .
The programme we are now talking about must not replace , but support and supplement the initiatives on the part of the Member States .
I should like to take up from where Mr Mauro and Mrs Prets left off and , in all modesty , state that we have come a very long way with the new educational technologies in Denmark where 70 % of primary schools , 81 % of high schools and 92 % of vocational and technical courses for young people have daily Internet access .
Everyone has something to learn , however , and it is therefore important to be able to use the programme for supporting the promotion and dissemination of best practice , for example by supporting school twinning .
It is very important to share experiences of the new technologies in particular , and that is actually an exercise encouraged by the Internet itself . Indeed , mutual aid and the free exchange of ideas are part of the Internet 's splendid philosophy .
I am also quite certain that many teachers have benefited from exchanging experiences with their pupils , for the fact is that , in this area , young people have , in many cases , far greater knowledge and experience than their teachers . This too is something that this programme will get to grips with .
Education has been high on the agenda for the Lisbon , Stockholm and Barcelona European Councils , and , with the adoption of Mr Mauro 's report , we are taking a step , albeit a modest one , in the right direction of complying with the important decisions taken at these summits .
Mr President , digital literacy is of course one of the essential skills needed to participate fully in the knowledge society in which we are all living today .
Not having access to the Internet or lacking ICT skills is becoming a barrier to social integration and to personal development .
A large number of jobs in services and industry now call for employees to possess all-round ICT skills , and that is why a programme such as eLearning is essential to achieve the overall objective of the 2000 Lisbon Summit , of making Europe the most competitive knowledge-based economy by 2010 .
I agree with the rapporteur , Mr Mauro , that we should teach ICT skills from a very young age up to university level , and ensure that schools and universities and , more importantly , the teachers themselves , are capable of using all the new technologies .
Nevertheless , we cannot forget that there are many disadvantaged groups unable to benefit from traditional educational and training provisions , who are consequently becoming increasingly isolated both socially and culturally because they are not digitally literate .
I would endorse the point that has been made already regarding the importance of maintaining the 25 % from the budget to bridge the digital divide .
In many areas , not only in accession countries , but in my own area of Wales , which is an Objective 1 area , it is vitally important for us to maintain the 25 % , because many of those communities have not yet bridged the important digital divide that is emerging .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the fact that the European educational programmes need only to be developed further rather than needing to be replaced by new ones is a point in their favour , especially in an age of globalisation and technological change .
They have proved their worth in such a way , and have been so successful , that we only have to adapt them to the new structures .
The structure of eLearning is the same as in the example we were given earlier , Erasmus Mundus .
We are all familiar with the Comenius programme within the great Socrates programme framework , which is about cooperation between at least three schools from different Member States .
This programme is extraordinarily successful , achieving a high degree of efficiency with relatively meagre resources and great commitment on the part of both teachers and students .
So I think it is tremendous that we have managed to use the eLearning Programme to strengthen this area of technology-supported school partnership .
We have , unfortunately , always had to decry the lack of sufficient funds for mobility for existing Comenius schools , and now , thanks to technology , mobility is being multiplied , albeit in the virtual realm .
That cannot , and must not , become more than an additional area .
Whilst it cannot be a substitute for real encounters between people , it can be an immense help to our schools in building up a real awareness of the Europe that we share .
That is why I also enthusiastically welcome our desire to increase the estimate to 40 % , and I would like to point out that , quite apart from bridging the digital divide , it is extraordinarily important not to lose sight of the need to develop European software .
Of the software used in Europe , 80 % originates in the USA .
Whilst I am a friend of the Americans in bad times and good , I would like to see a more equal balance in the field of software , and so what I ask of the Council , not only as regards this programme , but also the other technological programmes , is that they keep an eye on the development and enhancement of European software and facilitate the support and promotion that this needs .
Mr President , Commissioner , the Commission proposal for an eLearning Programme shows that the decisions of the Lisbon Summit are being implemented , even if the ambitious aims of the strategy regarding full employment and economic success are in difficulties owing to the uncertainty of the global economy .
The eLearning Programme is also a good example of excellent cooperation between Parliament and the Commission .
On Parliament 's initiative , and for the second year running , the EU budget already has a special budget line to support eLearning .
This year EUR 18 million has been allocated to this heading , B 3-1000 .
The Committee on Culture , Youth , Education , the Media and Sport has in fact expressed its concern that the Commission proposal will mean less being spent each year on the programme than has now been allocated for the preparatory actions .
For that reason the committee is proposing that the overall budget be increased from 36 million to 54 million .
The Committee on Culture , Youth , Education , the Media and Sport is aware that the expenditure for its category of activity must be accommodated within the degree of manoeuvre reserved for heading 3 in the Financial Perspective , which is very restricted .
Neither do we wish to haggle over the financing of multi-annual programmes that have already been approved .
I would nevertheless like to draw people 's attention to the fact that the opinion of the Committee on Budgets also makes reference to the discrepancy between the Commission proposal and the preparatory actions .
It is the opinion of the Committee on Budgets , therefore , that there would seem to be genuine justification for increasing the appropriation , as proposed by the Committee on Culture , Youth , Education , the Media and Sport .
Besides , it concerns such a small amount that it will probably go into the margin for error under heading 3 .
The Committee on Culture , Youth , Education , the Media and Sport would like to stress the importance of school twinning via the Internet .
The committee would like both primary and secondary schools to be included .
The inclusion of primary schools is , I think , justified for many reasons .
Networking via the Internet will provide brand new opportunities for small schools in remote areas to provide an opportunity for international studies and learning foreign languages and foreign cultures .
As primary schools cover a whole age group there are good grounds for making such facilities available to them , also to prevent the digital divide , which is the other aim of the programme .
For everyone to be included in the information society it is vital that there is a sufficient number of teachers with information technology skills .
The use of computers as a teaching tool is still very limited .
In 2002 , on average 90 % of primary schools had an Internet connection , but only 39 % of teachers used the Internet in their teaching .
There are still considerable differences in the extent to which the Internet is used among different countries , as we have already heard here .
They will narrow only if there is action on the part of the Member States .
The eLearning Programme at its best will only ever be an undertaking to support the equal utilisation of information technology and provide examples of how it can be used .
Mr President , first of all I would like to thank the rapporteur for his excellent report .
I would just like to mention three points .
It is a good thing that primary education is included in it , but I would also like to argue on behalf of older people and people who live in remote areas .
We must not neglect these people .
They will benefit from lifelong learning , and they can pass on their knowledge and experience to subsequent generations .
The second point is the importance of encouraging twinning between schools .
There are great differences - this has already been mentioned - between the various regions within Europe in terms of the level of knowledge and the use of IT in education , and that makes it difficult for schools to work together .
I would like once more to emphatically urge that we map out the current situation and also involve candidate Member States in this , because only then will we be able to achieve a more targeted approach for schools that are lagging behind , and this will hugely increase the range of options available .
My third point is that it is not only about quantity but also about quality .
I expect the private sector , which created the eLearning Industry Group working party , to play a major role . Collaboration between the private and public sectors is , in my opinion , a very good thing .
It will enable us to become the most dynamic knowledge economy in the world , and that is what we are aiming for .
Mr President , which of the mothers or fathers present does not know that feeling of embarrassment that comes from sitting next to your own child or a schoolchild at a computer ?
Even since my twins - who are now nine - were at pre-school , they have been showing me again and again how to use a computer , so I think I would need the eLearning Programme more than my children do .
Leaving such personal matters to one side , I congratulate this programme , and also the rapporteur , especially on his calls for European software , for more European content and for European services .
This is a responsibility for the Fifteen and for the European Union .
It is one from which the Council , too , cannot be discharged .
I also welcome all the amendments that are intended to foster a critical engagement with the instrument of the Internet , not only on the part of school pupils , but also on the part of their teachers .
Whilst much of this is good , there is one point on which , unfortunately , I am unable to agree with you .
The digital divide between the Member States is something that the Fifteen - who will soon be joined by another Ten ! - must sort out among themselves , but the digital divide in our societies is a matter of concern for all of us .
I do think that , in order to be consistent with your Amendment No 10 , we should stick to the Commission proposal as to how the funds are to be divided up .
We consider that to be a more equal and more balanced allocation of funding .
I am sorry , but with so little time available to me , I cannot go into greater detail .
Mr President , I should firstly like to congratulate the rapporteur , our fellow MEP Mr Mauro .
I remember the time 20 or 30 years ago when we were asked at school to outline what we thought the twenty-first century would be like , and we all imagined Martians , UFOs and flying saucers and ultra-modern trains and cars , including electric cars , yet no one was able to guess what would be the real revolution of this century : the advances in information and communications technology .
Even though it is very difficult to keep up with changes that are taking place at such a dizzying pace , we are obliged to ensure that the citizens of the European Union , especially children and young people , are able to be educated in current technology .
This presupposes a cost , since they need computers , multi-media equipment , Internet connections , plus one other very important thing , namely qualified teachers .
Ladies and gentlemen , we cannot skimp on matters of such vital importance .
We need to bear in mind that if , tomorrow when they have reached adulthood , the children of today are unable to use the new technologies , they will be almost like children of our own time who are illiterate , and that is something we cannot allow .
By that , I mean I am totally in agreement with the rapporteur that it is necessary , as a priority , to train teachers to be able to give classes in new technologies .
I also entirely agree with him that the budget should be more than the EUR 36 million proposed by the European Commission , since it would be truly absurd to spend more money on the preparatory action for a programme than on the programme itself .
I also wish to support e-twinning of European schools since that seems to me to be an excellent way of bringing about cooperation between schools from every corner of Europe . What is more , it will help us promote intercultural dialogue and language learning and will also facilitate exchanges between children who have got to know each other through the new technologies and who would like to meet face to face .
Mr President , I welcome this report and the Commission 's response to Parliament 's amendments .
However , even if we achieve the increased budget sought in this report , increasing it to EUR 54 million , we will still be only scratching the surface .
If we are serious about achieving the objectives outlined in the Lisbon process then clearly not only do we need to increase our budget at European level , but we must also find ways to ensure that Member States actually address the issues seriously .
I am aware of the fact , for instance , that teachers in Ireland have acquired skills at their own expense .
They have , through their trade union , acquired skills in order to pass them on to their pupils .
That is not a satisfactory way of achieving the objectives of the Lisbon process .
I welcome the proposal to devote a quarter of the budget to the digital divide .
This is an economic issue - ensuring that pupils , when they enter the labour market , are capable of participating in it .
It seems obvious also that people without the technical skills required to operate the technology would not only be unable to participate economically , they would be unable to participate in the democratic processes of society .
This , surely , is the bottom line in terms of the exclusion of citizens from society .
There is a clear demand for better computer resources in Irish schools .
As I said , 2 500 Irish schoolteachers undertook development programmes in the past year .
I fully support the budget increase .
I support the idea of concerted actions between the Commission , the Member States and other partners in the field of education to examine national experiences and to promote best practice regarding the use of eLearning and fighting the digital divide .
I know that the proposal will give much-needed impetus to the provision for eLearning in schools .
I hope that will be the case in relation to Ireland .
I particularly like the idea of e-twinning .
I hope this is used to its fullest extent .
I find it astonishing , given that Ireland depends so much on technology for its economic development and growth , that this area is so badly funded and so badly addressed in current educational policy in Ireland .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the European Council in Lisbon was , at that time , rightly concerned about the international position of Europe and discussed the possibilities of new technologies .
The emergence of information and communication technology is of great importance , we can no longer imagine life without it , and it has many implications in many different areas , including education .
ICT places new demands on education , and therefore also on teachers .
Students must be prepared to participate in the knowledge society .
This not only means extra work , however ; it can also mean an enrichment for education .
After all , it also opens up new opportunities for the transfer of knowledge .
We cannot rule out the fact that ICT will require a massive change in the structure of education in the future .
We formulated our first thoughts on eLearning in 2002 .
Now we need to elaborate upon these in our working plan .
This is an important and ambitious plan to implement a high-quality ICT infrastructure at a reasonable price and in a reasonable period of time in order to improve the quality and accessibility of ICT in education - a massive challenge .
Right from the start it was clear that this cannot simply be about making equipment available and being able to operate this equipment .
Just as important is how teachers and students are able to use this equipment as an educational tool in the learning process .
This brings us to the didactic , pedagogic and educational dimensions of eLearning .
I am glad that attention has been given to this in the report .
After all , the question ' what for ? ' is also important .
Education not only relates to the transfer of knowledge but also to such things as communication skills and social skills , which are important for personal development .
It should also contribute to a feeling of citizenship , social involvement and , when it comes to Europe , respect for cultural diversity .
Can it also be used for this ?
Yes .
The report offers good points of departure for this , particularly where it talks about making software available , when it talks about content and when it talks about the importance of training teachers .
I am convinced that this plan is an excellent opportunity for making a young generation familiar with new technologies and that it can promote a new intercultural dialogue , which is so important for Europe .
Peace is not something we can take for granted ; we have to work on it every day .
In Europe we do that via dialogue and cooperation , and that seems to be a good formula .
It will , however , also require commitment on the part of a future generation .
In order to interest them in this and motivate them , it is important that people get to know each other and understand each other .
In order to achieve this , contact across borders , international contact and experience are of great importance . This eLearning programme offers new opportunities in this area .
We all know - and it has already been said - how successful exchange programmes are and what tremendous experience schools and students can gain with them .
ICT increases the opportunities in this area via virtual campuses , school twinning , via the Internet and by promoting teaching partnerships .
As my colleague Mrs Hieronymi has already said , however , virtual encounters cannot replace real encounters , although they can be an important enhancement of them .
I therefore thank the rapporteur for his excellent work .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 11.30 a.m.
( The sitting was closed at 8.48 p.m. )
2001 discharge procedure

Mr President , although the Court of Auditors ' criticism of the Commission 's internal control and monitoring systems is fierce and direct , it is my opinion that we must recommend to Parliament that the Commission be granted discharge in respect of the implementation of the sixth , seventh and eighth Development Funds for 2001 .
In my report , I have focused on certain key basic concepts in current development policy and attempted to investigate whether these basic concepts place special requirements on , or raise particular issues in connection with , checks on the use of the funds .
In this connection , I would like to emphasise various points :
Ownership : ownership is of great importance if we are to manage development aid effectively .
The point is that legitimate requirements of donors , a policy of relief of poverty , environmental aspects , etc. may conflict with national and local priorities .
Budgetary support : budgetary support is another concept that caught my attention during my work on the report .
As far as I can see , in principle there is no reason - certainly not from a control point of view - to avoid budgetary support .
However , the Commission must carefully ensure that in future there is clarity concerning when and under what conditions budgetary support is an effective form of aid .
Decentralisation : the much discussed decentralisation that the Commission has implemented is based on more decisions being made on the spot rather than here and in Brussels .
I support this principle , but the Commission must ensure that the current problems with the audit arrangements at headquarters are not simply exported to the delegations .
Underutilisation : the implementation of payments from the funds quite simply takes place too slowly .
Can it be right that , for 2001 , there was a total amount of approximately EUR 8 500 million outstanding for obligations and projects that had yet to be implemented ?
Moreover , I find it alarming that the three funds effective for the 2001 financial year have been in the process of implementation for 16 , 11 and 4 years respectively .
I also find it incomprehensible and bureaucratic that , in administrative terms , implementation must take place via three funds at the same time .
I expect the Commission to present a realistic plan soon for increasing the speed of implementation and for simplifying administration of the funds .
The declaration by the director-generals : in order for any significance to be attached to this document , I expect next year 's declaration to state clearly what ' a reasonable assurance ' means .
A limit must be placed on the number of reservations that can be made and on when these reservations have consequences .
The Community 's external links are currently divided between no less than six different services .
This fact was supposed to have been evaluated in 2002 , but we have not yet seen any results of these evaluations .
We are still waiting .
As a result of its financial audit , the Court of Auditors ' sharply criticises the Commission 's internal control structure and monitoring mechanisms .
This is regrettable , even a matter for criticism , since it means we cannot assess whether we are getting value for money .
Finally , with regard to the budget : it is now up to the Commission to establish specific action plans and time scales for at long last bringing the development funds into the general budget .
It is entirely unacceptable that tax-payers ' money is not being used as effectively as it could be , and this is due not to the Commission - which is so often blamed - but to the governments in certain Member States .
My report on the development funds is only part of the overall discharge procedure .
The discharge procedure is an opportunity for Parliament to test the Commission 's ability to administer the EU 's tax money .
In this connection , I am surprised that the rate of reform in the Commission seems to be declining in certain areas .
In view of many of the figures that we are discussing , it is essential that we have a reliable accounting system .
That is not the case at present .
The current Commission replaced the Santer Commission , which had got bogged down .
We may ask whether the same thing is in the process of happening to this Commission .
In the areas that I have been working on , it had the opportunity and time , as well as the ability , to reform the administration of the EU .
A lot remains to be desired , and I must say that Mr Prodi 's wish for five more years as President of the Commission represents excessive optimism .
If the goods had been delivered , if the reforms had been implemented , and if the will and ability to get rid of old , poor administrative practices had been demonstrated , there would be reason to wish him every success , but that does not appear to be the case at present .
Mr President , Commissioner , Madam Chairman of the Committee on Budgetary Control , Helmut , fellow Socialist Members and Members from the other political groups who have worked with us : I believe we can be satisfied with the work we have done to date on the discharge of the budget of 2001 , which enjoyed broad consensus in Cocobu and which failed to win the support only of those who , out of ideological prejudice against the European institutions , consider this exercise to be more a means of checking their growing strength than an instrument for correcting their mistakes .
We have before us a combination of problems and recommendations that constitute a genuine work programme , which , although not perfect , will enable both the Commission and us to make significant progress towards improving budgetary implementation .
I therefore wish to focus more on the work that awaits us than on repeating what has happened in the past .
Our first priority is the modernisation and upgrade of the Community accounting system ; this modernisation must apply to the medium and long-term objectives and in relation to the crucial and immediate correction of its worst anachronisms .
Following the measures that have already been adopted on the security and inviolability of data , we must put an end to the various and contradictory accounting practices which , as the director-general for the budget acknowledged in his last annual report , call into question the synchronisation and coherence of accounting data , replacing them with a single system that is comprehensible , reliable and transparent and which can be consulted , accessed , understood and used by all actors involved in the budget .
What is particularly important is to bring a rapid end to the mechanisms that allow 20 % of appropriations recovered from irregularities in the EAGGF-Guarantee to disappear , leaving no trace or record in the Community 's books , in sums and for purposes of which the Commission is unaware and much less controls .
Then we have the problem which runs deeper and is more difficult to correct ; that of systematic budgetary under-implementation , which in 2001 stood at more than EUR 15 billion , a colossal sum , which on its own exceeds the entire budget of several of the current Member States .
I wish to reaffirm that the logic of irresponsibility that in this field frequently haunts the Community institutions and which always finds someone else to blame , must end .
It is up to the Commission to propose the regulatory framework in which to develop programmes for budgetary implementation ; it is up to the Commission to make budgetary proposals both on an annual basis and in accordance with the financial perspective ; it is therefore up to the Commission to ensure that budgetary programmes are feasible and realistic .
If the legislative and budgetary authority wishes to submit to the Commission proposals that it considers unfeasible , the Commission simply has to enforce its right of initiative and refuse to enshrine the proposal in law .
For most Community appropriations there are powers of codecision with structures of a national , regional or other nature . If , however , there are problems of implementation on the part of the management partners , the Commission must make these known in a transparent way and in good time , enabling the due corrective measures to be taken .
What is unacceptable is that , given deeply mediocre budgetary implementations that involve almost all non-Community partners in programme management , the Commission continues to claim that this is not its responsibility and that there is nothing more it should be doing .
We have paid particular attention in this field to the programme of structural aid for agriculture in the countries applying for EU membership ( the Sapard Programme ) .
We are very pleased and note with optimism the guarantees given by Commissioner Fischler to the effect that he will attach the greatest priority to this programme 's implementation .
We shall examine the results closely .
We also feel that we must make the greatest efforts to raise the awareness of our colleagues in the inter-parliamentary delegations of the need to speed up this programme 's implementation .
Lastly , I wish to draw attention to the need for crucial measures to be adopted on the way in which the Commission deals with companies with which it has contractual relations .
It is deeply regrettable that the Commission is not even able to detail the number of contracts with third parties through which it implements an extremely substantial part of its own budget and is therefore even less in a position to establish an appropriate ex-post mechanism to monitor not only the legality and regularity , but also the transparency and efficiency of these contracts .
It is symptomatic that in relation to Eurostat , a body on which this Parliament focused its attentions in the recent report by Mr Bösch , it has already been concluded that an audit of such contracts signed in recent years cannot be completed within the deadline that has been set , because there are more than 2000 of these contracts .
What is known as ' externalisation ' , in other words , the management of Community services by bodies outside the Commission , is doubtless a policy that must not only be maintained but must in many cases also be developed .
This externalisation , however , needs to be supervised more actively , more coherently and not in a way that merely goes through the motions .
Approving this report will consequently be less a point of arrival and more a point of departure .
I hope to be able , in this work , to continue to count on the cooperation that I have enjoyed to date from the Commission services , in particular from the directorates-general for the budget and for agriculture , which I wish publicly to thank .
I also count on the cooperation of Cocobu as a whole .
Mr President , Commissioner , I will refer to the report on the institutions , namely the Council , the Court of Justice , the Court of Auditors , the Economic and Social Committee , the Committee of the Regions and the European Ombudsman .
With regard to the Council , for the first time this Parliament is granting discharge .
Until now , it had not been denied , but there was a gentleman 's agreement that Parliament would not give its opinion in relation to discharge .
Now , it has been proposed that soon , when the Convention completes its work , the foreign and defence policy , which currently falls to the Council , should be included within the Commission ; from now on , this issue will be subject to discharge , in the same way as for other institutions which depend exclusively on the Commission .
Therefore , the Committee on Budgetary Control has considered it appropriate that this year the discharge of the Council be included , with the clarifications which I will summarise next .
The committee is pleased to note that cooperation in terms of responses and improvement during the next financial year are one of the Council 's objectives , as well as overcoming the discrepancies between the physical inventory and the accounting inventory .
We believe that the same internal reform criteria should be applied in the Council as in the Commission in relation to staff policy , that is to say that the qualifications of personnel and their remaining in high-level , and therefore high-responsibility , positions within the Council , should obey the same criteria as the Commission , in terms of not remaining for long periods and professional classifications .
We do not currently have much knowledge with regard to foreign and defence policy .
As I said before , until now the Council has been treated differently , and we believe it should be managed more effectively and more transparently .
With regard to the Court of Justice , discharge is granted , also with some observations which I will point out in a moment .
We note that there have been considerable improvements in accounting management of real estate and in the presentation of the inventory as had been requested .
We also note that all the real estate problems relating to the Palais and all the buildings in which the Court of Justice is based have been resolved .
There were many gaps in relation to information on these processes , but they have now been resolved and we are very pleased about this .
We are also glad to see that cases dealt with have increased , but the Court still operates slowly , which leads us to believe that perhaps it lacks sufficient resources .
We would like to know the exact situation and the requests of this institution , so that we can contribute to resolving the difficulties .
Discharge is also granted to the Court of Auditors and we must express our pleasure at the public presentation of the report of that Court , which was presented in a timely manner , in November , to the European Parliament and to the press , which is a transparent and clear way to behave .
We urge the Court of Auditors to maintain this policy .
Although sometimes , as a result of translation difficulties , the moment can be delayed , the sooner this presentation is made the better .
We are also pleased with the efforts it has made to make the declaration of reliability an instrument which provides information on improvements in management and control .
We believe this effort should be maintained , because it is one of the best ways of gathering information on the situation the institutions are in .
We also know that the Court of Auditors has staffing problems ; its staff , which must be highly qualified , do not stay in their posts very long - perhaps for reasons of personal promotion or professional career - and we should consider how we can resolve these problems , so that this staff is more stable and in order to facilitate the work of the Court .
We should also consider whether in certain cases it is appropriate to turn to temporary contracts or some type of externalisation .
We also welcome the improvements relating to information on the work carried out by the Court of Auditors .
I will refer very briefly to the Economic and Social Committee , to which we are also granting discharge .
All the past problems have been resolved , which we are very pleased about .
This committee has presented its accounts and all its management in a clear manner , and , in contrast with the past , we have no difficulty in granting it discharge this year .
I regret to say that this has not been the case in relation to the Committee of the Regions , and that we cannot grant it discharge during this plenary session .
We therefore request that it be delayed .
With the time limit for reports to be carried out expired , after a series of items of information had been requested by means of a questionnaire - as for the other institutions - we have received an audit report relating to 2001 in which there are many serious deficiencies in all aspects relating to the payment and presentation of receipts , travelling , daily allowances and other types of emoluments .
Therefore , despite the fact that the Committee of the Regions has delivered its modified Regulation with a later date , we believe it is more appropriate to postpone discharge until October and , meanwhile , to produce a report which gives us better and clearer knowledge of the accounts of the Committee of the Regions .
With regard to the European Ombudsman , I would like to say that he has cooperated magnificently with this Parliament 's Committee on Petitions and has done good work , despite the scant resources at his disposal .
Naturally , he will also receive our discharge .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I should first of all like to express my sincere thanks for the excellent cooperation I have received , not only from my fellow Members , but especially from the Secretary-General and his services .
I can inform you that we received a reply to our questionnaire even before Christmas , and that the replies to those questions have helped to make it possible for us to fully incorporate it into the resolution .
I believe that it is one of the first times that this has been possible at such an early stage , and I express my sincere thanks for that .
I have regarded my report as a kind of annual report on the functioning of the European Parliament in 2001 .
It starts with the most important news .
It recommends to you all that the Secretary-General be given discharge for the work he did in 2001 .
My report has 120 sections .
It is quite impossible , therefore , to explain everything , and so I should like to clarify just a few aspects , starting with staff policy .
I should like to go into more detail on equal opportunities policy : on women 's access to senior posts in this Parliament .
Parliament has declared itself in favour of this many times , but it remains a difficult area .
As I say in my report , together with the Committee on Budgetary Control , this objective has not in fact been achieved .
Only 22 % of the officials in the top category are women .
Three of the Directors-General recently recruited are men , and , in 2001 , only 14.3 % of women were promoted in category A as compared with 30.8 % of men .
I believe , therefore , that we have to support positive-discrimination measures .
Where there is equal merit , systematic preference must be given to women when filling management posts until a balance is achieved .
Another difficult area is the appointment of senior officials .
I recommend abandoning the accepted traditional practice of assembling geographically and politically balanced packages .
I do not think that this is a good thing .
We must go over to a policy of appointments based on the criteria of qualifications , merit and ability .
A second important chapter of my report concerns buildings policy .
First of all , there is the fact that we have three places of work .
In the previous discharge report , the Bureau and the Secretary-General were asked to publish a study on this .
That study is now available , and it reveals that having three places of work costs EUR 169 million per year : EUR 120 million for the infrastructure , EUR 40 million for extra staff and missions and EUR 9 million for miscellaneous costs .
The need for staff to travel to Strasbourg means that 25 855 days are lost .
That costs the taxpayer almost EUR 4 million .
Needless to say , this produces a particular image problem .
Every time we receive groups of visitors , we have to explain it all over again .
Not only does this give rise to an image problem , but also wastes time and money .
This is beyond our control .
Hence the recommendation to those MEPs who are active in the Convention to raise this there and ensure that the possibility of amending Article 289 of the EC Treaty is considered during the preparation of the draft Constitution .
I know that this is still a significant problem , as a proposal of this kind still has to go to the Intergovernmental Conference , and indeed a number of Member States still have a veto .
All the same , we owe it to ourselves to try .
Another aspect of buildings policy concerns the paved area that has been laid on top of Brussels-Luxembourg station .
The Belgian Government has a number of obligations in this regard and should in fact bear the costs .
The Belgian First Minister has been sent two letters , but has not replied .
I therefore urge the Belgian Government to comply with its obligation forthwith and pay us that EUR 4.74 million .
I also devoted a few sections to the D4-D5 building .
Mr President , you are the Vice-President responsible for buildings policy , and I say here in all frankness that I believe that you and the Administration have steered an excellent course .
I think that you have done everything possible to execute this building project in accordance with the proper rules .
I think , however and I say this in my report that a number of things have gone wrong , not on Parliament 's side , but on the Belgian side .
We were presented with a fait accompli against our will .
The fact that the Belgian Government at one stage agreed that the land was free of charge , but that this nevertheless ended up in the hands of a private developer , has added to the difficulty of our task , and that is something I regret .
Finally , Mr President , I wish to say a few more words about environmental policy .
This is an important element .
I describe the many good measures you have taken with regard to the D4-D5 building .
Significant efforts have been made to see to it that renewable energy will soon be utilised , that provision is made for solar panels and suchlike .
I think that we should work towards a genuine climate policy plan for our institution , so that we , the European Parliament , can also make a contribution to meeting the Kyoto standards .
As recently as Friday of last week , the Commission presented a study stating that , if all the government buildings in the European Union used renewable energy , this would already mean 18 % compliance with the Kyoto standard that Europe has to achieve .
Let us set an example , let our Parliament take this step , too , and ensure a real climate policy plan for the European Parliament .
Mr President , firstly I would like to say a few words concerning the discharge of the Commission .
I would like to recommend that discharge be granted on time this year .
We all know that there are problems with the Commission 's accounting and computer systems .
We know that from the Court of Auditors ' reports .
It is no secret that the Commission should have done something about the problem long ago .
I believe that the Commission has now grasped the seriousness of the situation and that a very extensive reform has been started .
Postponing discharge until October would not change anything .
It would be much more efficient to appoint external experts to assess the proposed reform and for Parliament to keep holding the Commission to its timetable .
The Commission should also be granted discharge on time due to its admissions in the Eurostat case .
Eurostat is a scandal and has been so for years .
Eurostat has entered into contracts with companies that have pulled the wool over its eyes and defrauded it .
This has now become clear to the Commission and , following pressure from Parliament , it has now terminated all contracts with the firms .
I think we should reward it for that .
It is very rare for an institution such as the Commission to admit to a mistake , but it has done so in this case .
It will now at last send a signal to other companies that they cannot get away with defrauding the EU in contracts with its institutions .
The Eurostat case would never have seen the light of day had it not been for a Eurostat employee .
I would like to highlight the role of Dorte Schmidt-Brown and her incredible professional and personal integrity .
I hope that the Commission will find a solution that will grant her compensation .
It would send a signal to other employees of the Commission that the Commission is serious when it says that swindling and fraud will not be tolerated .
I have recommended that discharge be granted to three agencies : the European Foundation for the Improvement of Living and Working Conditions , the European Agency for Reconstruction and Cedefop .
The remaining agencies must wait .
It was only recently that a final decision was made to grant discharge to a further five agencies .
We need time to look at them properly before granting discharge .
Consequently , what I am recommending is a proposal for postponement on technical grounds .
There are some problems that are general to all the agencies .
Basically , I believe that the Commission should apply the brakes and carry out a cost / benefit analysis of all types of agencies and the interaction between them .
An agency may perhaps have been established that later proves to have completed its role .
Perhaps there is need to merge some of the agencies .
We must constantly evaluate whether an agency provides any added value .
We must not have agencies just so that all the Member States can have their ' baby ' .
Many of the agencies have very large administrations .
That is not necessarily their own fault .
Administrative burdens are often imposed on the agencies that are better suited to a big administration such as the Commission .
Various solutions may therefore be considered .
More tasks could be transferred to the agencies .
We could consider transferring some tasks that are currently carried out by the Commission , e.g. within education and health .
We must avoid overlaps between the work of the Commission and the work of the agencies .
We should carefully consider whether there is a need to establish any more implementing agencies .
Could the tasks not equally well be given to the agencies that we already have ?
The agencies must now also implement the new Financial Regulation , and that has already happened at the European Monitoring Centre on Racism and Xenophobia in Vienna .
Among other things , this means that the agencies are now to be responsible for their own financial control .
There will no longer be an independent ex ante control of the agencies .
We accepted this as part of the new Financial Regulation .
I am concerned , however , that there is a risk of a gap in control arising .
The Internal Audit Service of the Commission simply does not have the resources to look at the individual transactions .
The Court of Auditors carries out very few control checks .
We are therefore very dependent on the internal control system in the agency functioning properly .
The Agency for Reconstruction has generally acquitted itself well , but unfortunately there has been a very serious case of fraud within the energy sector .
No employee of the agency was involved in the fraud .
Ultimately , however , the agency is responsible for control of the EU funds spent .
I have called upon the Commission to propose phasing out future EU funding of the energy sector in Kosovo if the present situation continues .
It is extremely regrettable that the agency has entered into a number of private employment agreements outside the rules on inviting tenders .
It is , however , the Commission which forced the agencies to sign the contracts .
It is not unlawful to conclude direct contracts , but it must be restricted to special cases and must take place entirely openly .
There are two examples that I could give but which I will not mention here to avoid embarrassing people .
These rules were not observed in several of the contracts signed in 2001 , and I would say to the Commissioner that this must not happen again or there will be problems .
We must ensure that the agencies observe the rules on tendering .
I am well aware that the rules can be highly bureaucratic and difficult . That is something that we must look at , but , whilst we have the rules , they must be observed .
Thank you very much for your cooperation , Mr Blak .
As the honourable Members know - particularly those in the Committee on Budgetary Control - each second of plenary session costs almost EUR 10 .
I therefore assume that you will value the time available to you .
Mr President , Commissioner , where criticism is called for , it must be expressed clearly .
In the Committee on Budgetary Control it is our task to examine and evaluate the Commission 's accounts every year , and in this , the European Court of Auditors ' annual report gives us valuable guidance .
We have also found points of criticism regarding the 2001 discharge and have formulated them in clear terms .
I will leave the details , though , to those of my colleagues who have dealt with the institutions concerned in their reports .
I would like to talk about something about which , for the most part , we can be pleased .
As rapporteur for the budget of the European Coal and Steel Community I have few reservations about recommending discharge .
We have here - and I almost regret that , in accordance with the Treaty , the ECSC expired last July after 50 years - an example of how it is perfectly possible to present a balanced and correct budget .
When , only five years after the end of the war , France 's then Foreign Minister Robert Schuman suggested combining the coal and steel industries of France , Germany , Italy and the Benelux countries , he was both showing vision and taking a risk .
With the major objective of a peaceful Europe in view , the ECSC was the first step towards a community of the states of Europe .
Fifty years on , we can say it was a successful experiment , and , today in particular , I would like to draw attention to that peace-preserving plan , to understanding between nations .
Apart from the industrial policy aspect , the ECSC also had from the outset a strong social side that should not be underestimated .
Hundreds of thousands of coal and steel workers benefited from adjustment aids to cope with structural change .
I would also like to mention the significant research aspect , for example to encourage innovative production techniques or develop environmentally friendly solutions .
The gains have been estimated to be worth ten times the money invested , and that is good to hear .
Following my in-depth research , let me put it like this : without the ECSC success story , we can be sure that some things in Europe would have gone differently and far less well .
In my report I have reviewed the measures required to accompany the expiry of the ECSC 's activities .
I would like to take this opportunity to highlight the exemplary cooperation given by both the Court of Auditors and the Commission and their active willingness to provide the information requested .
I would like to mention a few points which in my view nevertheless need to be addressed .
Firstly , there should be a publication , a real publication worthy of the name , describing the work undertaken by the ECSC and its success story .
Why should we not recognise successes when they occur and record them in writing for future generations ?
Secondly , the Commission must keep us informed about the redeployment of personnel - these people possess invaluable expertise , and we should not give it away or hide it .
We also need detailed information , of course , about outstanding commitments , even after the ECSC Treaty has expired - some of which extend to the year 2027 , with contributions for loans to officials , and , up to the year 2017 , a commitment for Eurotunnel - and we need information about the cancellation of all amounts from the reserve , which clearly will no longer be needed in future .
These are what is known as ' dormant resources ' .
The ECSC - I am repeating myself - was a model for peace and progress in Europe .
Even after it has expired , its spirit must live on .
I am glad that , even after the ECSC has been wound up , there will be a research fund making an important contribution in the coal and steel sector , in which the candidate countries will also take part , and willingly so .
I promise you , however , that we on the Committee on Budgetary Control will still be keeping our eyes open in this area in the future .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , as part of the discharge process the Commission and the other bodies , the other institutions too , have to give account to the freely elected European Parliament for the use made of Community budget resources .
Parliament exercises control over this on behalf of the citizens of the Union .
In the year 2001 , EUR 79 400 million were spent from that budget .
In addition , there was expenditure from the European Development Fund and the Coal and Steel Community .

I would like at this point to thank the general rapporteur , Mr Casaca , for his very thorough and intensive work .

On behalf of the Commission I would also like to thank the rapporteurs , Mr Staes , Mrs Avilés Perea , Mr Blak , Mr Sørensen and Mrs Langenhagen , for their thorough and conscientious work and I would also like to say how much I respect the Chairman of the Committee on Budgetary Control , Mrs Theato , for the way in which she directed this difficult process , and to thank all the members of the Committee on Budgets for their intensive work .
In addition to the several hundred pages of financial statements , the rapporteurs and the committee also had to work through the annual report of the Court of Auditors and hundreds of pages of replies to the 267 questions that were put to the Commission , and the committee held hearings with eight members of the Commission .
The European budget covers a broad spectrum of expenditure programmes , from the marketing subsidy for dairy products to slaughtering premiums for cattle , bee-keeping subsidies , restructuring measures in the fisheries sector , youth exchange programmes and support for research in biotechnology , not to mention aid to provide schooling for girls in Afghanistan or food aid in Southern Africa .
All these programmes have different rules .
Different players administer the programmes and handle the money , and the attendant risks of error also differ .
The scrutiny performed by the Court of Auditors and Parliament took the whole range of these varied tasks into account .
I must concentrate here , however , on a few points that proved the most important in the discharge process , namely the accounting rules and the book-keeping system , the contracts with the Statistical Office and the question of the rate of implementation of the budget .
So far as the accounts are concerned , the Court of Auditors has found that the 2001 revenue and expenditure account gives a true and fair view of the income and expenditure , and this is confirmed in Mr Casaca 's report .
He has again called for reforms to the balance sheet .
Mr Casaca 's report goes into the forthcoming reform in detail .
In the Committee on Budgetary Control we had an opportunity to discuss the proposed reform and the specific steps involved in great detail .
It is a project covering all services and all bodies .
In some points our accounting is already exemplary , so far as publication is concerned , namely in that we publish the figures for the cash-based revenue and expenditure account monthly on the Internet .
I mention this because the Commission 's proposal to oblige public limited companies to publish quarterly reports provoked lively debate as to whether that was reasonable .
The Commission itself publishes its housekeeping figures monthly .
Compared with the Member States , when we look at some aspects of the balance sheet , too , we have nothing to be ashamed of .
But is that enough ?
No , it is not .
It must be clear from the accounting system whether a payment is a final payment or an advance payment that can be called back in if a programme does not go well .
The accounting system must have an entry on both the assets and the liabilities sides as soon as a commitment is entered into , for example , and not wait until the payment has actually been made .
Our accounting must be on an accrual basis .
And the services that administer the resources must have direct access to the account status for their programmes .
That is the only way to have very good financial management .
It does of course present a challenge to the underlying information and technology system .
The Commission will of course gladly comply with the Committee on Budgetary Control 's request for a quarterly progress report on reform .
We have also agreed to follow the suggestion of the rapporteur , Mr Casaca , of starting a pilot scheme where recipients of payments are informed in writing as soon as the payment has been requested by the authorising officer ; this , too , will make for greater transparency .
But it must be borne in mind that only 20 % of the Budget is managed by the Commission and that in cash terms most of the Budget remains , in practice , in the Member States ' treasuries .
The European Court of Auditors examines the Commission 's cash management on an annual basis .
We will nevertheless put before the Court of Auditors Parliament 's call for a specific external audit .
We will also base the reform on the standards set in 2000 and 2001 by the International Federation of Accountants .
But I would at this point also like to make one fundamental observation .
In Old Europe - if I may put it that way - it has up until now been the case , for the European Union too , that the principal rules of accountancy were and are laid down by public law and not simply by the standards of an association of that kind .
The fundamental question arises as to whether we want to depart from this practice .
In my opinion , we should retain the practice that the public legislator has a part in deciding what principles must be applied for the accounts of the public budget .
We do , of course , also have the great advantage of having an independent public authority , the European Court of Auditors , as our external auditor .
At a time when , in the USA for example , the public audit authority is being strengthened as compared to private auditors as a result of scandals such as the one surrounding Enron , it is clearly an advantage to have a public auditor who is obliged to remain independent .
In response to the questions from your general rapporteur about contracts with Eurogramme , the Commission has agreed to suspend all payments to Eurogramme for the time being and to review all contracts concluded with it .
Contracts will be terminated wherever this does not entail additional costs .
You are now urging the Commission to review all contracts concluded by the Statistical Office since 1999 by July this year as well .
That is 2 660 contracts .
It cannot be done by July .
But because we want to answer Parliament 's concern , we will have to find a feasible solution here , for example on the basis of a sample .
The Commission will present the Committee on Budgetary Control with a list of these contacts at a forthcoming meeting and suggest how we may take scrutiny further .
The events surrounding Eurogramme or Eurostat have also shown that cooperation with OLAF in information matters needs to be placed on a less ambiguous footing .
OLAF is and remains master of the information from its own investigations , and , whilst OLAF 's independence must of course be safeguarded in everything it does , it has become clear that we must at the same time ensure that OLAF 's findings are promptly made available to the authorities that manage resources , so that measures to protect the Budget against fraud can also be taken in good time .
So far as the implementation of budget resources is concerned , I simply want to say a brief word here about the Sapard programme .
Regarding the Sapard programme , the Commission has promised the Committee on Budgetary Control and Parliament that top priority would be given to improving the programme 's execution .
My colleague Mr Fischler has already implemented some of the measures promised to the Committee on Budgets .
On the very day before this House gives its assent to the enlargement treaties , every effort is required to make pre-accession aid at last effective for agriculture on the spot .
Thank you very much , Mrs Langenhagen , for your very positive report and your very positive remarks about the ECSC .
You now have the report you reminded us about concerning lending activity , but it will probably not be possible to produce the publication you suggest about the ECSC 's activities since its formation in 1952 in all official languages by the end of this year because some of the posts have already gone to other services .
But I fully agree with you that this experience and information about this important part of the history of the common European path should be available in all countries and people should be able to see how the idea of economic cooperation led to a genuine project for peace .
We should indeed not allow this to be forgotten and we will see how we can take up this idea and find a feasible way of doing it .
Mr Blak , scrutiny of the agencies now covers a very broad spectrum of different activities , and your work , for which the Commission thanks you , was therefore very wide ranging .
The new Financial Regulation stipulates that the creation of a new agency must be preceded by a cost-benefit analysis and I welcome the fact that Parliament wants to see this principle strictly applied , and with regard to existing agencies an audit in the course of evaluation for the cost infidelity analysis continues to be the best form , also of course being designed to avoid duplication .
That is of course something of great importance when it comes to the use of scarce budget resources .
Regarding the external policy area of the Agency for Reconstruction , the Commission does not agree that there are sufficient grounds for an administrative investigation .
But we will of course examine the things you mention and report back to you .
In external policy over all , the Commission has complied with Parliament 's request to stop outsourcing tasks to the Technical Assistance Offices .
The number of TAOs has been reduced from 126 in September 2000 to 12 at the end of 2002 .
This shows that here , we have taken the path that Parliament wanted .
This has gone hand in hand with an appreciable change in the administration of ancillary aid programmes , namely deconcentration .
This is also true of the European Development Fund , for which Mr Sørensen is rapporteur , and here , too , my esteem for your thorough report .
The Committee on Budgetary Control lays particular emphasis on the need for members of delegations to be adequately trained to perform the management tasks they are now required to undertake .
The Commission produced a new manual for this in 2002 and the new Common Relex Information System for the financial management of external programmes , with the nice abbreviation CRIS , has now been introduced .
Every delegation now has to submit an audit plan , which is intended to ensure adequate supervision of aid programmes .
In its White Paper on reform produced in the year 2000 , the Commission made a list of all the measures necessary for the complete reform of the Commission .
Eighty-seven of the 96 measures have already been taken , and the Commission has reported on them in detail .
A guiding principle of this reform is the clear allocation of responsibility for the use of Community finance .
The Directors General now have to give an annual account of how the control standards have been applied .
What public administration requires its institutions to publish such reports , in which the weaknesses also have to be described ?
What administration then checks , in full view of the public , whether the necessary measures have been taken to improve financial management ?
I believe transparency itself is a key element of the reform .
The new Financial Regulation has been in force since 1 January 2003 .
This far-reaching reform is the fruit of the intensive work undertaken jointly by Commission and Parliament in 2001 and 2002 , and I would also like to mention the Council at this point .
Reform of the accounting system is in full swing and must be completed by the end of 2004 .
This Commission will leave behind a service that is comprehensively and radically reformed and ready for the new challenges of enlargement .
The Committee on Budgetary Control and this House have always supported and encouraged the Commission in this and with this discharge process Parliament has given renewed , and greater , impetus for reform .
Mr President , Commissioner , we can also vote for discharge from the external policy point of view .
I would quite particularly like to thank Mr Casaca for his close cooperation .
You are right , Commissioner , that deconcentration or decentralisation and the strengthening of delegations have set in train a great process of reform in external policy expenditure .
This decentralisation has been a complete success , as I have seen for myself in various places .
I would , however , like to raise three problems and , in a way as a kind of peaceful preventive strategy , point out that we shall be paying quite particular attention to them .
The first is Palestine .
Criticisms are sometimes voiced here , which up until now have proved unfounded , and it is good that Parliament has set up a working party to look into these things .
Because if , as I am , we are absolutely in favour of aid to Palestine , we need to be convinced that everything is being handled correctly .
The new Finance Minister and the new Prime Minister of the Palestinian Authority are a good sign , but we will be watching things very closely .
The second is the KEDO programme .
It is of course a difficult programme , especially in times like these , but it is a very important one .
We have received a reply from the Commission for 2001 , which we have noted , but with which we are of course not satisfied , and this means that we will be looking in particular at 2002 and subsequent years more closely to see whether it is ensured that our money really is being used for peaceful purposes .
That is quite crucial with regard to developments in Korea and North Korea .
The third programme is pre-accession aid .
Although you mentioned Sapard in particular , I think there are shortcomings with the other programmes too .
In view of the fact that Bulgaria and Romania will still remain even after the other countries have acceded , and that there will in all probability also be Turkey and a few Balkan countries , Croatia for example , we cannot be satisfied with amending Sapard alone .
We must structure these pre-accession aids and make them more flexible , if we are to make a success of this .
Nevertheless , we consent to the discharge for 2001 , giving notice , however , that we will be following these three matters in particular very closely in the months ahead .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , as draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs I would simply like to begin with a few general remarks about the Structural Funds .
2001 was anything but a good year for the Structural Funds .
It shows , with no ifs and buts , that the main objectives of the 1999 Structural Funds reform were not achieved .
Firstly , as with the previous reform , this time , too , there were quite considerable delays in moving from the old to the new programming period .
Secondly , the authorisation and administration procedures have not been simplified as originally planned .
Thirdly , the approach of decentralising day-to-day administration of funds while at the same time strengthening controls has failed .
The situation is indeed alarming .
The Member States are far from having used all the money available to them .
That is true both for the period from 1994 to 1999 and for the new Structural Fund period .
In 2001 , for example , only half the money originally envisaged by the Member States was called .
We all know what that means .
That is why the next Structural Fund reform , which will then cover not 15 but 25 states , will have to return to the principles that we actually wanted to implement with the last reform .
These are first of all concentration on a few clear priorities , secondly simplification of resource administration , and thirdly a more performance-related approach to the distribution of funds , something I have called for repeatedly but in vain .
The fourth demand would then have to be to avoid abrupt changeovers between programming periods in future .
I come now to the European Social Fund itself .
Let me please make it absolutely clear that we on the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs are very concerned about the sometimes very serious cases of mismanagement in the use of money from the Social Fund by the Member States and that we fully support the Commission here , Commissioner , in all its investigations and controls .
Sometimes we really do get the feeling that some Member States really do not want to make the effort to improve things .
As rapporteur for the last Social Fund reform , I was really very deeply concerned to read what the Court of Auditors has now written in its special report on the use of ' social risk capital ' , an instrument that this House pushed through especially in order to oblige the Member States to make a suitable amount of funding available as ' grants ' to non-governmental organisations and local partnerships .
The Court of Auditors notes that the Member States have made hardly any use of the instrument .
In two cases , Germany and Austria , it was not used at all .
I really cannot understand this .
On the other hand , I have to ask the Commission why it did not inform us of this intolerable state of affairs earlier .
The fact is that some Member States are clearly in breach of the Social Fund Regulation .
I therefore call on the Commission and the Member States to find , without delay , a solution acceptable to all sides .
This afternoon the Commission will be presenting us its proposal for the employment guidelines .
We will then for the first time have employment guidelines for three years .
That will at last give us an opportunity to make the European Social Fund - the only labour market policy instrument we have at European level - a genuine part of employment strategy because then we will no longer have different periods of validity .
We now have for the first time the opportunity to coherently dovetail employment strategy and Social Fund measures in order to reduce unemployment and ?
( The President cut off the speaker . )
Mr President , the Committee on Women 's Rights expressed - and I thank the rapporteur , Mr Casaca , who has included them in his report - a series of considerations which I will point out .
On the one hand , we are pleased with the efforts made by the Commission during 2001 to integrate the aspect of equal opportunities between men and women into the Union 's policies and particularly into new fields such as international trade , public contracts , asylum policy and the environment .
This is a good way of working to achieve the objective of equal opportunities which , as you all know , is included in the Treaty as one of the objectives to be fulfilled in all Community activities .
In this regard , I must point out , as other Members have done , the problems which have arisen in the management of the Structural Funds .
I have been responsible for an initiative report on compliance with the objective of equality in the Structural Funds , since it is a very important programme which is unfortunately not being implemented adequately and which leaves out such important criteria as this equal opportunities criterion .
We hope that in the future more initiatives will be adopted and the procedures will be simplified , so that these Funds are used appropriately in order to achieve this objective .
We also believe it unacceptable that , although the European Social Fund has the established objective of 15 % of total costs for the promotion of the employment of women , only 6 % has been used for this purpose .
Therefore , although 15 % is not a particularly high percentage , we believe that the fact that not even half has been reached must be corrected in the future , since employment is always one of the most important instruments for the integration of men and women and for equality .
We are also pleased with the implementation of the Daphne programme , which ended at the end of 2002 and whose new phase is now underway .
We have expressed a series of considerations on the extension of the Daphne programme , which will be taken into account in the Commission 's report and in the new phase of this programme , which is so important in the fight against violence against women and which has brought such good results , on which I congratulate the Commission .
Finally , we would like clear efforts to be made within the financial management of the Commission to channel a proportion of the budget for Community programmes towards equal opportunities between men and women .
We hope that this will be taken into account during the next budgetary year .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , you have heard the news . The Committee on Budgetary Control proposes discharge for the 2001 Budget in respect of all institutions except the Committee on the Regions , which still has until the autumn to finish its homework , that is , it must clear up the contradictions in travel and subsistence payments and other points and undergo a comprehensive audit .
It is also proposed postponing discharge for five agencies that receive money from the EU Budget until their constituent acts are brought into line with the new Financial Regulation .
Let me begin , however , by thanking all the rapporteurs for their conscientious and responsible work and the members of the committees for their constructive cooperation and in particular the committee secretariat for its excellent support .
We have broken new ground with the discharge procedure for 2001 because rules have come into force that are not always clear and may lead to difficulties .
The first question concerns the vote during the April meeting .
The Committee on Budgetary Control has two options : first , to propose the discharge be granted or , second , to propose the discharge be postponed .
If , in the second case , the plenary were to reject the proposal , discharge would be considered granted .
That is an implicit vote of approval , which in my opinion does no justice to the weight of the discharge .
What would then remain of an original stringent decision that would have to be watered down by being adjusted to such an indirect discharge decision ?
Are the accounts in that case still correct , now that , in contrast with the former case , we have to provide accounts for every discharge report , something which seems questionable ?
All the discharges must nevertheless be published in the Official Journal .
Yesterday evening the Committee on Budgetary Control had to comply with another new rule .
All the amendments tabled for the plenary had to be examined .
How that is supposed to be done is nowhere explained .
We therefore proceeded pragmatically and noted the Committee 's previous vote in the case of motions that were retabled , taking a vote on new motions , of which there were only a few .
One thing is quite clear - the plenary and the groups are the masters of events .
Our committee can make proposals but not set parameters .
I think this new rule complicates the discharge procedure .
Without the innovations referred to , I might have voted for a postponement in the Casaca report , because the rapporteur has listed the Commission 's failings clearly and in detail and the other rapporteurs have also commented on them .
This concerns the book-keeping and accounting system in particular , where staff decisions were dubious and where reforms were tackled too late and half-heartedly despite repeated reminders from the Court of Auditors .
If I am voting for discharge despite all that , it is because I did not want to risk the scenario I described at the beginning .
The Commission must not take this as carte blanche , but it must follow up our demands thoroughly , speedily and above all transparently .
There is not much time until the next discharge , which we start on in November .
We are looking for positive results by then , or all our complaints will be repeated with stricter conditions attached .
The points are mentioned here : proceedings in respect of Eurostat are still not completed , although steps have been initiated , and the committee 's demand is that all the options for presenting the accounts and their reform should be examined by outside experts .
They must then be discussed in a hearing .
A motion to this effect will be presented again today in extended form .
I ask you to vote in favour .
Let me thank , once again , all who have been involved in this big piece of work .
Mr President , now that the rapporteurs have driven a few things home to the Commission , I would like to concentrate on the political aspects of the discharge procedure .
People in this House clearly have different yardsticks for the discharge procedure and different political uses for it .
Our yardstick is that wherever clear commitments have been given to remedy acknowledged shortcomings , and where there has been no serious misconduct , discharge will be given .
So far as I am aware , it is also true that in order to get those commitments the rapporteurs have made a great number of offers that could not be refused .
I think that is a sensible way of proceeding .
For us there are therefore always two options when we enter a discharge procedure .
In the language of the Rules of Procedure both the option of postponing discharge and the option of granting discharge .
But I think we also have to make clear that our experience after four years is that parts of this House - and I mean by that the self-appointed Euro-sceptics - have always tried to reduce the discharge process to one option , namely to collect as many votes as possible to take a shot at the Commission in the hope that perhaps one day it will fall over .
I do not think that is what we understand by ' taking into account ' .
There are always both options and not just one .
Take the example of the accounting system .
We have always started from the assumption that the Court of Auditors has found there to be deficiencies that have to be made good .
We have called for further evidence for claims that go further than that , claims that are spread with particular ' verve ' in one country or another in publications which , surprisingly for me , they still call newspapers , but such evidence has never been produced .
It is important to note that .
As general rapporteur , Mr Casaca set clear conditions .
These were broadly agreed with the representatives of the various groups and were accepted by the Commission .
We were very pleased to hear that again from Mrs Schreyer today and we are therefore in favour of discharge .
We have seen that systematic attempts were made in 2002 to link a staff dispute that arose in the Commission with the smell of a cover-up of possible fraud in the accounting system .
On its own , that staff dispute would not have created much of a stir in the press .
But I say once again : the attempt to link it failed .
No evidence was ever produced for such a link and in the end there was only the staff dispute .
But a staff dispute is no reason for refusing discharge in a system where such discharge procedures exist .
On the contrary , the more hysterical the attempt to make more of the staff dispute became , the clearer it became even to some journalists that there was nothing more to the story .
Members of this House in particular then noticed that when , a week before the vote in committee , a newspaper suddenly describes as brand new a document that was distributed here in the House months before , basically an attempt is being made to orchestrate them .
At this point we can in my opinion say that we were right not to do that and we have shown that the self-appointed Euro-sceptics can be reduced to their hard core if they put their real agenda to the vote .
Mr President , I , too , should like to thank the rapporteurs for their work and congratulate them on the result , especially Mr Casaca , who this year took care of discharge to the Commission .
What is remarkable about this debate is that , on the eve of next year 's European elections , we once more have a Commission which has not received a positive Statement of Assurance from the European Court of Auditors .
Nevertheless , my group will align itself with those who wish to grant discharge .
What are our reasons for doing this in spite of that negative , or non-existent , Statement of Assurance ?
First of all , many reports by the Court of Auditors have revealed that there have been improvements in the administration of the Commission .
Secondly , a Financial Regulation has been adopted .
We believe that that Regulation must be given time and chance to take effect , and we are giving the Commission time to do that .
Our third argument for granting discharge is that , if we do not do so at the present juncture , on the eve of enlargement , it will make an extremely bad impression on the new Member States : that is to say , that we are in effect packing the Commission off home . Nor could we do that .
Our final argument for giving discharge is that we have found the attitude of the Commission towards this Parliament very positive in recent years .
Requests for information have met with a satisfactory and timely response , and even the response to Parliament 's own-initiative reports has been positive .
Consequently , we recommend discharge .
The crucial question for us remains : what does the Commission need to do in order to obtain a positive Statement of Assurance ?
The Court of Auditors does not say in its reports .
Every year another surprise awaits as to what they have to say , and another whole list of things that are going wrong emerges .
I think that it is good that the Commission is now entering into discussions with the Court of Auditors , and that it is then going to inform Parliament of the criteria and timetable it intends to keep to in order to obtain a positive Statement of Assurance .
I should like to say a little about agriculture .
The most striking feature of current agricultural policy is that it is no longer based on price support , but rather on income support - the integrated administration and control system .
The irritating thing is that this is applied differently in different European countries .
That is unacceptable .
In a united Europe , the systems should be the same .
I would therefore draw the attention of the Commission once more to an own-initiative report - which it so happens was drawn up by me , but was approved by plenary session - in which we point out that , if the administration of agricultural expenditure in the new and existing Member States concerned is not in order , the Commission must suspend advance payments much more often until the system is in order , instead of carrying out controls after the event and imposing penal charges .
Mr President , Members of the European Parliament have exceptionally good grounds for self-criticism in this debate .
As a former member of the Committee on Budgetary Control I myself am also guilty .
I did not draw the right conclusions from the reports produced by the Court of Auditors regarding the flaws in the accounting system .
I did not believe that the Commission 's accounts could be so very badly organised in a budget of almost EUR 100 billion .
Looking back , we Members of Parliament received all the relevant information from the Court of Auditors , on the basis of which we should have reacted earlier to the weaknesses in the system .
We were not equal to the task .
We are responsible for the weakness in the monitoring procedures , the Commission itself for the weaknesses in the system .
The problems are not individual cases of malpractice , but are themselves inherent in the accounting system .
The action taken by the Commission 's former chief accountant , Martha Andreasen , made it possible for the problems to be exposed .
Just a while ago Mrs Andreasen told me that the Emperor has no clothes , that the Commission 's accounting system is rotten to the core , and that things must be swiftly put right .
It is thanks to her that we can now speak about the real problems we used to turn a blind eye to .
For her pains , Mrs Andreasen was dismissed from her job .
That was an injustice .
The Commission has made a mistake in protecting officials who should have been dismissed on the grounds of total professional incompetence with regard to accountancy skills .
Instead , they dismissed Mrs Andreasen .
We politicians do not see problems if they are too close up or too big .
We did not see the flaws in the Commission 's accounting system in time , but , as we can see them now , things have to be put right .
We also have to restore Mrs Andreasen 's ruined reputation .
We must not just rescue Social Democrat and Green Commissioners with European Parliament Social Democrat and Green votes .
As Members of the European Parliament we should feel ashamed of the role we have played .
The report by the Committee on Budgetary Control lists numerous flaws , which give a gloomy picture of both the Commission 's accounting system and ourselves .
If we had to be discharged from liability regarding our own actions I would vote against it .
Mr President , I am not just being polite when I say that my special thanks are due to the Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance and to all the rapporteurs .
Unlike Mr Seppänen , I believe this committee has done its work very thoroughly and that in the past , too , it has tried to uncover every problem in good time .
Even before Mrs Andreassen made the headlines , we on the committee had a hearing about the book-keeping system and we had discussions about it with the Commission 's Internal Audit Service and with the Court of Auditors .
I would also like to particularly stress that the various rapporteurs , especially Mr Casaca , have taken a lot of trouble to check all the details this year and have written a very critical report , one that does not shrink from naming the problems , but which also makes clear that the Commission is making efforts to solve them .
For that reason , our group will also be supporting the discharge recommendation .
Unlike some of the EU 's opponents , we do not believe that this discharge recommendation is a whitewash ; it is based on a thorough examination and a critical assessment of the situation .
We are also in favour of postponing discharge for the Committee on the Regions because it has still not satisfactorily resolved the repeated problems with expense accounts , to which a solution must at last be found .
We are , though , particularly concerned about Sapard , which is a very important programme intended to prepare the candidate countries for future aid in the agricultural sector , and , sadly , only 9 % of it was implemented in 2001 .
The tremendous cash flow difficulties with the Sapard programme are no accident .
The programme was supposed to prepare agriculture and rural areas for accession , both through measures to modernise farms and rural industries and by creating the necessary infrastructure and providing adequate information about rural development .
It was also supposed to bring about the rural population 's active involvement in the design and planning of that development , which we in the Member States are already financing through the ' second pillar ' and the Leader programme .
Unfortunately , it did not work out like that .
During accession negotiations , the Commission gave clear priority to implementation of the acquis communautaire .
It used Sapard as a sort of training programme for the candidate countries ' administrations and as a test balloon for implementation of the acquis .
The administrative cost of the programme became enormous and delayed the accreditation of the agencies for far too long .
In the case of Slovenia , for example , building the administration for Sapard has cost more money than is ever made available for the country itself .
So instead of making people in the rural areas of the candidate countries feel eager to get going and creating partnership between government and NGOs , expectations almost everywhere have been bitterly disappointed , and the negative experiences with Sapard have unfortunately benefited those agitating against EU accession .
The Commission has now announced that it will hold a conference about the future of Sapard and Leader in the new Member States this spring and possibly amend the Sapard Regulations .
We think that is urgently necessary and we support it .
I would like to conclude by making one further point .
I think the Commission has some courageous officials , by whom I definitely do not mean Mrs Andreassen , but courageous officials who put the question of Eurostat on the agenda and have sought to solve this problem through internal channels .
I hope that Parliament and the Commission will in future appreciate , praise and support such courageous work more than the untruthful headlines of Europhobes , the untruthful headlines of Mrs Andreassen , who is allowing herself to be used primarily by opponents of the EU .
Mr President , I would like to praise the rapporteurs for the seven reports that we are discussing today .
These reports focus time and time again on the major problems that exist with the financial management of the considerable funds that tax-payers in the fifteen States pay to the EU .
Some of the accounts are reasonably satisfactory , but unfortunately this applies mainly to the smaller or minor units , the Council , the Court of Justice , the Economic and Social Committee , the Ombudsman , Parliament and the Coal and Steel Community .
It must be said , however , that the situation remains entirely unsatisfactory in the large areas that fall within the Commission 's remit .
In Mr Casaca 's outstanding report it is emphasised that , while the accounts as a whole are formally correct as far as the income , liabilities and administrative expenses are concerned , such a declaration still cannot be made in respect of all the other payments .
It is also stated that , in the past six years , very little progress has been made towards complying with the Court of Auditors ' comments on the accounting system .
It is stressed that , in connection with the closure of the accounts for 2001 , the Commission infringed the Financial Regulation , and , on page after page , we read the very weighty observations that ought to make us adopt a very different position which goes much further than we are currently doing .
Far too much regular fraud and deception is still taking place , and , when it is revealed by an honest public servant - whether it be Dorte Schmidt-Brown or Marta Andreasen - the person in question is dismissed and often has their name dragged through the mud .
The person in question is said to be ' not right in the head ' and those responsible are promoted .
Note that Budget Commissioner Mrs Schreyer did not today answer Mr Blak 's request for compensation for Dorte Schmidt-Brown .
I would like to support Mr Blak 's remarks .
Mrs Schreyer will have the opportunity to speak again and to respond to Mr Blak 's express request .
I feel that there is a lack of will in Parliament to tackle the entirely unacceptable economic management that we are witnessing in respect of large parts of the EU 's funds .
The EU was not created yesterday .
The EU is not a union of unstable developing countries .
The EU Member States overwhelmingly have national administrations that work far more responsibly and precisely than the EU .
The reality , however , is that the EU 's administration is such that responsibility is an entirely undefined concept .
The Commission clearly has no control over the director-generals and their public servants , and , regardless of the number of times that Parliament complains of faults and shortcomings , these are not corrected effectively .
There always seems to be a mentality that this is not our own money and that the people concerned are not held accountable in the same way as national civil servants and politicians are held accountable for the budgets in the national states .
The EU advertises itself in terms of greater democracy , greater transparency and an EU for the citizens , but the truth is that the EU is the opposite : the more EU , the less democracy , the less transparency , the less responsibility - but the citizens are too far away to find that out .
Parliament is doing the EU a disservice by , year after year , turning a blind eye to the fact that the reforms requested by the group of wise men in 1999 have still not been implemented .
A majority of Parliament would no doubt vote for all the budgets because they do not dare confront their citizens with the fact that the EU 's administration is not functioning well enough .
The Commission can therefore take the criticism easily .
Nothing happens , even if the reforms are postponed year after year .
We are , however , sending the wrong signal by adopting all the accounts .
We are ourselves being irresponsible if we tell our electorates that this is good enough - because it is emphatically not .
It is on this basis that some of us wish to vote against the reports concerning the Commission , the development funds and the agencies , but we will vote for the reports that recommend postponement of discharge .
Finally , I would like to thank the rapporteurs for the outstanding work done by themselves and their assistants on these reports .
Mr President , in the rarefied atmosphere of this House it is very easy to lose touch with reality .
In this context the reality is other people 's money .
It is taken from them on the grounds that Parliament feels it has the right to decide how it is spent .
People do not volunteer to pay tax and in the final analysis the money demanded is taken under the threat of force .
If they do not pay , citizens can lose their possessions , their livelihoods , be made bankrupt and even go to jail .
All of this imposes a special responsibility on us , a special trust , and we must ask ourselves whether we could look our constituents in the eye and say yes : all of this money has been spent and properly accounted for .
Speaking for myself , I have to ask myself whether I personally could justify putting someone in prison because they have not paid their taxes that this Community has used .
I cannot say in all honesty that I could and , frankly , that is the test .
On this basis I do not see how anyone could consent to the discharge of these accounts .
The test has not been passed .
We have not discharged our responsibility of trust to the citizens of our Member States in ensuring that the money has been properly spent .
We have no right to grant discharge .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , at last , we have reached the end of this discharge procedure which , once again , has given rise to much debate and caused rivers of ink to flow .
It is a shame that , at the end of this exercise , there are so few of us in the Chamber to discuss it .
It has caused rivers of ink to flow and , as happens every year - this year , I regret to say , with more marked ill will - it has brought discredit and even disgrace on a directorate-general and one man in particular , Jean-Paul Mingasson , whom everyone here knows and holds in high esteem .
I am keen to pay public tribute to him for the injustice he has suffered , since all the accusations made against him and the Budget Directorate-General , with which we have cooperated loyally for years , have proved to be unfounded .
Of course , there were a certain number of problems and difficulties , which we addressed in the context of this discharge , as we have done in all the others , but that should not have led to the newspapers printing often groundless accusations made by certain Members who do not appear to be present at the moment .
I am particularly keen to pay tribute to Paulo Casaca , María Antonia Avilés Perea , Bart Staes and the other rapporteurs for the significant work that they have carried out , which has , today , given us a balanced , comprehensive discharge , where we call , of course , on the Commission to settle a certain number of issues , in particular the delays .
These delays are clearly in the nature of things - reform cannot happen overnight - but it was perhaps a little unwise to say , at the start of this term of office , that it would all happen extremely swiftly .
It takes time .
We can clearly see this with the reform of the Staff Regulations , and the reform of the accounting system , in particular .
We saw it with the Financial Regulation , which gave rise to difficult negotiations although , I am glad to say , a successful conclusion was reached .
I hope , Commissioner , that this reform will be completed before the current Commission gives way to the next , and I am asking you this in the very interest of the Prodi Commission .
The reform of the accounting system , which has been criticised many times - sometimes rightly so , of course - is significant because this system is , in particular , the source of a very serious problem , that of the RALs , the outstanding commitments , which cause us major difficulties as an institution but also as a Union in relations with the outside world .
This is why we called for a timetable or , at the very least , close monitoring which we will , I am sure , be capable of carrying out and the results of which you will be able to present to us regularly .
I believe that this reform will enable you to speed things up .
We have overcome a difficult hurdle .
We trust you also with this exercise .
Carry it out effectively , since the work you have done over the past five years is at stake , as is the trust which we will place in you later , apart from a few minor negative criticisms , judging by the interventions made so far .
In any event , the Italian Radicals will be voting in favour of granting discharge .
Mr President , like my fellow Members , I am going to insist on what has been said in relation to the work carried out on the reports this year .


And I would therefore also like to congratulate the main rapporteur , Mr Casaca , as well as the other rapporteurs , Mr Blak , Mr Sørensen , Mr Staes and Mrs Langenhagen , who have done excellent work , each within the field corresponding to them .
I have personally been able to observe how we rapporteurs , who are obliged to carry out the discharge of the various fields , are subject to external pressure , are put under pressure from the political groups to work in a particular direction .
We have to see past this pressure in order to do rigorous and objective work , and I believe the various rapporteurs have achieved this this year .
Very serious problems have arisen , particularly in Mr Casaca 's report with regard to accounting , the Sapard programme and Eurostat .
The rapporteur has therefore had to make a special effort to ensure that solutions are found which , while granting discharge to the Commission , lead to effective solutions in the future .
I believe this has required important work which Mr Casaca has done excellently and I would therefore insist that we must congratulate him on it .
The other rapporteurs have also suffered external pressures .
During this year we have been subjected to pressure from the press with articles , sometimes true and sometimes manipulated , which have attempted to influence our work .
Commissioner , I do not like this work to be influenced , I like to have my own criteria , to make my own studies , to analyse what is happening properly and I must therefore thank the Commission for having cooperated enormously in order to clarify all these issues , so that the opinion issued by Parliament is really its own .
This is the approach I have taken in my work and my group is therefore going to grant discharge to the Commission this year .
In the various reports we have followed the same criterion because this work requires a high degree of responsibility from Parliament and must include a very rigorous analysis .
We defend the interests of the European citizens but , above all , we must bear in mind the consequences of what is decided in this Parliament .
Responsibility and rigour when it comes to carrying out the work must therefore be imposed .
This is how I have worked , and I believe the other rapporteurs have done the same and therefore , although it has been a particularly complicated and difficult year - as all we members of the committee know - we have been lucky enough to have the leadership of our President , who has shown great responsibility at all times , and I believe that the final result will be satisfactory .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , we are speaking here about a period of reform and how it should be assessed .
That period is of course still under way and we are therefore also justified in again giving the Commission a few laurels in advance .
If we are transferring thousands of millions of euros back to the Member States because we are not able to implement certain programmes , that does not mean we are being particularly frugal , but quite simply that we are failing to implement policies on which we have agreed .
This is not , though , only about the Member States , Commissioner ; if environmental protection organisations have their support status removed from one year to the next - more or less wilfully - that also has something to do with under-implementation of the European Budget .
If project applicants have to wait years to get the money from the European taxpayer , that , too , has nothing to do with economy or good management .
Commissioner , you raised the issue of Eurostat .
That is not about OLAF ; OLAF is known to have informed the Commission .
If , though , the Secretary-General of the Commission does not know where Mr Solbes Mira 's office is , that is a problem of the Commission 's internal reform .
You will have to keep an eye on that in the next few years .
OLAF is doing its work very well here .
There have already been two cases reported to Luxembourg .
We only have to insist that Luxembourg fulfils its obligations , follows up notifications involving the protection of European taxpayers and in the end brings charges .
There is PerryLux - a most deplorable case , one that is already a few years old , and about which Luxembourg has still not done anything .
I would really like to call on Luxembourg from here to take the protection of European taxpayers ' interests more seriously than it has done in the past .
We cannot have a situation where they benefit from having thousands of European Union officials based in Luxembourg but evade responsibility when it comes to safeguarding European taxpayers ' interests .
We have mentioned a point - this is something I want to say to Mr Blak - about the agencies .
Do you know what super users are ?
We are back with the reform here , Commissioner .
They are people who enable one and the same person to perform the tasks of resource manager , authorising officer , financial controller and accounting officer .
Anyone here who has anything to do with auditing knows that this naturally throws the doors wide open to the abuse of funds .
We have such things in our agencies .
It must be stopped .
Mr Blak was absolutely right to raise it in his reports .
I would like to urge everyone here today , if we find that again next year , to take a negative stance to the discharge of such agencies .
One last point .
We have decided to postpone discharge for the Committee on the Regions .
The latest news we have received from the Committee on the Regions confirms this course .
It is inconceivable that an attempt is now clearly being made to punish the bearer of those ill tidings , the financial controller , for what has happened here .
That is not the way .
Other speakers will be saying more about it .
I can only warn the Committee on the Regions and its Secretary-General not to continue the way they are going , because we will not hesitate to draw the logical conclusions .
Mr President , I do not have enough time to counter the attacks on critics made by Mr Kuhne and Mrs Avilés Perea .
Four years after Paul van Buitenen 's revelations , which contributed to the resignation of the previous Commission , the use of an unsuitable automated accounting system is still undermining the reliability of the accounts .
That system is made up of a variety of non-integrated parts , and is unable to reveal errors or anything illegal .
Officials who gain knowledge of these shortcomings and wish to contribute to a quick solution are not rewarded , but instead punished .
For years now , solutions have been put off until a later date , and only after 2005 will we know whether anything has really been solved .
Member States are not under pressure from the many infringement procedures for non-compliance with rules , because the former have not given rise to many investigations or penalties .
A similar state of affairs in a Member State or part of a Member State would probably result in the annual accounts there not being approved .
Why should we then approve such a document concerning the Commission before the problems have been solved ?
In my view , granting the Commission discharge at this stage sends out the wrong signal .
Mr President , Commissioner , the Commission 's implementation of the Budget has been extremely shaky for years now .
When it took office in 1999 , this Commission solemnly pledged that there would be a change for the better .
Today , however , four years on , a positive Statement of Assurance from the European Court of Auditors is nowhere to be seen .
We once again have to make do with an assurance that the Commissioner will really do everything in her power to improve the situation , and with her pledge that a modern accounting system will be in place by 2005 .
We have not heard any specific commitments for 2003 and 2004 ; we did not hear any even when we asked Mrs Schreyer explicitly to tackle urgent problems in the short term .
Postponing the granting of discharge is really the obvious course of action , therefore .
The report by Mr Casaca offers ample basis for this .
Then we can see whether the Commission really makes any progress in the coming six months .
The Commission 's poor management tarnishes the reputation of all the European institutions .
In spite of this , the majority in this Parliament seems to opt for allowing itself to be kept in suspense .
Is that in the interests of the voter , of the taxpayer ?
We are convinced it is not .
Lastly , I should like to raise the issue of the internal accountant , Mrs Andreasen .
Both the internal memo from the auditor and the modernisation plans show that her criticism really holds water .
It is reasonable , therefore , for the Commission to come out of its trench , admit frankly that it is wrong and put a stop to the disciplinary procedure , instead of shooting the messenger from the Committee of the Regions .
Mr President , I would like first of all to congratulate the rapporteurs .
I have been able to observe their efforts closely , as well as their coordination with all the members of the Committee on Budgetary Control .
I congratulate them but I would like to focus on the report by Mr Casaca , which I consider to be positive for the reasons I will explain now .
Firstly , because of the Commission 's generally positive attitude in cooperating in the drawing up of this report and in responding to the questions addressed to it .
But furthermore , because this approval , or this report , was preceded by an analysis , not only of the conclusions of the Court of Auditors , but also of the questions put in the questionnaire , the answers given by the Commission , and the working documents produced by certain members of this committee .
This is a cautious approval , however , which is accompanied by many recommendations which the Commission should not ignore .
I am sure it will not and that it will cooperate in this regard .
Of these , I will briefly mention the following : firstly , to try to eliminate the reservations in relation to the reliability of accounts .
Probably through the solution offered by Mr Mulder - which he has just referred to - through an open and constructive dialogue with the Court of Auditors .
But the Commission must also be aware - as I am sure it is - of the profound concern of the Committee on Budgetary Control and of the whole of this House , I am sure , given the deficiencies of the accounting system and the essential need to choose the right accounting model .
That is why we have presented an amendment to this House , so that there may be an audit accompanied by a hearing , so that we protagonists who ultimately have to judge these accounts can express our opinions on them .
Furthermore , I would also like to point out the caution in relation to the creation of executive agencies , the need to impose limits on the under-use of appropriations , particularly in relation to the Structural Funds , and compliance with the objectives of the Sapard Programme , above all in terms of its positive aspect of creating administrative support structures in the countries which are about to join us .
Mr President , I congratulate the rapporteurs , in particular my friend , Mr Casaca , who has done a more than brilliant job .
I also congratulate the Commission and all the Commission staff who have worked so hard to obtain a positive decision from Parliament in very difficult circumstances .
We have been told in recent days by Eurosceptics - many of them on the extreme left and right - that we should not be granting discharge because there are still too many concerns about the accounting system .
I share those concerns , but the Commission has made excellent progress in the last few months .
The alarmist and often factually incorrect reporting by some newspapers does not do justice to the efforts being undertaken to put things right .
With respect to the Council , I can only underline the comments made by the rapporteur , Mrs Avilés Perea , that it is high time that the Council - which now has an increasingly operational role - be held to account for the way it spends taxpayers ' money .
It would be good if the Convention were to make progress on this .
However , in the meantime , bringing the Council into the discharge report for the first time in the history of the discharge process , as we are doing today , is a major breakthrough .
Mrs Avilés Perea and Mr Bösch have already referred to the Committee of the Regions .
The situation there can only be described as alarming .
Two weeks ago the internal auditor of the CoR was invited to attend a meeting of our committee to explain the discrepancies between his views and those of the Director of Finance of that institution on the financial management situation .
The internal auditor said three things .
First , that the picture painted by the Director of Finance and the Secretary-General of the financial situation at the CoR was not complete .
Second , that the CoR failed to properly apply the rules on the reimbursement of travel expenses and other financial rules .
Third , and most shockingly , he said that his appearance before the committee was ' a cry for help ' .
The most senior official responsible for financial control at the Committee of the Regions issues a cry for help !
In those circumstances , we have no option but to postpone discharge for the CoR while an investigation by the Court of Auditors takes place to determine the exact nature of the problems .
Since the meeting of our committee two weeks ago , I have made further enquiries and I have obtained additional information on irregularities that are alleged to have taken place at that institution .
In one case a high-ranking member of the CoR is alleged to have organised fake meetings on the eve of official meetings to be able to claim additional daily allowances to the tune of EUR 10 000 .
Another , now deceased , member of the CoR is alleged to have been engaged in airline ticket fraud amounting to some EUR 11 000 .
There are more such cases .
However , perhaps most worrying - more worrying even than all of this - is the fact that the internal audit service appears to be subject to huge pressure and even intimidation , designed to discourage them from pursuing their activities in a free and impartial manner .
In view of the seriousness of these allegations , which I consider to be reliable , I have decided to refer this case to the Anti-fraud Agency OLAF in the hope and the expectation that OLAF will launch an immediate inquiry to get to the bottom of all this .
Finally , I want to express my full support for the report by Mr Staes on the discharge for the European Parliament .
I hope the Convention will take good note of it and that the Bureau of this Parliament will now overturn its ludicrous decision to build two new meeting rooms in Strasbourg .
We do not need them .
Mr President , in the Charter of Fundamental Rights , which we all prize very highly - and rightly so - Article 41 enshrines a right to good administration .
Now one might think it should be a matter of course here in Europe that each Member State has a fair and impartial administration which looks after the interests of its citizens .
In the specific field of budgetary administration , virtues such as thrift , efficiency , probity and reliability are , of course , particularly desirable .
The fact is , however , that , for the eighth time in succession , the European Court of Auditors has refused to issue a statement of assurance to the Commission attesting that the latter has managed European taxpayers ' money prudently and thriftily .
The accounting deficiencies that a courageous woman , a senior official in the Commission , brought to light in the spring of 2002 are hair-raising , even to those with little knowledge of accountancy .
For ten years the Commission had not conducted a cash audit .
At Eurostat , the European Statistical Office , preferential treatment and mismanagement have evidently been the order of the day , with a devastating impact on the Community Budget .
In spite of all this , the Commission sees no need to take decisive remedial action .
On the contrary , officials who expose deficiencies rather than being prepared to conceal them are sidelined and hit with disciplinary proceedings .
In this way - and I am addressing these words especially to the Commissioner - the Commission is not doing its job .
If Parliament , as the supervisory authority , tolerates this , we too are failing in our duty .
I am saying this so explicitly because I am a convinced European and because I want this Europe to have a future and to win the trust of the general public out there .
When it comes to administering its own budget , I believe that the European Parliament must act in an exemplary manner .
It just leaves a bit of a bad taste in the mouth when we in this House always discharge ourselves or our own Secretary-General .
I really think it ought to be done by another institution .
Let me turn now , however , to the details of the report on Parliament .
The highlighted shortcomings have largely been familiar to us for a long time .
Staffing decisions must be made more transparent , and the awarding of contracts must be beyond reproach .
On behalf of my group I firmly support these demands that are made in the report .
And it does seem to me that decisions on the purchase and construction of buildings , particularly in our Brussels base , are not always open to scrutiny .
As for the discharge of the three agencies , we rightly express concern at the fact that their responsibilities can still overlap and that duplication of effort can still occur .
The adaptation of their responsibilities to the requirements of an enlarged EU likewise remains unsatisfactory .
The conclusion of consultancy contracts by private treaty by the body known as the Kosovo Agency , involving in one case a monthly fee in excess of EUR 25 000 , was evidently the result of pressure from the Commission - a pernicious influence , in my opinion , which casts an alarming light on the Commission 's dealings with agencies in general .
I wonder whether it is even necessary to have these agencies popping up like mushrooms all over Europe .
Is there any reason why every single Member State should host at least one of these bodies ?
Can we afford these bodies , and do we need them at all ?
The Commission , I believe , uses them to fob off responsibility , but then interferes arbitrarily in their business in specific cases .
This brings the work of the agencies into disrepute , and we in Parliament should therefore resolutely oppose any policy of externalisation , in other words the contracting out to other bodies of tasks incumbent upon the Commission , a policy touted by the Council and the Commission as the way ahead .
Mr President , at last the Committee on Budgetary Control has decided to recommend granting discharge to the Commission .
Throughout this procedure we have all been aware of the well-documented flaws in the accountancy system , which were first highlighted back in 1994 .
This has been of major concern to all the members of the committee .
We cannot bury our heads in the sand , we have to face the problems head-on and this report does that .
Mr Casaca has done a very good job .
The reform of the accountancy system is essential .
We have timetables , we have specifics about where the whole accounts reform process is going , but we must put this into a context .
We are asking the Commission to introduce a system that not one country in the European Union has yet managed to accomplish , namely the introduction of a full accrual accounting system .
We have to remember that context .
We have demanded a lot of the Commission in this report , and European socialists have been leading the way in setting extremely stringent targets for the Commission to meet .
As shown by the committee last week , nearly all the MEPs on the Committee on Budgetary Control have been responsive to the clear efforts made by the Commission to deliver our demands .
The irony is that throughout this discharge procedure we have heard a lot of sound and fury from the right and the right-wing press , and yet all they could muster after all that was three measly votes in committee .
Even people who represent parties such as the UK Independence Party , people such as Mr Camre and Mr Titford , who are vociferous in their criticism , could not be bothered to turn up for the vote .
That shows that their objections are based on ideology , not on fact .
That is something we have to bear in mind .
The aim of most people in the Committee on Budgetary Control is to put proper controls in place .
A couple of weeks ago we had to make a political judgement as to whether our support for the Commission would help or hinder future reform .
We decided that postponing discharge would actually hold up the system .
We are interested in delivery .
Turning now to the Parliament discharge , we have to be very clear that we in Parliament cannot throw stones at the Commission and demand from them , for example , a certain level of transparency , if we are not willing to demand the same of ourselves .
I would like to congratulate the Secretary-General and the President of the European Parliament on the way they have run the administration over the past three years .
They pay full respect to financial regulation .
It will be interesting to see how the decentralisation system works over the next year .
But we cannot admonish the Commission for wasting taxpayers ' money when we spend willy-nilly on things that are , frankly , a total waste of money .
Every month thousands of parliamentary assistants and administrators leave Brussels to travel 400 miles to work here in Strasbourg .
We have now established that travelling time alone wastes over 25 000 working days each year - EUR 3.9 million !
Note must also be taken of how it discriminates against part-time workers , the majority of whom tend to be women .
It is wholly unnecessary to use EUR 173 million each year in order to respect historical treaties .
In the wider context , I have found that we spend over EUR 1 million on committee meetings held outside the seats of Parliament .
We have also seen an increase in the amount of money spent on yellow weeks , that is , EUR 372 000 .
The right wing must listen .
They are voting against all of these points about transparency within Parliament , and frankly they are a bunch of hypocrites !
Mr President , it is always a great pleasure to follow one of the Commission 's chief apologists .
I wonder how the people in the public gallery feel about the 5 % - 8 % of European taxpayers ' money from the GBP 98 billion 2001 budget that the Commission controlled going missing through fraud , mismanagement or waste ; about the EUR 15 billion surplus , money that could not be spent because of inefficient programming ; about the specific problems that we found when we debated these points - specifically Eurocost comes to mind ; about the leaked e-mails and memos within the Commission that show how bad the accounts actually were in 2001 .
About the promises we received of how things were going to get better for 2005 - but of course some Members forget that we are actually dealing with the accounts for 2001 and exactly how they were reflected .
About a 1960s-vintage public-sector accounting system that was in urgent need of reform , and yet the only action the Commission would take was to suspend one of the people who was brought in to carry out that reform .
The only sensible recourse for us to take is to postpone discharge , and we need to have much deeper inquiries into the accounting systems reforms that have been put forward so far .
Mrs Morgan said that she and her group are facing problems head-on . What they are actually doing is lifting up the carpet for the Commission to sweep its problems under .
The Socialist Group should be ashamed of the position it has taken over the last few months , because it has known full well that it was going all along to grant discharge no matter how bad the accounts for 2001 proved to be .
It will come to pay the price in the 2004 European elections .
Mr President , on 1 April we celebrated the entry into force of the Cotonou Agreement , and the fact that this gives the go-ahead for the ninth European Development Fund .
Today , however , we face the discharge for the seventh , eighth and even sixth European Development Funds , and the main thing that emerges is that a large amount of that money has not been spent , and that the Fund is therefore under-implemented .
The Commission is one of the chief administrators of development money worldwide .
No less than 10 % of the total development money worldwide is administered by the Commission .
We would urge , therefore , that careful attention be paid to the valuable comments made by both the Committee on Development and Cooperation and the Committee on Budgetary Control .
Many mistakes have been made , and there is a lack of measurable indicators .
Then there is the lack of coordination with the Member States , which means that the complementarity between the Commission and the Member States is often a dead letter .
The Council does not concentrate on strategic issues , but instead is involved with 50 management committees intended to enable the micro-management of individual projects .
There is a great deal of criticism of the way in which we carry out self-monitoring .
The only control is on legality , while many taxpayers are asking themselves whether we actually have anything to show for our development work .
I would therefore add my voice to that of the Committee on Budgetary Control in its wish for the incorporation of the European Development Fund into the budget .
I should , however , just like to return to something that I find very dangerous : here I am talking about the risks of direct budgetary support .
There is a growing trend towards this , and I understand , of course , that it seems much simpler at first glance .
Direct budgetary support already amounts to EUR 2 604 million , although we know that it involves great risks , which the rapporteur has explained very well .
To begin with , there is the risk of substitution .
In the context of combating poverty , we want 35 % of funds go on health and social infrastructure - education , in particular - but we note that the countries find it that much easier to spend their money on weapons .
I should like to point to the examples of Uganda and Rwanda , which are probably down somewhere in the Commission 's records as countries who do things by the book .
You should take a look at what those countries are doing in East Congo , however , and see how they share the guilt for plundering the land .
We are giving budgetary support to countries such as these .
We are not looking enough at the conditions , because the report - rightly , in my opinion - refers to these as poor and inadequately stipulated .
What we are looking at is a lack of control with regard to management and implementation , to say nothing of the possibilities for corruption that are permitted and covered up as a result .
There are the enduring problems of monitoring .
In short , Commissioner , I should like to urge that the European Development Fund and the money that the Commission administers for development and cooperation be examined not only on the basis of legality , but also of the results achieved in connection with the priority we all set ourselves , namely the eradication of poverty .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , allow me to express my sincere thanks for this lively debate .
I am unable at this juncture to deal with every contribution , but I can address a few points , beginning perhaps with one of those raised by Mrs Maes in her speech .
I hope that the Convention will ensure that the European Development Fund does not have a separate budget with its own rules - many of them complex - since this has contributed to our having had such poor implementation .
I hope that the Convention will take the step of deleting this separate fund from the constitutional treaty , so as to make development aid an integral part of the European budget .
I should also like to correct Mr Heaton-Harris : expenditure in the European financial year 2001 was not EUR 98 billion but EUR 79 billion .
Indeed , it was strongly emphasised in this debate that the budget was relatively low and was also underspent .

In response to Mr Casaca 's contribution , let me come back to the point that the resources which the Member States can retain when funds allocated to agricultural expenditure are reclaimed actually flow into the Member States ' budgets .
In other words , the Member States are entitled to use this 20 % , which they may retain for administrative expenses as they see fit , because they are required , of course , to meet the administrative costs incurred by the paying agency , and these funds are effectively intended to help defray such administrative costs .
With regard to Mr Blak 's comments about the former project officer for the Dotcom project , let me say that this matter is currently being re-examined by Vice-President Neil Kinnock .
The question of the extent to which support is granted under Article 24 of the Staff Regulations is currently under consideration .
A word to Mr Camre : you made accusations against members of the Commission staff , Mr Camre , which I must refute .
I will emphasise once again that , when irregularities - particularly fraud - are suspected , is suspected , there is an obligation to inform OLAF , which will then conduct the appropriate investigations .
OLAF , on which I recently presented a report , is not our only watchdog : we also have the internal Audit Service , and we have established inspection capacities in every directorate-general .
The situation portrayed by Mr Bösch in which an individual acts as both an administrator of resources and a financial inspector is no longer permissible under the new Financial Regulation ; these functions must now be performed by different people .
This now applies to the agencies as well ; as you may know , the necessary adjustments have been made in recent weeks to bring the relevant rules , including the provisions of the agencies ' founding instruments , into line with the new Financial Regulation .
On the accounting system , let me reiterate that , in the year 2000 , we commissioned a study to review the accounting system .
After receiving the findings , the Director-General and I once again amended the proposals for the revision of the Financial Regulation and incorporated new accounting rules .
That was in 2001 .
I should like to reiterate my thanks to Mr Dell 'Alba for his commendation of Mr Megason , who has truly performed sterling work for the Commission and who has always been a particularly staunch advocate of greater Parliamentary involvement in the budgetary process .
Much of the ' soft law ' we have introduced in this domain over the past few years to enable Parliament to participate more fully in the process has been due to his commitment .
And then , still in the year 2001 , the Commission published a working paper on the reform of the accounting system .
The work that should have been done in response to that paper , however , was delayed for several months because of a situation of which you are all aware .
Strenuous efforts have now been made to make up for lost time .
The Committee on Budgetary Control , as you know , has welcomed the outline reform proposals and especially the road map - the sequence of specific planned measures .
Mrs Stauner 's allegation that no cash audits had taken place for ten years is simply unfounded .
The European Court of Auditors carries out a cash audit every year as an elementary component , so to speak , of its auditing activity .
The Court of Auditors has once again informed the Committee on Budgetary Control of its annual audit .
I believe it is quite wrong for anyone here to more or less disregard the work of the European Court of Auditors .
This was a very spirited debate here today , matching the intensity of the entire reform process and reflecting the intensive , committed and meticulous way in which Parliament has conducted the whole discharge process .
These are , of course , sweeping reforms , and critical support on the part of Parliament is essential if they are to be implemented .
I should like to thank Parliament , and particularly the Committee on Budgetary Control , for its critical but unstinting support .
Mr President , on a point of order , I wondered whether Mrs Schreyer would say that it is realistic to expect the introduction of a full accrual accounting system by 2005 .
We obviously hope that will be the case , but the World Bank took four years .
Could the Commissioner explain how she is going to meet a very tight timetable ?
Mr President , it is a very tight and highly ambitious timetable , but the Financial Regulation - which , as you are well aware , has been entirely revised with Parliament 's assistance and is now in force - imposes a statutory obligation to implement these reforms by the year 2005 .
We made this explicit pledge to Parliament and the Committee on Budgets .
We shall therefore make every effort to meet that target , and we shall keep you constantly informed of our progress .
If we pull out all the stops , I believe that this reform process can be successfully completed .
It is the ambition of the Prodi Commission to ensure that the entire process of reforming the Commission is properly concluded by the end of 2004 .
Mr President , I should very quickly like to go into the fact that the speakers from the Group of the Party of European Socialists have hardly touched on the content of the discharge , but only attempted to cast stones at those who are monitoring this process with a critical eye .
What took the biscuit was being branded a hypocrite by Mrs Morgan .
I utterly reject this insult .
That concludes the debate .
( The sitting was suspended at 11.20 a.m. and resumed at 11.30 a.m. )

Mr President , as I have already informed you , I would like to speak on a procedural matter , namely , why we should add another section to this report .
Firstly , I wish to thank all my colleagues in the Committee on Foreign Affairs , Human Rights , Common Security and Defence Policy for their cooperation in producing this report .
It is important that the European Parliament continue to monitor developments in Hong Kong and this report provides an important update on many issues , not least on Article 23 , the proposed anti-sedition legislation , on which we passed a resolution in December 2002 .
The report assesses the current developments in the areas of institutional development , the rule of law , human rights , the economy , environment and EU-Hong Kong cooperation .
However , after the report was debated and voted on in the Committee on Foreign Affairs , there was an outbreak of the acute respiratory disease , SARS .
Although the outbreak was debated in the plenary last night there will be no resolution on the subject .
Given the fact that there have been over twenty deaths and almost one thousand recorded cases of the disease in Hong Kong , it is appropriate that the report should refer to this problem .
I would therefore like to propose an oral amendment , the text of which Members have in front of them .
I look to their support and cooperation in this regard .
Mr President , in view of the increasing importance of restorative justice , I am grateful to the Kingdom of Belgium for its initiative in this matter .
The aim is the establishment of a European network of national contact points , designed to permit a permanent exchange of information on restorative justice and on one of its most commonly applied methods of resolving disputes , namely mediation .
Ladies and gentlemen , every citizen of the Union can move freely within its borders , but , by the same token , he or she can also become a victim of crime in any Member State .
Some of the honourable Members of this House and their staff have had painful personal experiences of this in the immediate vicinity of the Parliament building in Brussels .
On the other hand , I believe there is little point in creating more and more new European authorities .
For this reason , I have proposed that the secretariat of the contact network be established within the existing secretariat of the European crime-prevention network .
This will serve to minimise operating costs as well as maximising the synergy effects between the two networks .
I have also given sharper contours to the defined aims of the initiative as well as proposing a different legal basis .
Nevertheless , it should be pointed out that the establishment of a network of contact points cannot be an end in itself .
The creation of such a forum can only be the first step .
It will therefore be our task to seek further advances in the protection of victims in cooperation with the Council and the Commission .
Europe has the opportunity to adopt legal provisions that will effect a truly rational harmonisation of the varying treatment of victims of crime in the Member States .
Mr President , the shadow rapporteurs and I should like to propose that Amendment No 15 be taken as an addition .
Amendment No 15 therefore concerns Paragraph 65 b .
At the same time , I have a comment regarding the vote on Paragraph 66 .
We propose a split vote into two parts , and we recommend rejecting the first part of Paragraph 66 and accepting the second part , which begins with ' also regrets that after the assurances etc . '
- ( FR ) We are very pleased to join in the protest against the harassment which Yannick Bigah is undergoing in Togo .
We are , however , shocked by the fact that the protest is restricted to this single case and only seeks guarantees for human rights associations , whereas Mr Eyadema , Togo 's dictator , is creating many other victims with much more serious consequences .
The European Parliament 's call for a kind of safe-conduct to protect certain associations from the dictatorship is better than nothing , but it would be preferable for it to protest against the dictatorship itself .
However , we have to assume that the European Parliament is sensitive to the fact that Mr Eyadema is one of the oldest protégés of French imperialism in Africa .
Rather than running the risk of condemning the protector by condemning the dictator , we are restricting the problem to an individual humanitarian case .
. ( PT ) I have voted in favour of this report because I agree with the rapporteur 's assessment , which received the broad support of the committee .
Making the movement of excisable goods less bureaucratic and guaranteeing fiscal controls that serve as a deterrent to tax evasion and fraud are crucial aspects of ensuring the completion , deepening and streamlining of the internal market .
It would therefore appear to be desirable , given the modern tools now available , to centralise data , which would enable the various Member State authorities to link up with one another .
This is the aim of the Commission proposal , by means of a real-time computerised messaging system - EMCS ( Excise Movement and Control System ) - to track the movements of goods , also integrated with the New Computerised Transit System ( NCTS ) , which is also in the process of being brought in .
As to the doubts that have been raised over the legitimacy of such Community action in an area of taxation , I think that the problem is definitively resolved with the selection of a legal basis , making it clear that this is an administrative approximation for fiscal control and to improve the internal market , and not any kind of fiscal harmonisation .
I also supported , in particular , the rapporteur 's suggestion to involve the candidate countries more closely before they join the Union .
The main aim of the text which we have just voted on is to guarantee the safety of bovine artificial insemination ; but there is another aspect of this activity which has not been sufficiently taken into account thus far , that is the biodiversity or genetic diversity of bovine breeds .
Left to liberal market rules , the bovine artificial insemination sector is seeking performance at the lowest cost , which results in pressure to reduce the number of sires , thereby leading to an increased risk of inbreeding , the threat of rare breeds dying out and impoverished biodiversity .
The genetic selection of animal breeds encompasses a public service aspect which has not been properly taken into account by a purely commercial organisation of the sector ; the preservation of biodiversity within domestic animal breeds encompasses one of the aspects of the multifunctionality of agriculture which the Member States should be keen to sustain .
This is why I would call on the Member States , while promoting free enterprise within this sector and applying the rules necessary for the complete safety of artificial insemination , to encourage the preservation of a gene pool which is as varied as possible in bovine herds .
- ( FR ) The issue of wheat from the Black Sea is symptomatic of the systematic refusal by the Commission to apply the principle of Community preference , of which it is , however , the guardian according to the Treaties .
It is , nevertheless , unusual to see such blatant examples of this latitudinarian attitude outside WTO rounds .
By delaying its reaction , by refusing to use all the regulatory instruments at its disposal , the Commission deliberately allowed very substantial amounts of Russian and Ukrainian wheat ( almost 10 million tons ) to enter European Union territory . This is wheat which we did not need since we have intervention stocks that can be mobilised perfectly easily .
This ' laissez-faire , let it in ' attitude of the Commission during the 2001-2002 campaign has been perpetuated in the form - for the time being the reduced form - of tariff quotas for categories of cereals of which we produce a surplus .
The institutionalisation of this rift calls into question the position that Europe has occupied until now in trade in cereals .
We will have to ensure that the rift does not widen and that it does not lead to massive fraud in the context of enlargement .
I am pleased that my report has been adopted almost unanimously by the House .
- ( FR ) This agreement , like so many others of its kind , illustrates the way that the European Union wraps up its policy of pillaging the resources of developing-world countries in hypocritical observations .
It is clear that this is the case when a tiny , poor , remote country in the Pacific Ocean , entirely dependent on tuna-fishing , is asked to agree not to the fact that it will be exploited but to the conditions of its exploitation .
Not content to help the ship owners - and , next in line , the major agrifoods companies which market tuna - to obtain fishing rights , the European Union has found the means to subsidise two thirds of the meagre royalties which these companies have to pay to the Republic of Kiribati .
What this report reveals of the conditions of what must be called pure and simple pillaging can only provoke disgust .
If we abstain , instead of voting against this report , it is only because we would not want to risk blocking the few clauses which it contains which could provide some resources for the Kiribati population .
Mr President , Mr Sørensen 's report concerns the European Development Fund , so let us talk about development .
I was taken to Falcone-Borsellino airport in Palermo by the leader and representative of the Sicilian division of the Pensioners ' Party , Mr Mario Collesano .
While we were talking about the report on the European Development Fund , he advised me not only to vote for it but also to ask Parliament what happens to the funding for development , for we know that the money invested in the development of the regions of southern Italy , for example , has left Brussels and Strasbourg but has never reached the European citizens of Sicily , Calabria or the regions of southern Italy , or the European citizens of many other regions whose development is lagging behind , for that matter .
Mr President , I have also been to Naples , to beautiful Naples , where I was seen off at the airport by the leader of the Naples division of the Pensioners ' Party , Mr Fortunato Sommella .
Charging me to vote for the report concerning , inter alia , the budget of the European Environment Agency , he said ' Goodbye ' to me with these words : ' With regard to the environment , remember that we in Naples are hoping and praying that we will receive funding and assistance from Europe for the redevelopment of the beautiful Camaldoli hill , which overlooks the Gulf of Naples , so that the Neapolitan sun can shine on the European Parliament as well as here .
I therefore send the Neapolitan sun to Strasbourg to shine on the day when you speak , Mr Fatuzzo ' , and indeed , as you can see , Mr President , the sun of Naples is shining even on this cold Strasbourg day .
. ( PT ) I share the rapporteur 's conviction about Macao 's importance as a bridge between the EU and the People 's Republic of China because of its history and its cultural links with Europe , especially with Portugal .
I agree with his assessment of the positive developments in the Macao Special Administrative Region ( MSAR ) and I see that the ' one country , two systems ' formula is working .
Similarly , I agree with the priority the rapporteur attaches to appointing an EU-Macao Cooperation officer to the MSAR , reiterating the position already adopted by the European Parliament and which I have called for in various questions to the Commission .
I wish to highlight the need to promote and diversify cooperation between the EU and Macao , and I hope that this report and its approval will make a vital contribution to all EU bodies ' involvement in promoting this cooperation .
I welcome the report 's aptness and clarity and I thank the rapporteur for the support he has given the recently formed EP / MSAR Friendship Group , which I launched a short while ago .
I also wish to thank him for the favourable response he has given to the amendments I tabled . One such amendment emphasises the particular importance the Chinese authorities attach to Portuguese language speaking and the enormous recognition given by the European Parliament to Portuguese which is , in terms of the number of speakers , Europe 's third most important world language .
- ( FR ) The 2000 and 2001 Commission reports on the application of the principles of subsidiarity and proportionality are distressing .
They reveal a limited view of subsidiarity , which should never call into question the Community acquis , which should not oppose the Commission 's projects and which should not , above all , be decided by national parliaments .
The reduction of the number of Community texts which the Commission has planned since 1990 is just the mechanical consequence of the final stages of the implementation of the Single European Act .
However , subsidiarity continues to be constantly violated today .
Currently , the Court of Justice , that is a Community institution not controlled by the people , is the ultimate judge of subsidiarity , usually in agreement with the Commission .
The Convention on the Future of Europe currently sitting would like to strengthen this role .
We do not agree .
As I have already said in my ' Contribution on subsidiarity ' which I submitted in 1995 to what was then the Parliamentary Committee on Institutional Affairs , the whole idea of subsidiarity is that national parliaments make decisions freely .
It is the people who ratified the Treaty .
It is the people who should decide its limits .
Mr President , the Grosch report rightly seeks to introduce an additional test for the goods- and passenger-vehicle drivers who travel throughout Europe .
Is it dangerous to drive these vehicles ? It occurred to me that it is a dangerous and also very difficult job to be at the helm of governments in Europe too !
Would it not , therefore , be a good idea to organise tests and training courses for the Heads of Government and ministers of the European States too , who are at the helm of the different countries and have such a difficult job to do ?
- ( FR ) We have to fight illegal immigration .
It is very often synonymous with the exploitation and trafficking of human beings .
This is why I agree that drivers should be trained to prevent illegal immigration .
Moreover , professional crime is becoming a serious problem since it concerns the people 's feeling of being unsafe .
We are faced with forms of organised crime and international terrorism where weapons and methods have evolved and are becoming more and more sophisticated .
Given these developments , training in crime prevention is extremely important .
. ( PT ) Adopting the directive on the initial qualification and periodic training of drivers of certain road vehicles for the carriage of goods or passengers will provide the EU with a crucial weapon in the fight to prevent road accidents involving heavy vehicles .
Portugal has always stood out from other Member States where road fatality statistics are concerned .
In 2001 alone , there were more than 42 500 accidents , with around 5 800 causing death and serious injury .
A large proportion of these accidents is caused by vehicles carrying passengers or heavy goods .
I therefore welcome this report , which contributes to improving road safety on the one hand through new technologies such as driving simulators and , on the other , through ongoing training courses for professional drivers .
My only regret is that this directive applies only to new drivers starting in the profession five or six years after the directive 's entry into force .
Bearing in mind the profession 's accident rate and its difficulties in attracting new members , I feel that these timescales are too long .
I also agree with drivers being given specific training as a means of combating the scourge of organised crime , illegal immigration and trafficking in human beings .
. ( PT ) The adoption of any measure intended to improve road traffic safety is greatly to be welcomed .
These measures , incidentally , present an urgent challenge - road accidents are the greatest cause of loss of human life in Europe .
I therefore believe that the compulsory periodic training of drivers of heavy goods vehicles in all Member States is entirely appropriate .
With regard to goods transport , I have been calling for a long time for priority to be given to re-establishing rail transport and to revitalising short-sea maritime transport ( or cabotage ) and inland waterways , instead of focusing attention on the more than overloaded road system .
For this reason , and in addition to the proposal before us , I support all the measures to encourage this re-balance between means of transport and a better use of transport networks at European level .
This is a report by Mrs De Sarnez on Erasmus World .
The phrase ' Erasmus World ' reminds me of Fantasy World , Adventure World and Future World , in other words of Disney World .
This is a programme for young people , but when will we have a Methuselah World programme - EUR 200 million appropriated not just for culture and cooperation through aid to young people but also for exchanges of culture between the elderly , who travel throughout the world in such large numbers ?
. ( PT ) The European Union must meet the needs of a society that is based on knowledge and open to the world .
The Erasmus World programme will enable us to respond to these challenges by stimulating the quality of higher education and by promoting cultural exchanges in cooperation with third countries .
Hence the importance of this report , which I support .
European higher education must be acknowledged to be of high quality and in line with the needs of the labour market .
The success of this programme will only be assured by a budget increase that will provide the various projects with appropriate funding , and also by the rigorous selection of the candidates , establishments and teaching staff .
Scholarships that are awarded must enable all categories of candidates to participate in these exchanges .
It is particularly important to publicise this programme through communication and information projects and by drafting common working instruments that do not constitute barriers to the movement of candidates .
Lastly , the name ' Erasmus Mundus ' is particularly felicitous , because it gives the programme a more global dimension without favouring the language of any Member State .
- ( FR ) We voted for this text and the majority of the amendments insofar as they can encourage improvements in higher education in Europe and further greater openness in higher education to other cultures and languages for students in both the European Union and third countries .
Of course , however , we rejected the amendments which sought , openly or indirectly , to further private higher education institutions or allow employers , whatever the pretext might be , to increase their hold over university education .
I can only support and uphold the general objective of the five-year Erasmus World programme ( 2004-2008 ) , which seeks to help develop high-quality education in Europe through closer cooperation with third countries .
We must prepare the citizens of Europe and partner third countries to live and work in a society where knowledge is an imperative , strengthen the attraction of Europe as a centre of excellence for higher education and , lastly , increase mutual understanding between peoples and cultures through exchanges and structural cooperation .
Establishing this Europe of education that is both attractive and open to the world nevertheless calls for budgets equal to the task : this programme , which is the bearer of great prospects must not be the bearer of false hopes because it is allocated insufficient funding .
In other words , the budgetary outlay must be worthy of the programme which we want to see implemented , a programme which is truly wide-ranging , a programme which can benefit a sizeable number of students and thereby attain the ambitious objectives in order to bring about significant intercultural dialogue .
- ( FR ) The Erasmus World programme 2004-2008 is a positive initiative since it aims to strengthen the position of European universities at international level .
In an environment where competition is , in this field too , ruthless , everyone will understand that it is essential to direct all our energies to preventing the brain drain to the United States .
Having said that , this objective would not exempt the European institutions from their obligations in the field of education .
Therefore , given that Article 149 of the EC Treaty stresses the ' responsibility of the Member States for the content of teaching and the organisation of education systems and their cultural and linguistic diversity ' , the integrity of the guiding academic principles , starting with the academic neutrality of teaching and the independence of teachers , must absolutely be guaranteed .
We must avoid negative trends , rightly condemned by a group of many French university professors at the Jean Bodin University Monitoring Centre , in certain Community education programmes , particularly the Jean Monnet Chairs ; in spite of their obvious educational value , the latter sometimes fulfil an ideological propaganda function that is no less obvious , a function naturally incompatible with the normal performance of teachers ' tasks .

Erasmus World must not be the new Trojan horse of European federalism in the teaching profession .
. ( PT ) I congratulate Mrs De Sarnez on the excellent report she has produced on the proposal for a decision establishing a programme for the enhancement of quality in higher education and the promotion of intercultural understanding through cooperation with third countries ( Erasmus World ) , to which I give my full support , particularly with regard to the need to encourage and consolidate cooperation with third countries in fields such as education .
I also wish to emphasise that this programme must genuinely enable us to create a European higher education system that is effective and recognised for the quality of its training and of the reception it provides .
. ( PT ) If any reform can change the face of our country in the space of generations , it is educational reform .
It is , therefore , also with us in mind that I have used my vote to subscribe to this Erasmus World programme .
Although the programme is founded on closer cooperation with third countries , its main aim is to contribute to increasing the quality of higher education and of education in general in the European Union .
This is the conclusion we are bound to draw when we see that the programme seeks to :
prepare the citizens of third countries as well as Europeans to live and work in a global society based on knowledge ;
strengthen Europe 's position as a centre of excellence for higher education ;
promote mutual understanding between peoples and cultures through exchanges and structural cooperation .
Lastly , I wish to highlight what appears to be an appropriate financial envelope for setting up courses , degrees , study grants , partnerships , lectures , seminars and all the other actions that will make this initiative a reality .
. ( PT ) I fully agree with the content of this report , because I believe it improves the text proposed by the Commission and , mainly , because it focuses on a type of initiative that is becoming increasingly crucial and important , such as the ' Erasmus ' programme .
Today 's global society requires us continually to improve our preparation for the challenges that face us .
In addition to opening up within the Union , European university education must therefore also open up to the world of third countries , thereby contributing to establishing European universities as centres of excellence for higher education .
This latter objective will also provide a major boost to the European universities themselves which will thereby gain visibility .
Nevertheless , opening up to countries outside the Union must not diminish the Erasmus programme 's extension , expansion and encouragement for Europeans too .
In fact , we must make further efforts to ensure that the programme can be a real option for everyone and indeed , why should it not become a normal part of university education in Europe ? We must also develop measures to encourage the positive effects of this type of programme , without allowing their increase in number to lead to a fall in quality .
Mr Mauro , you have proposed and succeeded in obtaining from the European Parliament the appropriation of EUR 54 million for education and training , which will make it possible to train teachers in how to teach students new information and communication technologies .
As a representative of the Pensioners ' Party and of the elderly of Europe , I therefore request EUR 54 million to train teachers in how to teach pensioners and the elderly .
I hope that Parliament - which is represented here today in large numbers - will heed my words and that , at the next opportunity , it will vote for EUR 54 million to be appropriated for the education of the elderly too .
- ( PT ) The overall aim of the eLearning programme is to encourage the integration of the new information and communication technologies into Europe 's education and training systems , to foster :
greater intercultural dialogue
language learning
the development of lifelong learning and
the exchange of good practices .
The amendments that have been tabled improve the Commission 's proposal and this report gives a considerable boost to achieving the goal of a knowledge-based society .
In budgetary terms , the percentage earmarked for preparatory actions must be increased and the percentage for fighting the digital divide must be reduced , because there are other Community instruments that could address these more appropriately .
It is crucial to increase funding earmarked for the twinning of European schools at various levels within the education system .
A large majority of schools in the Member States are connected to the Internet , but few teachers use this as a teaching tool .
Teachers must therefore be made aware of the importance and added value , both for students and for themselves , of integrating the Internet into education .
- ( FR ) We are , naturally , in favour of the widest possible distribution of information and communication technologies to pupils and teachers .
However , if we did not vote for this report but abstained , it is because the rapporteur urges us , under the pretext of furthering these technologies , to help businesses in this sector in various ways .
These are businesses which , moreover , are not all , far from it , small and medium-sized enterprises , as the report would have us believe , but some are subsidiaries of large groups .
.
( PT ) In the wake of the Lisbon Summit , ' e-Europe 2002 ' and the action plans for ' e-Europe 2005 ' were adopted in the aim of benefiting from the contribution that the new information and communication technologies ( ICT ) could make to economic growth . ' eLearning ' or electronic education seeks to use these technologies in education and training .
The only thing is that , to those who have focused so much on this entire area , it must be stated that the sums involved are too low , especially given the desire to encourage the integration of the new information and communication technologies into the various European education and training systems , thereby improving their quality and accessibility .
As the rapporteur points out , a key approach is to focus on the training of teachers and not only on connecting schools to the Internet .
One only has to look at the data supplied on schools ' connections and the use of the Internet by teachers to understand the enormous discrepancies and major inequalities that remain in the European Union .
The report attempts , therefore , to expand and improve the Commission 's proposal , and so we have voted for it , although it does not go as far as we would have liked , because it is also important for all students to have equal access to the Internet , which is far from being the case .
. ( PT ) I congratulate Mr Mauro on the excellent report he has produced on the proposal for a European Parliament and Council decision adopting a multi-annual programme ( 2004-2006 ) for the effective integration of Information and Communication Technologies ( ICT ) in education and training systems in Europe ( eLearning Programme ) , which I fully support , in particular with regard to the need to develop the new technologies in remote regions .
I would further draw particular attention to the role that the new technologies can play in the Outermost Regions which , due to all the constraints they face and to their current situation , need support in preparing for the digital age .
Under this programme , I would also highlight the importance of teacher training , without which , it will not be possible to develop an effective education policy , and of extending this programme to cover primary schools .
I also wish to express my support for the attention this programme pays to the use of the new technologies by the disabled , and the need to develop projects for teaching the new technologies to the elderly .
. ( PT ) What I stated in my explanation of vote for the De Sarnez report , also applies here , with regard to an initiative intended to encourage the integration of the new information and communication technologies into European education and training systems , improving their quality and accessibility .
What is of particular significance is that the report underlines the fact that the programme is not designed to replace the Member States ' actions in this sector , but to support and complement them .
It will provide the financial contribution for pilot projects , for research and monitoring , for strategic actions by European networks and partnerships , for European organisations aiming to set up ' platforms ' , and for technical and administrative assistance in various sectors .
I could therefore only vote in favour of the report .
- ( FR ) NICTs , new information and communication technologies , inevitably result in a new model , a new paradigm based on new relations between students , knowledge and teachers , and they are producing and proposing an educational reorganisation in the world of teaching .
The principle aim of using and integrating NICTs in the field of education must be to improve the conditions of student learning and their relations with the world .
Any form of use which did not comply with these principles would entail using them just for the sake of using them .
Well , NICTs can be wonderful educational allies if they are the means and not the end .
If they further the objectives established by the educational and social community , they allow progress and development to take place .
These new technologies today offer education an unprecedented opportunity to satisfy an increasingly large and diversified demand for teaching .
It is a considerable challenge : in actual fact , it is clear that individuals ' ability to access information and process it is a deciding factor not just for their integration into the labour market , but also into their social and cultural environment .
Any inability by an education system to train its pupils to use or master these technologies would consequently further deepen social inequalities , or even create them .
Their introduction into educational establishments does not cast doubt over the status of teachers or the basic vocation of schools : quite the opposite , as it can lead to freedom and an opening up to the world .
.
( DA ) The principle of ' restorative justice ' is good and effective and should clearly be promoted .
We have voted today for an exchange of experience at intergovernmental level .
We emphatically reject a harmonisation of criminal law and the desire to enable the EU to develop its own visions and policies in the area of restorative justice .
In casting our vote , we have voted to retain the basis of the Belgian initiative concerning funding via the Member States ' voluntary contributions and concerning coordination , and have thus voted against the amendment of the report that seeks to establish a secretariat controlled by the Commission and funded via the EU 's general budget .
- ( FR ) The European area of security and justice must be integrated into the Treaty on European Union and thus bind the new candidate countries .
International cooperation in the field of justice and the fight against all forms of crime , including terrorism , must be intensified .
Citizens are free within the Union , but they may also become a victim of an offence in one of the Member States .
The initiative , which consists of setting up a network of contact points aimed at creating an institutionalised forum for the permanent exchange of information and theoretical and practical knowledge concerning restorative justice , is part of this movement .
. ( PT ) I voted in favour of this report .
I share the rapporteur 's concerns to a great extent regarding the urgent need in criminal courts to respond better to the needs of victims , who are often relegated to a merely instrumental level compared with the State / offender dichotomy , which has become central in criminal matters and criminal proceedings .
I consider that the application of restorative justice , with strict concern for appropriateness and proportionality , may be an effective way of facing up to that situation and , as far as is acceptable , making offenders liable for remedying or lessening the practical effects of the illegal act committed .
If a European network of national contact points is set up that takes into consideration the Member States ' various internal criminal justice solutions , which have arisen out of their legal systems and traditions , it will enhance the exchange of information and the adoption of good practice without destroying the individuality of the national legal systems or creating artificial structures that clash with them .
I must stress , however , that this broad initiative by all parties in the field of criminal procedure must never neglect the common good , in its aspects of public order and social peace , for fear of sacrificing the ultimate aim of the rules of criminal law .
.
( DA ) We have voted in favour of the report in order to secure a solution to the problem for the citizens of Kaliningrad .
The real problem , however , is the Schengen cooperation 's closure of the external borders .
Kaliningrad is simply one specific example of the consequences that Fortress Europe has for poor people outside the EU .
In establishing Fortress Europe , we are bringing a new Iron Curtain down through Europe .
The closure of the borders between Russia and Poland and Lithuania is just as unnatural to the citizens of these countries as the Berlin Wall was to Berliners .
- ( FR ) While the removal - moreover , partial and limited - of the borders between European Union Member States constitutes progress , the legal and material barriers which we are doing our utmost to strengthen around the Union represent a retrograde step towards barbarism .
In the entire eastern part of enlarged Europe , these barriers are dividing peoples which had been united by a common past and are sometimes creating and aggravating divisions within the same population .
This has given rise to particularly outrageous consequences in the case of Kaliningrad , cut off from the rest of Russia .
Until now , there were no particular administrative difficulties when travelling from Russia to Kaliningrad or vice versa .
As of 2004 , the European authorities will demand visas for this journey .
We are therefore being asked to approve a deterioration of conditions of movement for the inhabitants of Kaliningrad or those who go there .
A deterioration sought and imposed by the European authorities , even though they are presenting it to us today as simple technical arrangements .
As in each of the past few years , I have voted against granting the Commission discharge for 2001 .
The Prodi Commission has once again failed to fulfil its obligation to manage the European taxpayers ' money prudently and thriftily .
For the eighth time in succession , the European Court of Auditors has refused to issue the Commission with a statement of assurance as to the reliability of its accounts .
The glaring accounting deficiencies in the Commission which first came to light in the spring of 2002 encourage fraud and carelessness .
For ten years the Commission did not conduct a single cash audit .
In Eurostat , the European Statistical Office , mismanagement and top-level conflicts of interest have been discovered , but no tangible action has been taken in response to these discoveries .
A European Union with this sort of administration cannot fulfil the exacting requirements arising from enlargement and from the continuing process of integration .
We wholeheartedly support items 46-53 of the report , which are all designed to underline the high costs of the European Parliament 's travelling circus as it moves between Brussels , Luxembourg and Strasbourg .
As the rapporteur points out , Parliament 's moving between Brussels and Strasbourg entails additional costs for taxpayers amounting to approximately EUR 169 million per year .
What is more , moving makes Parliament 's work considerably less efficient .
The solution is for Parliament 's activities to be concentrated in one place of work .
If this is to be possible , the Member States need to listen to reason and amend the Treaty so that Parliament itself is able to determine where it sits .
The European Convention can make an important contribution by giving impetus to the debate on Parliament 's seat so that change really can come about .
- ( FR ) I voted against the Staes motion for a resolution concerning discharge from the European Parliament .
This vote does not express any reservations on the management of the 2001 budget by the European Parliament .
On the contrary , it expresses my opposition to the rapporteur 's attempts , supported by 13 members of his committee , to assume powers which fall under the competence of either the Member States ( such as deciding the seat of the institutions ) , or bodies other than Parliament ( property policy , and so on ) .
Under the pretext of budgetary rigour , the MEPs were thus asked to vote on an ill-assorted series of proposals whose sole aim is to discredit fellow Members elected by the House to manage Parliament 's budget .
This motion of implicit mistrust deserved to be rejected .
After my stay in Naples , Mr President , I went to Trieste , where I took the train to go to another Italian city .
I was seen off by the representative of the Trieste division of the Pensioners ' Party , Mr Luigi Ferone , who said to me : ' Mr Fatuzzo , I know that you will have to vote on the European Coal and Steel Community too .
Well then , please will you tell the European Parliament that Europe must be a Europe of steel , because in this situation of the war in Iraq it has seemed to me to be a Europe of butter .
We want a strong Europe , a Europe as strong as steel . This is what you must say ! '
And that is what I am saying .
That concludes the explanations of vote .
( The sitting was suspended at 1 p.m. and resumed at 3 p.m. )

The next item is the report ( A5-0085 / 2003 ) by Mrs Buitenweg , on behalf of the Committee on Citizens ' Freedoms and Rights , Justice and Home Affairs , including a proposal for a recommendation of the European Parliament to the Council on the reform of the Conventions on drugs [ 2003 / 2015 ( INI ) ] .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , anyone skimming through Mrs Buitenweg 's report and listening to her statement might think that these proposals of hers are actually quite straightforward and thoroughly acceptable .
This is a shrewd piece of work .
Let me warn you very strongly , however , against supporting it .
You need only read the last section of this report , in which Mrs Buitenweg says quite openly in her explanatory statement that cannabis should purely and simply be deleted from the list of internationally controlled substances .
In other words , she is calling from the outset for an amendment of the Single Convention of 1961 and for the deletion of cannabis from the list of prohibited products .
The reason why I wish to warn you categorically against backing Mrs Buitenweg 's proposals is that your vote for this report is a vote in favour of freely available drugs and against the health and future of our young people and our society .
If you back Mrs Buitenweg , your support will help drug dealers to extend their massive business operations to Europe , and it will damage the programme established by the United Nations with a view to helping farmers to switch to alternative crops and to make a profit from them , because you will be opening a new market for drugs in Europe .
And you will ultimately be guaranteeing the proliferation of drugs instead of waging all-out war against them , which ought to be our aim .
The Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats - and I say this here as their spokesman - are resolutely opposed to the free availability of cannabis .
We support the preservation of the UN Single Convention .
What we advocate is the full application of this Convention , not its amendment .
We are in favour of the full entry into force of the programme produced by the European Union , involving simultaneous measures of prevention , suppression and reintegration .
Why are we in favour of this approach , and why do we oppose the free availability of narcotic drugs ?
It is fairly simple : consider , if you would , the horrific situation in the European Union , where one third of our young people have already tried cannabis .
Almost 8 % of 15- to 19-year-olds smoke pot daily , and 75 % of young people think that cannabis is harmless , even though several studies produced by the medical profession indicate conclusively that the use of cannabis poses physical and , more especially , psychological risks and that it leads to addiction .
In short , there is absolutely no reason to liberalise the sale and use of any narcotic drugs , including cannabis , or to remove cannabis from the list of prohibited substances .
On the contrary , anyone who knows how much harm drugs can inflict on young people will agree that zero tolerance of drugs is the only answer .
That is what we are demanding as an alternative to the proposals contained in this report , and we hope that a majority of the House will support us in tomorrow 's vote , because we want to protect our young people , and for their sake we are resolutely opposed to any amendment of the Single Convention on Narcotic Drugs .
This is why we hope that common sense will prevail in the European Parliament and that we can take this common sense majority view to the Vienna conference in order to reinforce the United Nations in its efforts to combat narcotic drugs and to make it clear to the UN that we support the preservation of the Single Convention and that we shall do our utmost to oppose any liberalisation and legalisation of narcotic drugs .
To sum up , unless radical changes are made to the Buitenweg report , we shall certainly be unable to give it our approval .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I must say that I am absolutely amazed by what I have just heard Mr Pirker say , and I will explain why .
As far as I am concerned , I first wish to congratulate our rapporteur , Mrs Buitenweg , on her report , which , contrary to what has just been said , is well balanced .
I have witnessed the fact that this was not easy , given the particularly animated debates which the issue aroused when it was considered by our committee .
As Mrs Buitenweg pointed out , it really is necessary to take stock of the effectiveness of the existing conventions and also the appropriateness of reclassifying narcotic drugs .
By way of an example , I would point out that Article 3 of the Single Convention classifies over 100 substances into four tables , the first of which groups opium , heroin , cocaine , cannabis and methadone in the same category .
Is this really logical ?
I would put this question to Mr Pirker .
It must also be said that the Buitenweg report in no way seeks to make short work of the issue of decriminalising drugs , even soft drugs , but addresses solely and exclusively two issues : the effectiveness and relevance of the current system and the need to reclassify substances .
Nevertheless , reclassification of substances on no account means proposing the non-prescription sale of cannabis or its further legalisation .
I defy Mr Pirker to demonstrate to the House that this is one of the proposals in Mrs Buitenweg 's report .
I would equally point out , that two months ago , this very institution adopted the Malliori report , which specifically said that drugs should be classified on a scientific basis , according to their health risks .
Mrs Buitenweg , moreover , expressly referred to this document and I fully support her here today .
Are we going to continue to refer to conventions , the first of which dates back to 1961 and the most recent to1988 ?
We feel that the time has come to evaluate these instruments .
I repeat that the report is well balanced , that it makes ample and meticulous reference to the risks of drug addiction and that on no account does it encourage the use of narcotic drugs .
On this point , I again defy Mr Pirker and some of his fellow members in the PPE-DE Group to find any paragraphs containing the slightest encouragement for drug addicts .
Under no circumstances does this report seek to minimise the risks associated with drugs and the harm they cause and , in my opinion , there are no grounds for specifically upsetting the balance in Mrs Buitenweg 's report which it was difficult but right to obtain .
I therefore hope that we can achieve the broadest support possible for this report , in order to make real headway in our common desire to repair the damage caused by drug addiction .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , drug consumption and the drug traffic are among the most terrible scourges of our times .
There are few people , if any , in Europe who do not know somebody - a family member , a neighbour , a friend , a workmate , someone close , an acquaintance - who has been through the experience of taking and being dependent on drugs , with the effects that has in terms of personal and social dysfunction , human degradation , deteriorating health , poverty and , all too often , crime and death .
That is why the fight against drugs is still a touchstone of public policy today ; for any government , for any responsible state , now is not the time to scale down this fight .
The three United Nations Conventions that are the backcloth to the resolution we are debating today and will vote on tomorrow take centre stage in this .
They represent the highest point in a position that nobody can deny : the drug strategy will only be 100 % successful one day if it is carried on in an organised way , at a truly global international level .
The 1998 action plan of the United Nations General Assembly is another step in that direction , and we have now reached mid-term in the ten-year evaluation period defined at that time .
Well , the problem is still so serious internationally that this is not the time to weaken that position or any of its instruments .
In recent years it has become fashionable in some quarters to say that prohibition policies , lumped together as ' prohibition ' , have suffered continual failures and that these failures are recognised by the authorities themselves .
This is not true !
Above all , the push towards liberalisation that people are trying to extract from this is not right either .
First of all , finding areas or levels of relative lack of success does not wipe out the successes achieved or the crucial importance of the international prohibition framework that has been adopted as a global security network ; secondly , finding areas of lack of success because we want to improve efficiency levels is not the same as publicising failures in order to inspire and nurture a surrender to this global threat ; and thirdly , detecting any failure is therefore only useful if it comes with a serious diagnosis of its causes , so as to strengthen resolve even further at the next stage .

It is not difficult to recognise , then , that the main reason why we cannot yet claim a 100 % success rate in the fight against drugs , along the lines set by these three conventions , is that this fight is still not really being conducted in a truly international framework .
There are still countries that either openly or subtly operate outside the rules .
There are many who put more effort into discovering loopholes and omissions in the framework of the conventions or making new ones than in trying to implement them properly .
This report , or rather its explanatory statement , is a good example of just that .
There are still countries even in the European Union , such as the Netherlands , for instance , which are trying out policies in a different direction , and one might even wonder whether this calls into question the common security framework in the Schengen area .
There are still territories outside the control of state authorities where criminal gangs openly defy international authority .
There are still other territories and areas of activity of many different kinds on which many countries take only a weak stand , that is if they do not deliberately turn a blind eye to the illicit goings-on .
These are the weaknesses on which we must focus our attention in the run-up to the Vienna meeting on 16 and 17 April .
As an informed , responsible Parliament , we must not send the Union 's representatives at this meeting a single wrong sign , a single sign of weakness , a single sign of giving up .
This resolution got off to a bad start .
It started with an initiative that in its entirety openly challenges the United Nations conventions and their framework , although it then tries to circumscribe its aims .
Next , Mrs Buitenweg tried hard to constrain its content , but she did not erase the original wrong direction taken by the initiative or its risks .
Afterwards , during the debates in committee , there were efforts to reconcile different viewpoints and limit areas of disagreement but , despite these efforts , the matter is so sensitive that , as representative of the Union for Europe of the Nations Group , I decided to propose an alternative resolution that could give us absolute political certainty .
It is for this proposal that I ask for the House 's support .
Any ambiguity in this field will lead to disaster .
Mr President , Commissioner , there are some Members who have decided to speak not on the Buitenweg report but on motives or on the recommendation on which it is based .
These Members like to try and divide the House into those who are against drugs , meaning themselves , those who are for our children and young people , meaning themselves , and those who are for drugs and have got it in for all our children .
First of all , it must be said that , today , drugs are your drugs ; they are free : free to be controlled by the Mafia and organised crime , free to kill with overdoses , free to kill with Aids , free to kill in the streets and squares of our towns .
If anything , we antiprohibitionists are against your free , criminal drugs ; we are in favour of control , we are in favour of the law and observance of the law .
We are in favour of treating drug-takers - whether they take legal or illegal drugs - as consumers , in some cases as sick people , but not as criminals .
We do not understand how your preventive measures can be applied to people who are treated as criminals .
I am glad to say that , today , the European Parliament is called upon to debate that which falls within its remit : not the issue of free , legal , prohibited drugs , therefore , but the evaluation and possible reform of the current policies .
This is what you must debate , and you are refusing to do it .
In 1998 , under your international Conventions , the United Nations decided to launch a ten-year plan - 1998-2008 - to rid the world of drugs .
' A drug-free world : we can do it . ' This was the great slogan .
All sorts of things were tried , even financial agreements with the Taliban - European funding was given to the Taliban regime before September 11 to pay for the eradication of the opium plantations .
We paid for the fumigation of Andean valleys in South America . We paid for helicopters and armies .
We paid for the militarisation of our society .
Five years on , the result is an increase in drug consumption and production and the diversification of the market .
Increasing amounts of increasingly dangerous drugs are being produced with new molecules and new substances .
Now , five years later , we are debating the situation as it stands , not expressing ideological points of view .
What we are calling for , what the Buitenweg report is calling for , is an evaluation of the results .
If our policies had been applied by those in power , I think we would be willing to agree to such an evaluation now .
We do not understand why you are against it : when there is ideology , when the individual moral code of any one of us - and I do not consider mine to be necessarily any worse than yours - becomes a State moral code , then we are building an ethical State , and applying prohibition to drugs leads to it being applied to debates and to science , with the result that cannabis and the coca leaf are treated in the same way as heroin .
I would like to see you accept this equation of cannabis with heroin if it was your son or your daughter who was smoking cannabis or using heroin .
I could continue but I have run out of time .
I hope that the Members of all the political parties will , at least , take up the challenge to debate and evaluate the situation rather than hold forth on ideological views .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I am very sorry to distress Mr Cappato , but I too am going to take a line which is not pleasing to him .
This report states a basic position . It is not a response to the current situation , as some would have us believe .
In actual fact , for many years , the UN has been maintaining a position against drug producers and pushers , clearly indicating the degree to which the different substances are dangerous and vehemently upholding the need to combat illegal trafficking and the spread of crime at all levels .
After the 1961 UN Convention , there were further declarations : in 1971 , 1988 and 1998 .
Now , in view of the Ministerial Conference due to take place next week in Vienna , the European Parliament is being called upon to present a proposal , to express its position .
That is no easy task , given what we have just heard .
Although it takes these broad premises as a starting point and appears to be well balanced , the report then comes more or less directly to the usual conclusions which regularly divide Parliament and public opinion too - that soft drugs , particularly cannabis , should be liberalised and legalised and that a distinction should be made between soft and hard drugs .
Some of the Members asked just now how the report could be interpreted in that way , but the points are there if one reads the report carefully .
Moreover , the method of treatment using alternative substances is clearly recommended as the most effective system , the most direct way of combating drug addiction .
Here too , nothing could be further from the truth .
As we are aware , this method is disputed in many Member States because it does not bring about the recovery of drug addicts but just stops them being a threat to society .
In other words , the important thing is to remove the problem - this kind of method is not really intended to bring about the recovery of the individuals concerned .
The report also appears to be deficient in that it does not combine the proposals for measures in the current situation with pre-emptive initiatives to limit the phenomenon in the future .
In any case , the attempt to liberalise cannabis as a non-dangerous substance is unacceptable in that there is no scientific evidence to this effect .
Although it may be true - and here I am opening a window for those who hold a different view - that not all those who start by smoking cannabis go on to take hard drugs , it is now an established fact that all those who are now slaves to heroine started by smoking pot or grass .
These different opinions have already emerged , during the course of the debate in the Committee on Citizens ' Freedoms and Rights , Justice and Home Affairs , and it is no coincidence that this report was adopted by 24 votes to 20 .
The documentation is clear for the most part , then , confirming how difficult it is in this matter to proclaim absolute truths or to provide conclusive , unquestionable solutions .
Mr President , in the vast majority of cases I am prepared to support a compromise for the common good of the EU and to listen and form impressions , but definitely not today .
Ladies and gentlemen , you need to know that there are two clear policies in the Group of the European Liberal , Democrat and Reform Party .
There is a limit to compromise , and one that Mrs Buitenweg has grossly exceeded .
There is no reason whatsoever for demanding changes or a review of the UN conventions on drugs .
It is not the conventions that are at fault .
Instead , it is unwillingness on the part of the Member States to get to grips with increasing drug problems .
To those fellow MEPs - and there are some even in my own group - who say that I am inflexible and do not appreciate the importance of changes , I would say that , inflexible I may be , but I am also aware of what is behind this resolution .
This is , of course , emphatically about politics , Mr Evans .
You do not need to be Einstein to appreciate that .
A visit the other day to the red-light district in Amsterdam convinced me even more , for it is a fact , Mr Evans , that those who are keen to review the UN conventions are the same persons who want to legalise and liberalise drugs policy .
Mr Cappato 's rhetoric does not therefore ring in the least bit true .
We know what he is after .
We also know what Mrs Buitenweg wants , namely to legalise both soft and hard drugs .
Do not forget that those of us here in this Chamber are the representatives of millions of Europeans .
More than a million people have signed what is termed the Vienna Declaration , rejecting any undermining of the UN conventions .
Ladies and gentlemen , the signals we must send to Vienna and to all the young people of Europe , including those sitting here and applauding , are : no , we do not want legalisation ; no , we do not want liberalisation .
No we have not given up the fight for a drugs-free Europe .
You should reject the resolution .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , two important assessments of government policies on narcotic drugs form the basis of my criticism of this report .
Attempts by governments to suppress the use of certain drugs are as old as their failure .
Against this , let me put to you the liberal idea , which certainly does not represent a particularly strong attack on the power of the state , that there are things which are simply no concern of government , such as the flavour of jam people like to eat , how many layers of clothing they wear in winter or which narcotic substance they like to smoke , sniff , drink or inject .
Government efforts to regulate individual consumption , indeed , have serious consequences , for it is a fact that the 2 000 heroin users who die a wretched death each year in Germany alone are not destroyed by the drug itself but by the conditions in which the state compels them to use it .
The report before us today scarcely touches on this point .
A policy on narcotic drugs needs to be a humanist policy , which means for example that drugs should be assessed on the basis of their actual effects on the human body ; in other words , impact should take precedence over legality .
In practice , however , government policies on narcotic drugs have nothing to do with humanism but much to do with the creation of a governed nation and with the productivity of the national population .
Any humanist - and let me say to my radical and less radical fellow Members that I have absolutely no intention of triggering a Marxist critique of the role of the state in this case - will agree that it is essential to reject any type of official policy on drugs .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , in the Europe of our times , in the world we live in , drugs are frequently associated with crime , AIDS , social exclusion and unemployment .
Drugs are , indeed , a problem threatening citizens ' health , security and quality of life , and that is why the European Parliament has committed itself to finding an effective solution to the drugs problem , which is a problem common to all countries and all social groups .
The three conventions governing the narcotics issue have already been mentioned here : the 1961 one on narcotics , the 1971 one on psychotropic substances and the 1988 Vienna Convention against the illicit traffic in these substances .
These three conventions prohibit the production , traffic , sale and consumption of a wide range of substances for other than medical or scientific purposes .
The proposal of the rapporteur , Mrs Kathalijne Buitenweg , is basically to amend the 1961 Convention on Narcotic Drugs through a reclassification of the scheduled substances .
What the rapporteur wants - and she does not hide this - is to change the list of prohibited substances so that cannabis can be removed from this list , which , whether you like it or not , will lead to the legalisation of trade in this drug .
It is laudable that the Member States that are signatories to these conventions should meet , as will happen on 16 and 17 April , as the Commissioner has reminded us , in order to evaluate the progress made and the difficulties encountered and to debate whether there is a need to introduce changes .
In this process , new strategies in the fight against drugs or the reinforcement of existing ones will always be welcome .
When , however , this report proposes a reclassification of the scheduled substances , it is trying to push for a liberalisation of the consumption of certain drugs . This is something I cannot accept .
I do not believe that supporting a movement to liberalise drugs can or should be the solution for an effective fight against the growing drug problem .
I consider it unacceptable that one should wish to put out the idea that the European Union agrees with the liberalisation of drugs when this is contrary to the strategy that has been followed in almost all the Member States .
We have to observe the existing conventions and strengthen the means for the treatment and rehabilitation of drug addicts ; we have to observe the principle of subsidiarity , given that there are different drugs policies in the various Member States .
I should like to end by recalling that last month in this House we approved a report by Mr Pirker on the problem of the accelerating growth in the production of and trade in synthetic drugs , which approved extending the ban to substances which at the moment are not scheduled .
Nobody in the Europe in which we live would understand if we took a different approach today .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the heat of the debate clearly shows that we are dealing with the heart of a real social issue and I would like to thank Mrs Buitenweg for having tackled it with her report .
But let us be clear : are we not today acknowledging the failures of these three international conventions , the first of which is 40 years old ?
Are we not saying , today , that everything that we have done in terms of prohibition is meaningless ?
The major international meeting this April will decide to launch an evaluation of these conventions .
This could be an opportunity to open a broad debate on the matter .
The report we have here has considerable impact .
It shows , for once , that we have reached a state of maturity and responsibility .
It proposes , with reasoning based on pure good sense , an essential evaluation in order to put an end to the state of delirium or - dare I say it - the obscurantism which inspire certain individuals when discussing drug addiction .
Talk of an evaluation and a review is not proselytism .
We must conclude that the conventions are repressive , when we have just voted for a document which calls on us to move towards prevention and take more pragmatic steps .
It is clear that the classification system which currently regulates various drugs is totally obsolete .
How can we be endangered by a scientific re-evaluation carried out on the fundamental basis of the criterion of danger to health and society ?
Are the opponents of this measure , the defenders of zero-tolerance convinced so little by their arguments that they are coming to fear a simple evaluation ?
Let us be clear , that is , there is a genuine failure of all the policies we have developed ; we should take the time to carry out these evaluations ; we should put a stop to the stupid obscurantism which places cannabis and heroin on the same level .
It is time to remember that the Member States are the ones which organise , ratify and write these conventions and that they may have now decided to reach a political position which is certainly more logical , coordinated and above all , more responsible in this field .
Mr President , a few views in the Buitenweg report and , even more so , in the Cappato proposal could easily be supported by drug dealers , by the pharmaceutical industry producing substitutes and by those who prefer the young to be under the influence of the drug culture than to fight for their rights and demonstrate against the imperialist invasion of Iraq .
Not one reference to the social causes of drug addiction , to prevention or to rehabilitation .
The UN studies into the negative consequences of legalisation and prescribing substitutes are dismissed and the report even doubts their harmfulness by proposing classification , but with a call for new studies into their consequences .
Mr Cappato even goes so far as to maintain that it is not drugs but the illicit nature of their use which is to blame for the marginalisation of drug addicts .
Even more outrageous is the allegation that prohibition is to blame for the increase in the use of drugs .
Thus he exonerates the dealers and capitalist society and condemns young people .
The European Parliament has a chance to protect young people from drug dealers and their friends by voting against the report or radically reformulating it .
Mr President , the Ministerial Conference next week will , therefore , be discussing the evaluation of the progress achieved and the difficulties encountered in meeting the targets of the Conventions .
The targets were to do with reduction of use , sale , production , and so on .
Those are good targets , and so it is great that Mrs Buitenweg has drawn up a report about them , to give the delegation a couple of recommendations .
However , her intentions do not , of course , stop there .
As a true politician , she also wants to give some guidance .
Her report is cleverly formulated , but is in my opinion based on an erroneous point of view .
That is why I am somewhat critical of it .
To my way of thinking , Paragraph 7 is the key section .
When it comes to evaluations , criteria have to be laid down .
Those are broadly outlined in Paragraph 7 ; very broadly , as I think that they all deserve to be specified in greater detail .
I take the view that scientific research in this field is in any case very difficult , and that it has to be prepared very carefully so that the criteria laid down are adhered to at all times during the research .
We all know that any scientific study nowadays can be undermined by another scientific study .
You can even hire institutions for it , anyway .
We should be extremely careful that it is really done properly , therefore , and so we should heed Mr Blokland 's warning about the staff working on it .
When this issue comes up for discussion , all kinds of emotions are vented .
I find that very entertaining to listen to .
I have just heard Mr Robert Evans speaking vehemently about these matters .
That means that there is some kind of conviction behind his views ; either that , or he wishes to project a certain image about himself .
I understand that , in the Netherlands , the idea of the autonomy of the individual , who must take central stage , is very important .
I do not believe in that position at all .
I have a totally different belief in that regard , in that I do not believe that every individual has the right to choose his own addiction - as I have heard proclaimed on Dutch television once or twice .
I find it a strange autonomy where surrendering autonomy is actually the highest form of autonomy .
I do not think much of that .
Furthermore , the Netherlands has had a rude awakening .
Everyone thinks that we have a wonderfully tolerant policy ; but we now see it as being very dated , and are looking at other possibilities .
We are saying : have we not been much too tolerant ?
Is that classification of drugs really such a good idea after all ?
I can tell you , Mr Evans , that the Netherlands is able to grow cannabis that is so good , and so highly concentrated , that the line between this and hard drugs is scarcely perceptible .
Therefore , that classification has invalidated itself .
In addition , the tolerant climate in the Netherlands - in which large numbers of people do not see themselves as criminals when making ecstasy tablets - has resulted in a production boom , making us , I believe , one of the largest exporters in the world .
You could say that this is good for the Dutch economy , but I see that as the wrong way of looking at things .
We have to realise that those ecstasy tablets are responsible for a great deal of senseless nightlife violence .
I think that we must get away from this , and conduct a more down-to-earth policy along the lines of zero tolerance .
Mr President , the Swedish Social Democrats , including myself , believe that the UN conventions on drugs should form the basis of the EU 's drugs policy , and we wish this basis to remain in place .
To evaluate the policy 's effectiveness is one thing , but to suggest , as this report does , that international conventions that work well should be rescinded is going too far .
Nor do I see any reason for reclassifying preparations , as is also demanded by the report .
We must remember that , according to the UN conventions , scientific proofs are now already required before a substance can be used lawfully for medical purposes .
I am not therefore in favour of this report as it at present stands .
For me , in my capacity as a representative of the people , it is important not to give way in the fight against drugs .
Sometimes , it is difficult to discuss these issues because , as has been shown in today 's debate , we each have very different views concerning the way in which the available tools are to be used .
Allow me to explain my approach and that of the Swedish Social Democrats .
We believe that the decriminalisation or legalisation of so-called soft drugs would be downright harmful because soft drugs lead to the use of harder drugs .
That is something we know from experience , and I hardly think that anyone here could contradict the fact .
We support a drugs policy consisting of three parts , each of which is important : firstly , preventive work ; secondly , a policy of control ; and , thirdly , treatment .
The first part , consisting of preventive measures , is the most important , and that is where the emphasis must be .
It is therefore not acceptable to tear up our international conventions dedicated to prevention and to promoting a sensible drugs policy .
The second part , relating to control , is also important , but it is only one of three parts .
Treatment and rehabilitation are obvious elements of any humane and effective drugs policy aimed at ending the demand for drugs , halting their proliferation and preventing drug-related crime .
Mr President , as a Finnish liberal , I support Mr Olle Schmidt 's policy .
We ask ourselves what it is that attracts young people to the drugs trade .
All right , it is when they live in societies that offer them no better prospects and no other possible areas in which to succeed .
I myself come from a society in which all young people have opportunities of receiving an education , bettering their social position and improving their lot .
They have hope .
There is nothing better than hope in the fight against the drugs trade .
If we argue in favour of a trade 's having to be legalised if it is profitable , I wonder if we must not also legalise trafficking in human beings , including women , which is in the process of becoming just as large an economic sector in the world , and even more dreadful .
To those who say we are being ridiculous when we talk about the success of Nordic drugs policy , I would say that , according to statistics from Finland , where drugs-related crime fell last year , we have succeeded .
Mr President , Commissioner , it is commonly acknowledged that we urgently need a coordinated policy at international level to combat drug addiction and drug-related crime .
The conference for the mid-term review of the UN action plan to be held in Vienna gives us a chance to hold a scientifically documented debate on the effectiveness of the measures applied to date .
The targets set at the session in New York in June 1998 were admittedly rather ambitious .
Quite a few points in the plan have been successful , such as a balanced approach between reducing demand and reducing supply and collating statistics so that they are comparable from one country to another .
The UN conventions on drugs are an important framework for successful policy .
However , they need to be evaluated and updated , taking account of changes which have emerged in the international environment , new data in this specific sector , the effectiveness of pilot programmes and the speed at which new addictive substances are being produced and trafficked .
We have a duty to study all this carefully and assess if , in the end , the current conventions are felt to be up-to-date and adequate .
Nor should we forget that these conventions were drawn up in 1961 , 1971 and 1988 .
Today 's recommendation by the European Parliament basically moves in this direction and I should like to take this opportunity to congratulate the rapporteur .
This recommendation does not come down for or against the legalisation of addictive substances .
On the contrary , it calls for our policies on this very difficult issue to be up-to-date , adequate , effective and , most importantly , to prevent the problems , not punish the users .
Mr President , the aim of the proposal before us is to crush the current policy on drugs , which is based on three United Nations Conventions .
It seriously questions the sense of zero tolerance with regard to drugs .
The rapporteur must be given credit for having cunningly hidden her real message behind technical nuances of meaning .
The change to the classification of drugs in the UN Conventions , which is called for in the report , is unnecessary .
The entire reclassification is merely a code name to disguise the promotion of a liberal policy on drugs .
To put it simply : we are speaking here about legalising the use of cannabis , partially decriminalising the sale of cannabis and its derivatives , and making heroin available under supervision .
This I cannot agree to .
A restrictive drugs policy , in other words zero tolerance , is the only way to adopt a position on drugs .
This policy has had good results .
In the Nordic countries we have managed to control the drugs problem to a greater extent than elsewhere in Europe .
As an example of the results that have been achieved I might mention that there has been a reduction in drug deaths and drug-related crime , and the number of experiments with drugs has levelled off .
A sad example of a liberal drugs policy is the ' model country ' for this trend , the Netherlands .
According to Europol statistics , more than 50 % of the synthetic drugs circulating in Europe are produced in the Netherlands .
Just as my colleague , Mr Oostlander , said here earlier on , it is quite clear that drugs and their use proliferate wherever there is a favourable attitude to them .
As background data , the report uses studies by the European Monitoring Centre for Drugs and Drug Addiction .
The importance of these studies wanes , however , when one considers the background of this unit 's former director .
In January this person had to resign from his post because it became evident that , in addition to his regular duties , he was promoting the legalisation of drugs .
The question of attitude to drugs is one of principle .
We politicians have to be conscious of our responsibilities and act in accordance with them .
Ladies and gentlemen , I urge you to think carefully about what sort of message you want to send out in tomorrow 's vote , especially to the young .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon .
The next item is the report ( A5-0086 / 2003 ) by Mrs Cerdeira Morterero , on behalf of the Committee on Citizens ' Freedoms and Rights , Justice and Home Affairs , on the amended proposal for a Council directive on the right to family reunification [ COM ( 2002 ) 225 - C5-0220 / 2002 - 1999 / 0258 ( CNS ) ] .
Mr President , Mrs Cerdeira Morterero , ladies and gentlemen , before starting the debate on Mrs Cerdeira 's report , I should like to thank her for its quality and to congratulate her personally on being here with us and to wish her a full and speedy recovery .
The new amended proposal for a directive on the right to family reunification , on which the European Parliament is to make a decision today , was adopted by the Commission in response to the mandate given by the Heads of State and Government meeting in Laeken on 15 December 2001 .
The European Council confirmed at that time that a common asylum and immigration policy presupposed the establishment of common rules on the subject of family reunification .
The European Council recognised , however , that progress on this was slower and less substantial than expected and that new impetus and new guidelines were needed in order to make up for the delay .
To this end , the European Council called on the Council of Ministers to speed up its work and asked it to approve the provisions on family reunification by July 2003 .
The Commission considers that family reunification is an essential element in the successful integration of third country nationals into European societies .
This instrument is for us , therefore , an essential aspect of the common immigration policy proposed by the Commission and was , in fact , the first of all the proposals that the Commission presented to the Council in execution of the Tampere mandate .
For this amended proposal , the Commission has used a new approach to the points that for two years have led to insurmountable differences between the Member States .
This new approach recognises that several stages will be needed to achieve the harmonisation of national laws .
This proposal is thus just the first stage towards such harmonisation .
To this end , we have enshrined a certain amount of flexibility in several of the instruments , especially in relation to the points that caused differences between the Member States .
This flexibility is incorporated in two ways : first , as regards the background , through the use of a standstill clause , the idea of which is to prevent Member States from misusing derogations introduced subsequently in relation to the legislation in force at the time this directive is adopted ; there is a kind of freeze on the level of protection for family reunification as it exists today in the legislation of the Member States .
Secondly , the Commission is introducing a rendezvous clause , which lays down a period of two years after the transposition of the directive and specifies exactly which provisions must be subjected to priority review so as to open up the second phase , the second stage in the process of harmonising national legislation .
It is obviously a question of those provisions that are considered more sensitive , such as the definition of family members and the possibility of also covering family members of Community citizens who have not made use of their right to freedom of movement .
The main changes brought in compared with the initial Commission proposal first of all concern the definition of family members : the right to family reunification is guaranteed for the spouse and minor children .
With a concern for flexibility , it is specified that a Member State may examine whether a child below twelve years of age meets an integration criterion , but only if its legislation provides for this today or on the date when the directive is adopted .
The admission of unmarried partners , relatives in the ascending line and adult children , on the other hand , becomes optional for the Member States , which must decide on this through legislation or regulation .
In matters of family reunification procedures , requirements concerning accommodation , material resources and sickness insurance will remain optional .
It is expected , however that they can be monitored after reunification when the family members ' residence permits are renewed .
A derogation will also allow Member States to retain national laws relating to their reception capacity when examining applications for family reunification .
In such cases , depending on the reception capacity , applications may be dealt with in stages , provided that the family members ' waiting period is not longer than three years .
Lastly , the provisions dealing with the family reunification of refugees were put together in the same chapter to reflect better the specific nature of their situation .
Overall , the proposal falls short of our initial intentions but it does not , however , involve any obligation to harmonise family reunification requirements downwards , and we see it as a first step on a path that we wish were faster but which we shall continue to tread with conviction and persistence .
I thank the rapporteur and Parliament for supporting this debate throughout the three long years that our journey together has taken .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the report by Mrs Cerdeira Morterero on family reunification was adopted by the Committee on Citizens ' Freedoms and Rights , Justice and Home Affairs against the votes of the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats , which considers the report to be utterly unacceptable .
This is the third proposal presented by the Commission on this subject since 1999 , and once the directive has been adopted by the Council , it will soon be transposed into the national law of every Member State .
We in the European Parliament are asked today to deliver our opinion on a solution to the problem of reunifying the families of non-EU citizens , a solution that is both humane and realistic .
It gives people from non-EU countries the chance to live in and with their families in the European Union while also avoiding a drastic increase in the level of immigration into our Member States .
After several years of hard bargaining with the Council , the Commission has now finally adopted a realistic and practicable approach .
I am , however , critical - as I was with the initial proposal - of the Commission 's decision not to differentiate between the various reasons for immigration .
Accordingly , I call once again on behalf of my group for separate directives on family reunification - one for asylum-seekers , one for migrant workers and one for subsidiary protection .
By dealing with subsidiary protection - that is to say the granting of temporary residence rights to people in need of protection - in a separate directive , the Commission has now taken a step in the right direction , a step we have been encouraging it to take .
It would have been logical to do likewise for asylum-seekers and migrant workers .
Extending reunification to non-marital and same-sex partnerships and children belonging to people in these partnerships , for which Mrs Cerdeira Morterero argues in her report , is something that we categorically reject . Who , for example , is supposed to verify the existence of such relationships ?
I totally fail to understand why the door is being deliberately thrown wide open to abuse .
I can only recommend to the ideologists of this House that they try to get in touch with those who work at the sharp end in the Member States .
They are the ones who have to cope on a daily basis with unclear regulations and a considerable caseload of abuses .
If people-smugglers are already being paid huge sums of money by those who want to enter the European Union illegally , risking their lives in the process , it is easy to imagine the sort of money that will soon be changing hands to enable people to enter the EU quite legally as so-called partners .
The Commission 's proposal that the reunification of these categories of people should be at the discretion of the Member States is not convincing either , because it gives too much scope , in my view , to individual countries in a united Europe with open borders .
Instead of supporting the realistic and practical approach which I proposed in my first report and which has since received widespread endorsement in the Council and the Commission , the left-wing majority are continuing to romp about here in their ideological playground .
By persisting with their unrealistic proposals , they are playing into the hands of those Member States that have no wish to consent to codecision rights for the European Parliament in this domain .
In this specific case , I am in the unaccustomed position of welcoming the fact that we are only being consulted on this matter .
The Council has already reached a political agreement to accept the Commission draft .
The Council , at its meeting on 8 May , can therefore be expected to base its decision on the Commission 's draft , which is a more realistic document .
For this reason , my wish for today and for the future is that our decisions should not be coloured by ideological party manifestos but that , in the parliamentary processes which are still pending , we should agree on constructive , practical and coherent policies that the people of our countries can endorse .
Mr President , before beginning my speech , I would propose the following exercise , both to the people who are present and to those who are absent , because there is nobody here from the Council , although there should be .
Imagine from now on that you are included in the scope of this directive and that we are talking about your husbands , wives and children .
I believe that would be a good exercise .
Secondly , I would like to congratulate the rapporteur , Mrs Cerdeira Morterero .
She had a very difficult job to do .
The Commission 's first proposal was well received by this House .
We made certain proposals which have not been taken into account , and not only that , but as a result of the debates of the absent Council we have received a new proposal which we do not like nearly so much .
Despite this , the rapporteur has made an effort to find a way to move forward , since we believe this is a very important element of immigration policy which should be established as soon as possible .
We therefore accept many of the new proposals presented to us , we accept the basis on which they are founded , we accept the idea of having to demonstrate the capacity to maintain the family , we are prepared to wait for an agreement on a new proposal on subsidiary protection , but there are certain things which , despite everything , we cannot accept .
We cannot accept a limitation of entry for minor children for any reason , and this appears obvious to us .
We cannot accept the extension of time limits and we cannot accept - we do not like it at all - the number of exceptions which , despite the goodwill of the Commission , appear in the proposal .
Despite this , and without much success , we in the PSE are prepared to reach an agreement and continue talking .
Ladies and gentlemen , as I have said , we are talking about family life .
I imagine that the PPE-DE agrees that this is the basis of our society .
We cannot accept a proposal which raises to three years - and three years and nine months if we include the procedure - the period during which a man and more and more often a woman - please bear this in mind - has to wait before having their children with them ?
Do you know what happens to a child between four and seven years old or between seven and twelve years old ?
Is it reasonable to create so much disquiet amongst people who we want to live within our society ?
I would like to pose a question : would it not be better to recognise that we human beings live in families ?
Could we not create laws which make it easier for families to enter ?
Would this not be more practical ?
In exchange , I would be prepared to talk about the inclusion in the quotas of people who come to work , inclusion in the open coordination method , and in these quotas , of people who come for purposes of family reunification .
But I believe that that would really be a more practical policy in terms of integrating these citizens into our society .
- ( DA ) Mr President , allow me to start by regretting that the Council established its policy as early as the end of February without waiting for the opinion of the European Parliament .
Although it has taken a long time to get this report through Parliament , that does not give the Council an excuse to disregard Parliament 's role in the legislative process .
Having said that , I believe that the directive concerns a very central area of the debate on immigration and integration .
It is a fact that family reunifications among third country citizens contribute between 40 and 50 % of the total number of immigrants into the EU .
The directive will help to produce greater clarity concerning the rules , improved integration and a fairer distribution of the burden within the Community .
At the same time , the directive gives the Member States sufficient opportunities to prevent inadvertent economic immigration .
It must be emphasised that family reunification helps to secure values that are entirely fundamental to every individual : the family unit and a normal family life .
On behalf of the Group of the European Liberal , Democrat and Reform Party , I have supported the proposed amendment that creates a wider definition of family and also brings third country citizens with subsidiary protection within the rules on family reunification .
At the same time , however , I do not consider it wrong for us to link certain requirements to the rules on family reunification .
I still believe that the Member States must have the opportunity to set requirements , for example in the form of a normal standard of accommodation , an income that ensures that the family can be provided for , and respect for public order and security , as well as the opportunity to establish a waiting period .
It is my wish that this report will be adopted with as much support as possible in this House , and that the Council will then in future listen to the advice we give it .
Mr President , Mrs Cerdeira Morterero 's report is attempting to make positive adjustments to the Commission 's initial proposal , in a climate characterised by security laws and the de facto criminalisation of emigration .
This is the case , for example , with regard to the ending of discrimination in the field of family reunification .
But we might ask ourselves whether it is not a question of a fool 's bargain , as asserted by certain fellow Members , since the Council already reached an agreement in February , with which Commissioner Vitorino was satisfied .
Therefore allow me , in turn , to express doubts over the desire to take the opinion of the European Parliament into account .
Allow me also to express extreme concern over the current trend where several countries of the Union are hardening their migration policies .
For example , we understand why the French Government called this agreement - an important part of the policy on the control of migration flows .
While harmonisation of national laws is necessary , is this taking place based on compliance with the rights and protection of third-country nationals , in the very spirit of the Tampere agreements , or will the transposal of this directive on the contrary be the pretext , for some , for a reduction in the level of protection already guaranteed by the Member States ?
By increasing the conditions of entry , for example , for children and choosing between qualified and non-qualified job-seekers , Europe is becoming a fortress .
This policy plays no part in creating a European citizenship which upholds the values of tolerance , democracy and solidarity in accordance with , in particular , the Geneva Convention and the Universal Declaration of Human Rights .
This is a real opportunity for the Union : immigrant populations should instead take advantage of free movement and a welcome which enables them to participate in local life and have a reasonable income .
We would be a long way from the fantasy of invaders in that case .
In this respect , the 2002 report on the Continuous Reporting System on Migration set up by the OECD re-establishes the truth .
In France , whether the Minister of the Interior likes it or not , the total number of permanent entries totalled 119 000 people in 2002 , that is , less than the figure for 1998 , and the principal reason for this migration remains , in 77 % of cases , family reunification .
Lastly , following the example of human rights associations , I am today anxious to condemn actions which the Danish Presidency in a way allowed in its Return Action Programme of November 2002 .
I refer to chartering flights which are loaded with ' undesirables ' .
It will have taken barely four months for Mr Sarkozy in France to disappear into this organisation of forced returns , shameful for this day and age , and above all , a far cry from a humane and fair immigration policy .
Mr President , today , the European Parliament is again taking a position over the Council 's proposal on family reunification .
In this connection , we should remember that the Council has already laid down a general approach , on 27 February this year .
While the right to live with one 's family is recognised by international conventions and referred to in the Charter of Fundamental Rights , it is disgraceful to see that the Council 's approach casts serious doubts over this right for residents from third countries .
If we take into consideration the Tampere Summit , which sought to establish a common approach in order to guarantee , in accordance with human rights instruments , the integration of third-country nationals legally resident in the Union , this new approach is a genuine downward adjustment .
As certain Members are saying , it is true that this directive is better than nothing when we know of the difficulties encountered to reach this point .
But we cannot avoid condemning its minimalist aspect , despite all the goodwill of the rapporteur , whom we sincerely thank for her work .
Nevertheless , allow me to make some criticisms .
Why exclude people who enjoy temporary protection or subsidiary protection status ?
Excluded from the asylum system by this proposal , they have become rightless .
They are also excluded from all the directives on third-country nationals .
Moreover , why restrict family reunification purely to the legal spouse and dependent children under certain circumstances ?
Nothing justifies making the admission of minors over 12 years old subject to the condition for integration , or excluding minor children over 15 years old .
The definition of a third-country national child should be the same as that of another European child .
A child is a child .
Whatever his nationality , he has the right to live with his parents .
This provision appears to run counter to Member States ' international obligations on children 's rights .
Such inconsistencies are unjustified and unjustifiable .
As regards the length of the procedure , as soon as the application for family reunification is submitted , it must be possible for this to take effect within a reasonable time .
A waiting time of three years of marriage is much too long .
We do not ask Europeans to have been married for three years before they can live together .
Yet the principle of the right to live as a family is simple .
When a foreigner legally resident in a Union Member State holds a residence permit valid for one year , the right to family reunification should be automatic .
Furthermore , with this restrictive proposal , family life is in danger of becoming an ordeal , especially for women .
In actual fact , the directive stipulates that the grant of a residence permit is limited to a period of one year and is renewable under certain circumstances .
Now , the permit issued should have the same duration as that of the spouse .
The stipulated period of five years before an autonomous residence permit is granted to the spouse is much too long .
The lack of legal autonomy often makes women totally dependent on their husbands , which is unacceptable in a Europe that upholds women 's rights .
Moreover , given that access to employment for members of the family is not a right from the moment of entry , this forces one of the spouses to bear all the expenses and block any social integration of the other spouse .
This proposal for a directive is the result of a philosophy which conflicts with that adopted last year .
Not only does it conflict with the talk of integration urged by many of those involved , but it also incites immigrants ' children to violent reactions in the face of the injustice experienced .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , once again I can only highlight the fact that the text that has been submitted to us represents a significant pro-immigration shift .
The idea is always the same : to promote ever more immigration in Europe and to make the right to family reunification the driving force behind this Community policy .
One month ago , the European Union 's Justice and Home Affairs Council reached a difficult consensus on the directive on family reunification .
Today the rapporteur is proposing to amend this compromise , that she considers to be too restrictive , because it does not go far enough in advocating the right to extended family reunification .
What is actually proposed here is an extension of the definition of family member to include unmarried partners , children of full age and relatives in the ascending line if they have no other means of support .
But who is going to decide whether the fact that they have no other means of support is legally significant ?
Even a homosexual partnership , for instance , is seen here as equivalent to a family relationship .
Nevertheless , it states , the relationship will have to be stable and long term .
What a joke !
But the floodgates have been opened .
They have for all applicants .
This means that if just one person comes in almost fifteen more will be able to settle with them .
We are not unsympathetic to the fact that some foreign families have to live apart .
But if you want to avoid their being uprooted as a result , why do you never consider , in these times of unemployment , the possibility of organising family reunification in the countries of origin ?
And why not devote a portion of our development funds to this , as all too often these funds actually only serve to take money from the pockets of the poor in rich countries to line the pockets of the rich in poor countries .
Is this the real purpose of family reunification ?
Should it not instead be focused on the migrants ' countries of origin ?
More than ever we denounce this immigration of colonisation , which is organised by the Member States with the active collusion of the European institutions : our right to asylum is a mess ; border checks have been abandoned ; illegal immigrants are having their positions legalised ; marriages of convenience are flourishing , and so on .
All of this must stop . It is our duty to put an end to this suicidal policy that is being pursued by Europe .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , this draft directive is , in fact , the first legal instrument to be introduced by us in the realm of legal immigration .
I am therefore pleased that , at least now at the third attempt , the proposal presented by the Commission is based on a sound approach , and we support it , not least because it incorporates many of our parliamentary proposals , particularly those made by the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats .
I consider it especially encouraging , for the sake of the labour market in the European Union , the social safety net and the interests of the Union with regard to the integration of non-EU nationals , that the concept of the family introduced in this draft is that of the nuclear family , in other words that the family as defined in the draft is restricted to parents and minor children .
I also find it encouraging that the Council has already given its political approval to this proposal and that we can expect the final adoption of the directive based on this narrow definition of the family to be effected in the month of May .
The report before us , on the other hand , which we are now discussing , is a very definite backward step , a return to the Stone Age , as it were , of immigration policy .
It quite simply ignores the realities and opportunities that exist in our Member States .
For example , by redefining the family , you are calling for the extension of the directive to unmarried partners , adult offspring and other relatives .
You even go so far as to ask for the immigration of second and third wives and their children .
That , if I may say so , is inconsistent with the tradition and culture of Europe .
You call for shorter time limits , and you seek to curb Member States ' scope to impose appropriate restrictions through their own national laws and regulations .
The proposal presented by the Commission is sound .
We in the Group of the European People 's Party shall support it .
We utterly reject , however , the proposals tabled by the rapporteur , which would extend the concept of family far beyond the limits that the European Union can accept as a tolerable basis for its immigration policy .
Mr President , the report contains proposals which , if they were binding , might go some way towards reducing the difficulties that we are experiencing with family reunification .
However , it does not go far enough and some of the amendments proposed are a step backwards and we will reject them .
The right to family reunification has to be an absolute right .
In fact the report seems to be primarily concerned with placing limitations on this right on a wide variety of pretexts so as to prevent it from facilitating so-called illegal immigration .
This motivation , which is despicable from a human point of view , reduces the scope of the few positive aspects of the text .
Society is so lacking in egalitarian values and there is so much poverty in the world that more and more poor people are trying to escape hunger and suffering and find refuge in the countries of Europe ; all too often they unfortunately fail to do so .
The national States and the European institutions can put up all the barbed wire they like , both literally and in legal terms , to prevent this happening , but they will not succeed .
The measures of constraint to turn away those who are fleeing poverty only serve to show the inhumanity of those who take and support these measures .
Mr President , the proposal for a directive on family reunification has been rearing its ugly head in the European Parliament periodically since 1999 .
The reason for this game of ping-pong is simple : first , the Commission makes an over-liberal proposal ; the European Parliament approves it and raises the bid even higher ; finally , the Council - which appears to be the most responsible of the three - says no and the cycle starts all over again .
This time the Commission thinks it has found an invincible weapon .
It keeps a low profile on most of the provisions contested by the Council as if it were giving in , but introduces a new Article 19 at the end of the text explaining that all of these matters will be re-examined no more than two years later .
Their tactics are clear .
The idea is , at least initially , to gain approval for minimal European legislation on family reunification so as to have the principle of European law and European intervention recognised .
Subsequently , the Commission will use these points in its favour to return to the attack , all the more so given that Article 19 already states which provisions will have to be amended .
As for the Council , there is a risk that they will let the text go through because they will all say - as they do all too often : ' the essential points are safe for the time being and as for the rest we will see in two years ' time ' .
We think , for our part , that the Council should not allow itself to be caught up in this chain of events .
Family reunification accounts for a huge number of immigrants today and it is important for each Member State to retain its ability to keep it under close surveillance , so as to tailor it to its reception capacity .
The Commission and the European Parliament dream of imposing an a priori extension of this right on the Member States , but it is out of the question that they would let this happen .
We therefore think that this directive would serve no purpose and would be dangerous for the Member States , particularly since the Convention on the Future of Europe is showing a willingness to have all of these issues decided by qualified majority .
Mr President , I should like to intervene very briefly pursuant to Rule 122 to make a personal statement , because aspersions have been cast on me by Mr Evans .
You are right , Mr Evans , that my wife 's family is from the Far East and that as a result they do live more than 10 000 kilometres away .
I adore my wife .
I hold my parents-in-law very dear ; I visit them frequently in Japan and they come to visit me .
But neither they nor my brothers-in-law nor my wife 's cousins have ever considered that the fact that she had become my wife gave them an automatic right to remain and be resident for life in the territory of the European Union .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I should like to begin by pointing out that establishing common standards on the question of family reunification is for us an important element in a real common immigration policy .
This is an outcome of the Tampere European Council deliberations and was recently confirmed at Laeken .
It is , however , a very sensitive subject in which it is natural that national realities should loom large .
Hence it is difficult to reach solutions and compromises , which indeed accounts for the fact that this proposal has been under discussion in the Council for almost two years .
The Commission has thus come up with this new proposal ; although it is far from ideal , it is certainly feasible and will allow a start to be made on the process of harmonising legislation on admission for family reunification purposes .
I must therefore congratulate the Commissioner , Mr António Vitorino , on the pragmatic approach that has made it possible to deal with the points that were still causing problems and include the compromises that have in fact been reached in the Council .
I consider this solution of a multi-stage process a judicious one , as it provides for great flexibility on the points where there is still stalemate , while at the same time granting national legislations some room for manoeuvre .
I also congratulate him on the provision he has termed a rendezvous , which establishes that this flexibility and derogation will be subject to priority review after two years .
For all these reasons , while congratulating Mrs Carmen Cerdeira Morterero on the work she has done , I have to criticise her attempt to broaden the scope of family reunification too far ; I believe this is undesirable not just because it is not possible in this first stage in view of the diversity of national legislation on this subject , but also because it may lead to situations of uncontrolled abuse in which the receiving country is unable to create the necessary conditions for full integration and the peaceful coexistence of foreigners and nationals .
I should also like to recall that we have here a directive that is attempting to impose minimum standards , whereby the Member States , according to their traditions and national legislation , have every right to adopt more favourable rules on family reunification .
I hope , Mr President , that , regardless of our differences of opinion - which are natural and , in any case , essential in a democracy - we can pool our efforts to set up a clear , transparent legal framework to ensure that legal immigrants are integrated into the receiving countries . Family reunification is certainly one factor in this framework that will encourage the personal stability of the immigrant and support this integration .
In accordance with the agenda , the debate on this report is now interrupted and will be resumed later at 9 p.m.

The next item is the Commission statement on the economic forecasts for spring ; guidelines for employment .
The Commissioner , Mr Pedro Solbes Mira , has the floor .
Mr President , both my colleague , Mrs Diamantopoulou , and myself are going to give you full information on the broad guidelines for economic and employment policy .
This afternoon , the Commission has just decided to adopt its recommendation for the employment guidelines for 2003-2005 .
It focuses on the contribution economic policies can make to the Union 's strategic objective established in Lisbon .
The economic policy guidelines form part of a coordinated package of guidelines , together with the employment guidelines , which will be presented by my colleague , Mrs Diamantopoulou .
Within the context of rationalisation , and in response to the request from the Spring European Council in Brussels , the economic policy guidelines have experienced a series of changes .
They are more concise and they focus on the key questions of economic policy ; their general section has been drastically reduced , as well as the number of guidelines they contain , but , nevertheless , they are still exhaustive and they still deal with all the economic problems , though in a more condensed manner .
With regard to the guidelines by country , these are now clearly structured in accordance with the great specific economic policy challenges of each country .
This also allows greater attention to be paid to the essential issues of economic policy .
Furthermore , the specific guidelines are explicitly linked to the general guidelines , from which they stem .
Finally , a specific section is added on the euro zone and the challenges it is faced with .
This approach , however , does not represent a radical break with the past , since the basic strategy implemented over recent years , particularly since Lisbon , is still valid .
While confirming these strategies , the economic policy guidelines insist on the need for macroeconomic policies to maintain stability and support growth in order to decisively achieve economic reforms and in order to guarantee that growth is sustainable in the face of economic , environmental and social changes .
I will not deal with these three issues in detail . I will restrict myself to making a few comments on each of them .
With regard to macroeconomic policies , the current uncertain economic situation makes it essential that policies inspire confidence .
Macroeconomic policies must be geared towards the need to promote short-term growth and at the same time preserve macroeconomic stability .
In relation to budgetary policy , this means that flexibility must be combined with a credible adjustment .
Wherever possible , automatic stabilisers will have to operate fully , but we must also continue to make progress on reducing deficits .
These guiding principles respond to the agreement on the strengthening of the coordination of budgetary policies laid down in the Commission 's Communication last November .
In particular , the need to reduce , where necessary , structural deficits by at least half a point of GDP is included in it .
Furthermore , it is important that wage evolution is compatible with price stability and increases in productivity , in order to re-establish the profit margins needed to promote the expansion of employment-generating investment .
With regard to the second point - promoting growth potential - the economic policy guidelines duly recognise the need for structural reforms .
If one thing demonstrates the Union 's weakness in the face of a global slowdown , it is undoubtedly the need to further strengthen our economy 's capacity for growth and its resistance to shocks .
In order to stimulate job creation , the Member States must improve the combined effect of social security taxes , acting both by means of tax rates and of criteria for the provision of social security services .
They must promote a more flexible organisation of work , revise labour legislation and make appropriate efforts on education and training .
We must also facilitate the mobility of the workforce by promoting the recognition of pension and social security rights .
Naturally , these measures must be supplemented with active labour market measures in order to assist in job-finding .
The broad guidelines also propose measures to promote competition in the products and capital markets , which stimulate entrepreneurial spirit as well as the transition to a knowledge-based economy .
In order to improve the funding conditions and , in particular , access to funding for small and medium-sized businesses , the capital risk action plan must be fully applied before the end of the year .
Furthermore , recent events have demonstrated the need for better rules on the management of companies and for appropriate financial supervision .
Finally , with regard to sustainability , the guidelines deal with long-term sustainability of public funds bearing in mind , above all , the problem of the ageing of the population .
Pension reform must be aimed at improving financial sustainability , promoting longer working lives and removing the incentives for early retirements , in order to make more flexible models for professional and employment development possible .
In accordance with November 's Communication , the guidelines reflect the consensus that we must do more to deal with public debt and to guarantee that it continues to decrease .
In relation to environmental sustainability , the guidelines maintain that economic growth must not be at the expense of the environment .
It is therefore necessary to combine the legislative instruments with others based on the market .
To this end , the Member States will have to reduce subsidies , tax exemptions and other incentives which have a negative impact on the environment .
Finally , it also deals with economic policies ' contribution to social sustainability .
Employment is the best means of protection against poverty and exclusion , and job creation depends on there being favourable conditions for activity and investment in the private sector .
The Member States must take the necessary measures to improve the functioning of the labour market and to allow salaries to reflect differences in productivity .
The Commission has established this strategy in a clear way .
By doing this we are attempting to be as firm as possible with regard to compliance , placing more emphasis on this element .
Mr President , a month ago I presented the revised Employment Strategy to Parliament .
I think that today , with the joint presentation of the two packages , we are taking an important step and making an important contribution to improved and faster implementation of the Lisbon objectives , while at the same time taking account of the needs and problems of an enlarged Europe .
The indicators and forecasts for the period of time in question , with fairly worrying economic growth indicators , show that employment maintained a low rate of growth in 2002 . The increase in employment was around 1.1 % , which means 500 000 new jobs , although we must of course assume that the poor growth forecasts for next year will also have repercussions on employment .
It is therefore very important for us to coordinate and step up our efforts so that we can fire growth and help create jobs .
The proposal we are presenting has a fundamental change in comparison with the past .
This is the result of broad consultations with Parliament , the social partners and the Member States ; it is the result of a thorough analysis and evaluation of the previous five years and , when it was presented for the first time in January , it really did have broad support from the Council .
The employment guidelines are being presented this year together with the economic guidelines .
It is significant that we have taken an important step this year as far as the timing is concerned .
This will avoid the confusion which has arisen in previous years , when there was six months ' difference between the two packages . We have also taken an important step as far as the substance is concerned , because we have achieved a considerable degree of cohesion and compatibility between the two packages of guidelines , which will be conducive to better coordination and more efficient cooperation with the Member States .
There are fewer guidelines and they are simpler and , of course , they are very clear as regards the results they must achieve .
The guidelines are not particularly analytical , because employment policies have a strong national dimension and there are questions of subsidiarity , so that every country must , to some degree , select the means it will use .
However , they have clear political guidelines and we do , of course , elucidate specific results which must be achieved in each sector , linked in several cases to quantitative targets .
What is the new structure ?
What is the new conception of the employment package ?
The political basis is the interaction needed between economic policies , employment policies and social policies .
So there are three objectives : more jobs , better jobs and a labour market which does not exclude anyone .
These three objectives underpin ten priorities which basically cover a broad range of reforms .
These reforms relate to people 's needs . Specifically , they relate to lifelong learning and the services which need to be provided to the unemployed ; they refer to education systems , and of course they refer to companies , for example the problem of bureaucracy in companies and the question of supporting companies and promoting entrepreneurship .
They also refer to a very broad range of reforms such as reforms in social security and protection systems , the question of pensions , the question of taxation , especially when it refers to low wages . And finally , they refer to the question of equality of the two sexes and the participation of women in the labour market , which is mainstreamed in all the policies , although there is , of course , a specific priority which relates to equality of the sexes and all groups subject to discrimination .
They do , of course , follow on from the previous guidelines , but the new factors mainly refer to the question of the ageing population , the need for policies which will keep older workers in the labour market and the question of mobility .
One interesting new factor is undeclared work , which is also a priority of the Italian Presidency .
Ladies and gentlemen , I should like to refer to the quantitative targets .
The Employment Strategy is based on the method of open cooperation .
Consequently , there are no sanctions and there are no binding measures .
This means that , if this is to be more than an exposé of ideas , we need to agree and commit to specific results , to specific quantitative targets .
We therefore propose a series of quantitative targets .
Most of them are of a national character ; in other words , they are set by the Member States , although there are indicators for all of them , and there is just one exception , undeclared work and the serious analysis on the part of the Commission .
Finally , there are guidelines relating to the intergovernmental model as far as the participation of the social partners and reform of employment services are concerned and , finally , there is the question of recommendations , with specific recommendations for each Member State .
We have taken account of the analysis of the labour market in each Member State and we have looked at the recommendations in the light and from the point of view of the new guidelines .
There are 57 recommendations to the Member States this year and , of course , I must reiterate the compatibility and cohesion which exists with the timing guidelines to which Mr Solbes referred .
I am sorry that Parliament will be pressed for time this year in order to give its opinion on the employment package .
I would like to assure you that the Commission will do whatever it can to help Parliament work through this in a short space of time and as efficiently as possible , and I hope that , from next year , there will be better and , from the time point of view , more relaxed communication between us .
Mr President , what the Commissioners have presented here basically reaffirms the continuation of the Stability Pact policy , the policy that has just been set forth at the Brussels Summit of speeding up liberalisation and making the labour market more flexible .
In other words , it is an insistence on more of the same .
The consequences are proving disastrous , particularly in the country I come from , Portugal , where we have entered a technical recession , where we are falling farther behind European Union averages , where unemployment is growing faster than in the European Union as a whole and where we have the highest rate of poverty , including persistent poverty .
A change of policy is therefore needed . My question is : when will the stability pact be reviewed , so that we can be sure of public investment , job creation , improved purchasing power and effective measures to tackle poverty and social exclusion ?
Mr President , quite obviously the European Union is currently experiencing a mild recession and the future is not very bright either .
The costs of the war and then the costs of the peace will weigh heavily on the world economy and therefore also on the European economy .
Can we afford , Commissioner , to continue to suffocate ourselves with a dogmatic policy of stability , which is seen as an end in itself ?
Of course stability is a public good !
But economic policy cannot be restricted solely to combating public deficits .
At present , the United States , paradoxically , has a much more pragmatic economic and fiscal policy than Europe .
The American public deficit , calculated in accordance with the Maastricht criteria , would now be in excess of 5 % .
Should not the Stability and Growth Pact be supplemented , Commissioner , with a pact to coordinate economic policy , which would give a boost to growth and employment and would seek to stimulate public and private investment in research on infrastructure and regional development , and in training and the labour market ?
Mr President , today 's debate relates to the broad economic policy guidelines for generating more employment in Europe .
The Commission does not believe that the problems arising in Europe relate to an expansive fiscal policy .
The stabilisers are playing a role , they are allowing this expansive policy to take place .
On the other hand , it has not so far been demonstrated that the countries with expansive fiscal policies achieve better results in terms of growth .
In fact , I would say that the correlation is the opposite : countries with more healthy tax policies are those with the highest growth levels .
I believe that the current problems do not - as I have said many times - relate to the Stability Pact , but that they are problems relating to the reforms necessary to increase our growth potential in Europe .
And this is closely related to the proposals we are making in our broad guidelines .
In my opinion , the modification introduced by the Commission in November on the Stability Pact gives us sufficient room for manoeuvre to confront the current circumstances .
Mr President , Commissioners , ladies and gentlemen , I do not agree with my fellow Member , Mr Goebbels , on the first aspect .
I believe we have to maintain the discipline established in the Stability Pacts because it gives the European Union a solidity and credibility which are greater than those of the United States , which , in the analysis of economies at international level shows a deficit which is causing great concern .
I would like to insist on the need for there to genuinely be effective coordination and effective compliance with the commitments established in the Stability Pacts on the part of the Member States and I believe , on the basis of the proposals that have been made here , that if the Commission does not have greater capacity to influence this compliance in an area such as the use of tax policy , for example , the certainty that the objectives will be achieved is really very limited .
I would insist , and I believe Parliament generally supports this , on the degree of compliance and fulfilment of the Member States ' commitments , since , as the current situation demonstrates , unfortunately there are certain very important States which , rather than moving closer , are moving further away in terms of providing credibility and solvency .
Mr President , I shall be very brief . I wish to begin by addressing sincere thanks to the Commissioners .
I want to ask two questions arising out of what has been said in Parliament during the debate .
The first question concerns the demographic challenge , which will be one of the most important issues , and perhaps the most important of all , for the future of the EU .
What initiatives are the Commissioners prepared to take to create a more family- and child-friendly policy , enabling family life and childcare to be combined with working life ?
My second question concerns what Commissioner Diamantopoulou mentioned regarding older workers .
In the United States , it is unconstitutional to force older people to retire .
Should the issue of the compulsory retirement of older people be looked into in the European Union too , and ought older people to be given the option of continuing in work voluntarily for longer than they are at present ?
Last of all , I just want to emphasise that it is important for the Stability and Growth Pact to be clear and not to concern itself with politics without there being clear criteria .
Mr President , I have three questions .
I approve of the coordination of economic and employment policy guidelines .
When will it be time also to integrate the social policy guidelines into this coordination ?
Growth , employment and social welfare belong together .
With the growth and increase in employment we have at present , we shall not successfully meet our future social commitments in respect , for example , of pensions .
How , as the Commission , do you view this ?
We very often talk about human capital and lifelong learning .
So that we might make better use of the work force , what , in practical terms , do you propose when it comes to lifelong learning and quality in the workplace ?
Mr President , I shall start with the question put by Mrs Figueiredo , who linked the increase in unemployment in Portugal with the stability pact .
I think that the analysis of the labour market in Portugal and the recommendations for this country make interesting reading .
You can see that there is a very serious productivity problem , which has to do with investment in human resources , with large numbers of students dropping out of school and with a very large number of people who have not attended secondary school .
The lack of qualifications , the lack of manpower with special skills impacts on the field of small and medium-sized enterprises and the field of innovation and high technology .
If you go further , you will see that there is a particular problem in the field of women where , although there is a high proportion of women in work compared with other countries , if you analyse the female labour market , you will see that it is centred entirely around very low paid jobs and part-time jobs , again due to lack of skills among women .
Therefore , the policies which need to be applied and on which the Portuguese Government has , of course , made a great deal of progress , relate to structural changes which have to do with manpower .
Of course , no one believes that it is just a question of structural changes , rather than of the overall development of a country , but we cannot ignore these important policies .
On the second question raised by Mr Bouwman , I believe that the very close cooperation we had since November at all stages of processing the proposals prepared the parliamentary committee in question , so that it was able to give an adequate response in an efficient manner within this short space of time .
We shall try next year to make full use of the margins available within the framework of synchronisation , so that Parliament can play an active part .
On the question of older workers and how they can stay in the labour market , early retirement schemes have been used by companies in Europe as a restructuring tool for a great many years .
In both the public and private sectors , every major restructuring has been linked with privileges or a pension scheme at a very young age for workers .
As a result , we have a large number of relatively young pensioners , who are under 55 years of age , and of course it has to be said that this has reached its limit .
Today , the economic situation is such , especially in the pension systems in both the public and private sectors , that it would find it very hard to tolerate this sort of solution .
Therefore , first of all , early retirement cannot be seen as a solution either for companies or for workers , who retire at an active age and find it hard not to be involved in economic life , given that there has been a considerable rise in life expectancy .
Of course , we cannot talk about abolishing early retirement schemes , unless this is accompanied by a decision with policies to keep these people in the labour market .
In this respect , the guidelines we are proposing also contain policies and specific targets for training , for investing in these people so that they can make a career change , for supporting them so that they can break into the field of small and medium-sized enterprises and set up their own businesses ; policies which will keep them active .
I repeat that , in the 22 quantitative targets you will see in the texts , there are targets relating to workers over 55 and , of course , one of these targets was agreed last year at the Barcelona Council .
What exactly are we proposing on the question of investment in human resources ?
Within the ten priorities we refer to , there is the question of lifelong learning and a proposal for a quantitative target for each country 's investment in lifelong learning in relation to total labour costs .
We must say that , at the moment , the numbers in Europe are very , very small .
2.4 % of labour costs is being invested in workers in the private sector ; there are guidelines and specific targets for the education system and there is the target of 80 % of the population to have undergone training equivalent to secondary education by 2010 , so that they can stay in the job market and so that they are employable .
And I think that , if these quantitative targets are ultimately accepted at national level , it will be an important political strength for the national governments .
Thank you , Mrs Diamantopoulos .
Mr President , I want to begin by commenting very briefly on the time frame .
I am Parliament 's rapporteur when it comes to the guidelines we are discussing now .
I want to state that I did not receive the final wording of the guidelines until a few minutes ago when I came down to the Chamber just before 5 p.m.
I shall have finished my work in two days ' time .
My report will be submitted for translation on Friday morning .
These are unacceptable conditions , but I must not waste any more time talking about this right now .
I want instead to address a political issue that I believe to be a major issue .
I think that the best thing of all about the Commission 's European employment strategy is the very strong emphasis upon the quality aspect .
That , I believe , is above all what basically distinguishes our own labour market from those in the United States , Japan and elsewhere .
The quality dimension is crucial but , at the same time , there is a pressure to reduce labour costs that has nothing to do with quality .
How is this contradiction to be resolved between this pressure to reduce costs and the demands for quality ?
Mr President , I will reply quickly .
We all currently have the problem of difficulties with times , but we already knew this during the process of achieving streamlining .
There is no doubt that in the definition of the benchmark systems , there are no implications from the point of view of Community obligation .
There is a system for reviewing figures and behaviour and , with regard to the need raised by the honourable Members to be provided with the figures , many of them are already available in the spring report which we presented .
The figures which appear in it are not the absolute figures ; in many cases , there are no aggregated Community figures , but there are figures for each of the Member States in relation to R + D and other types of education , which provide a degree of homogeneity enabling us to compare what is happening in each of them .
Mr Alavanos has the floor for a point of order .
I would ask you to be brief .
Mr President , I tabled Question No 47 on the subject of the protection of dry walls , the low stone walls built on the Greek islands to stop soil erosion .
This is an environmental , purely an environmental issue .
It is not a foreign policy or any other issue .
My question should have been included in the questions to Mrs Wallström and I should like to ask for it to be included , primarily on the basis of the number allocated to it when it was tabled .
This is a question which comes within the competence of Mrs Wallström .
Perhaps Parliament 's services made a mistake .
Please could it be included there , as the first question for Mrs Wallström , on the basis of when it was tabled and the number allocated to it ?
Mr Alavanos , I take very good note .
As you know , it is the Commission that informs Parliament and informs the President of Parliament .
I simply organise the debate during this sitting , but I take very good note of what you say and I will communicate it to the relevant bodies , both to the Commission and to the President of Parliament .
The next item is Question Time ( B5-0088 / 2003 ) .
The following questions are addressed to the Commission .
Part I
Question No 33 by José Ignacio Salafranca Sánchez-Neyra ( H-0176 / 03 ) :
Subject : Abolition of the scheme of generalised tariff preferences for some sectors in Central America and the Andean Community , through graduation
Does the Commission take the view that abolishing tariff preferences ( through the adoption by the EC of proposal ( COM / 2003 / 0045 final ) for a Council regulation implementing Article 12 of Council Regulation ( EC ) 2501 / 2001
I would remind you that the graduation mechanism , which is the subject of Mr Salafranca 's question , has been part of our Generalised System of Preferences since 1995 .
This system seeks to encourage the economic development of the countries benefiting from these preferences by enabling them to increase their exports to the Community and by targeting these tariff preferences at the countries that need them most .
The objective of this system is to encourage the development of exports from the countries that benefit from the preferences , with the corollary that the preferential treatment has to stop once this objective is reached .
This system of trade preferences cannot go on forever ; it has to have a time limit , which is why we have the graduation mechanism .
This enables limits to be imposed , based on the fact that only some sectors need the GSP .
This graduation is determined by objective and neutral criteria , which are included in our legislation and are directly linked to the export specialisation in the countries concerned .
The Commission understands the concerns expressed by Mr Salafranca , which moreover coincide with those expressed by some of the beneficiary countries .
Nevertheless , we feel that , overall , fears about the impact of this graduation are exaggerated , even if we are prepared to show a little flexibility in this case .
In the case of Colombia , which is the subject of the first part of your question , most of the exports concerned are cut flowers and the exports mainly go to the American market .
It is therefore not very likely that a slight increase in European customs duties will affect the general level of exports of cut flowers from Colombia .
In the case of Costa Rica , where it is both plants and cut flowers that are affected , we do not share the concerns that have been expressed in various quarters either .
Costa Rica is a country that is developing relatively well .
Its overall economic situation has improved and in terms of specialisation , which defines as it were the competitiveness of a sector in the country compared with this same sector in other countries , it is clear that Costa Rica remains competitive .
Turning now to your question about the impact of the graduation mechanism on countries that benefit from the specific system of preferences fighting against the cultivation of drugs , it is true that when it was first set up the graduation mechanism did not apply to the ' Drugs ' GSP .
The situation was changed in 2001 with a Council regulation applying the new scheme of preferences up to 2005 and bringing the ' Drugs ' GSP into line as it were with the standard scheme .
Why this change ?
Because we wanted to avoid this ' Drugs ' GSP being challenged at the WTO on the grounds of its discriminatory nature .
Incidentally it did not escape the attention of India , which has opened a dispute against us before the WTO on this matter .
I think that we should be able to defend ourselves .
Finally , let us take a look at the results of applying the graduation mechanism in the past .
We see that the withdrawal of preferences has generally not hindered exports of the products concerned from the beneficiary countries .
If we look at what has happened in the region mentioned in the question , and in particular in Chile and Mexico , we see that applying graduation has not stopped exports from these countries continuing to grow .
It is also true that multilateral negotiations are yielding regular cuts in customs duties , with the result that both duties and preferences are less and less significant as time goes on .
Let us remember finally that if this preferential treatment is withdrawn , it is the European importer that has to pay the duty in question , perhaps by cutting his margin slightly , and we all know that in the case of an importer this is usually comfortable .
Colombia and Costa Rica therefore meet the objective conditions in our legislation for having the graduation mechanism applied and we do not agree with the analysis according to which this would be a considerable blow to their economies .
Graduation is not a sanction ; quite the opposite .
It means that the exports of the country concerned have reached a level that is self-sustaining without the support of the preferences system and that the objectives of economic competitiveness and maturity that we wanted to foster have been reached .
That being said , and to respond to the concerns that have been expressed both by several Members of Parliament and by some of our Member States , as well as by some traders and , obviously , by the countries in question , the Commission has agreed to show a degree of flexibility .
The graduation mechanism , which was supposed to enter into force at the end of 2002 as provided for in the regulation , has not yet entered into force and the countries have therefore been able to continue to benefit from the GSP .
The final date is still under discussion and should be decided on shortly by the Council of Ministers .
So , even though we do not share all of the concerns that have been expressed , in this case we have started to show flexibility .
Mr President , the Commission is an essentially political institution , in my view at least , and I would like the Commissioner to give me a political reply .
Commissioner , I have listened very carefully to your reply for 6 minutes , but I would like to ask , from a political point of view , whether it can seriously be argued that the removal of these preferences , through the modulation mechanism , is going to benefit a country such as Colombia which has 26 million people living in poverty and in which 30 000 people die as a result of violence each year ?
Or a country such as Costa Rica , where these products are cultivated in sensitive areas , where there are immigrants , heads of families and women ?
I frankly believe , Commissioner , that they are not going to benefit these countries , and that no comparison can be made with Mexico or with Chile .
You avoided answering the fourth and fifth aspects of my question and I am not going to ask you to reply , but you spoke of flexibility and I would like to know how the Commission measures its flexibility .
By being able to hold talks in relation to the entry into force of these measures ?
Would the Commission be prepared to remove agricultural substitute products from this system ?
And finally , what does the Commission intend to do when the Drugs system of generalised preferences expires in 2004 ?
Does the Commission intend to renew it ?
It had not escaped me , Mr Salafranca , that the Commission is supposed to be a slightly more political than technical institution .
Nevertheless , as political as it may be , its objective is to apply the treaties , rules and legislation that the European Union has adopted for itself .
If we do not do so then we are failing in our duties , and that is a political matter , not a technical one .
Is this modest reduction in customs duties on cut flowers going to have a serious and lasting impact on Costa Rica and Colombia ?
We do not think so .
You can express a contrary view .
The only thing that can decide between us for the time being are precedents .
And the precedents have shown us that there were no major risks .
Nevertheless , it is because it is sensitive to the political situation that the Commission has agreed to delay implementation of this graduation .
Until when ?
We are in the process of discussing this with the Council of Ministers , which , as is so often the case where trade policy is concerned , has the last word on this matter .
Would a specific derogation for agricultural products be welcome ?
We do not think so , for one simple reason : that it would further weaken the compatibility with WTO rules of our generalised system of preferences , which , as you know , has been challenged by India on the grounds , I might add , that it does not benefit from the ' Drugs ' GSP itself .
We do not therefore wish to bring grist to the mill of those who , as it were , want to see the back of this scheme .
Finally , what will happen in 2004 ?
The scheme expires at the end of 2004 and we will decide next year between two options which currently seem to be possibilities : either to modify the scheme as from 1 January 2005 or to extend it for a certain period of time .
The choice between these two hypotheses will depend on how far the round of negotiations has advanced , because it would be good to know the general trend in tariff levels before determining the exact preferences .
This decision will be made by the Commission during the course of next year .
Question No 34 by Myrsini Zorba ( H-0214 / 03 ) :
Subject : ECHO in Iraq
In 2002 , ECHO provided aid to Iraq worth ? 15 million .
The Commission is now seeking ? 100 million , of which ? 21 million has already been announced , with an additional ? 79 million being sought from the emergency reserve .
Given that , under the present circumstances , the amount of aid has been greatly increased and that ECHO is represented in the region by just five people based in Amman , is this representation adequate for today 's enormous humanitarian needs ?
Will there be an increase in the number of ECHO representatives in the region and in Iraq as well ?
Has there been any evaluation of ECHO 's management of its activities to date ?
Is the idea of a more permanent structure in Iraq and for the region viable ?
Is there an agreement with the United Nations for ' the day after ' ?
Thank you very much , Mr Nielson .
We will move on to the second part of Question Time , during which the three Commissioners present will be providing answers .
Part II
Questions to Commissioner Liikanen
Question No 35 by Bill Newton Dunn ( H-0177 / 03 ) :
Subject : Are hotline numbers known sufficiently to the public ?
The Commission has been given money by the Budgetary Authority to encourage all Member States to publicise hotline numbers for use by the public when they encounter unpleasant material on the Internet .
Is the Commission satisfied - looking deep into its heart for the truth - that these numbers are known to anything more than a tiny minority of the public ?
When does it believe that these useful numbers will become sufficiently widely known ?
Thank you very much , Mr Liikanen .
We will move on to the questions to Mrs Wallström .
Questions to Commissioner Wallström
Question No 37 by Torben Lund ( H-0179 / 03 ) :
Subject : Endocrine disrupting chemicals and test methods
In its opinion of 26 October 2000
Mr President . I would like to thank Commissioner Wallström for a very full answer .
The reason for my question is , of course , that it is taking time to find these recognised test methods .
We should have had a method for the effects on health last year , and for the effects on the environment now in 2003-2005 .
Now I understand that the methods for health effects will not be produced until 2004 ; these test strategies that are to be developed through OECD systems have become something of a perpetual motion machine .
I find this very alarming , since it means that nothing can be done .
Unless the substances are also toxic or hazardous for other reasons , we cannot even start to apply the precautionary principle , since there are no recognised test methods .
I would like to ask about the last thing that Commissioner Wallström mentioned , namely the issue of getting hormone-disturbing substances included in the category of ' hazardous substances ' in new chemicals legislation and as an independent hazard criterion , on a par with what may be carcinogenic or mutagenic substances .
Surely it is important to take the step now and say that this is something that is so risky for us that there is a need for us to include it as an independent hazard criterion ?
Mr President , Mr Lund , what we have here is an extremely complicated procedure .
At the same time , it is important for the EU to participate in an international context .
This is clearly a cross-border problem .
It is important for us to remain within the framework of the OECD 's activities and to try to develop these methods .
I do not believe that there is anyone who wants to delay this work .
On the contrary , we all feel a need to press on and ensure that we as quickly as possible obtain test methods and systems for working with these hormone-disturbing substances .
We can only promise that we shall do everything we can to ensure that the work produces good results .
What we are now discussing in connection with the new chemicals legislation is the fact that , as long as we lack clear definitions and clear test methods , together with agreed systems for using these , we must act on a case-by-case basis .
The fact that , in the discussions we have had so far , specific mention has been made of the group of endocrine-disrupting substances is a factor pointing in the direction of future clarity .
The next stage is just to work as quickly as we can to come up with agreed methods of dealing with such substances .
Question No 38 by Jan Dhaene ( H-0197 / 03 ) :
Subject : Setting up a European civil defence corps
There is an urgent need to set up a European civil defence corps .
This became apparent once again after the Prestige disaster .
These ' Green Berets ' under the European flag could provide assistance in the wake of disasters all over the Union and would have specialised equipment which not all Member States can afford .
How much progress has the Commission made on implementing this proposal ?
Which Member States have already agreed to cooperate ?
When will the Commission present the proposal to the Council ?
Thank you very much , Commissioner , for your extensive and very well-informed reply .
Four Members have requested the floor , but according to the Rules of Procedure , only two supplementary questions can be put .
In accordance with the policy of transparency which we value so much , I will tell you the order in which the floor was requested : Mr Rübig , first of all , then Mr Ortuondo , and next Mr Nogueira followed by Mr Wuermeling .
I am therefore going to give the floor to the first two Members , Mr Rübig and Mr Ortuondo .
There cannot be more than two questions .


Mr Rübig , your supplementary question .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , it is a matter of importance to all of us that speedy and effective help should be provided in disaster situations .
Might you not contemplate the compilation of a Green Paper , listing for the benefit of all our offices and of all the voluntary organisations , what the options are , or create a virtual platform where the relevant bodies could coordinate their efforts in an emergency ?
Commissioner , since the Erika accident on 19 December 1999 , several initiatives have been taken by the European Parliament and the other European institutions to increase maritime safety .
Unfortunately , the appropriate measures must not have been taken , because subsequently , in November 2002 , we suffered a new maritime accident - involving the Prestige - and now we are revising what was approved at the first opportunity , resulting from the Erika disaster .
To this end , we are currently also working in the European Parliament 's Committee on Regional Policy , Transport and Tourism on the reform of the Regulation on single-hull and double-hull oil tankers and there is a very important issue , which relates to the contribution .
You have said that there is a European Union response centre , and I would like to know whether in it you have established emergency plans , above all for sensitive coastal areas , such as those of Galicia and Brittany , where year after year there are successive oil tanker accidents which cause damage to the environment .
Question No 39 by Alexander de Roo ( H-0211 / 03 ) :
Subject : Scientific meeting at Ispra to discuss Spain 's national hydrological plan
There are press reports of a planned meeting at ISPRA between the Commission and Spanish Government representatives , including leading scientists , to discuss the scientific evidence regarding the impact of the Spanish national hydrological plan .
Can the Commission confirm that such a meeting is planned ?
If so , when will it be held , and who will participate ?
Can the Commission also indicate how this meeting will contribute to its consideration of the various concerns raised about the SNHP and its environmental impact in Spain ?
This was exactly the point .
This was the whole idea of setting up a meeting .
We have such different views on this . Even the experts are now used by one side or the other .
We wanted to bring the experts together so that we could get some more facts and have all the different views reflected in such a meeting , and actually check at expert level why we have such different figures and results .
First of all , it will be a technical , scientific meeting , because everything is being politicised .
This is where we wanted to have a flow of information which could give us some more facts before we can continue to work on this issue .
Mr President , I am going to ask two very short supplementary questions .
The first is this , and I am asking Mrs Wallström : what is the amount of and the timetable for the financing of the national hydrological plan by the European Union for 2000-2006 ?
In the second , which also has to do with the environment and Spain , I ask what is the amount forecast by the Commission for the financing of the Galicia plan established by the Spanish Government to recover the Galician coastline and to develop Galicia after the Prestige accident , also for 2000-2006 , bearing in mind that the Spanish Government considers that EUR 12 billion of global funding is needed over this period ?
I have the impression that part of Mr Nogueira 's question is supplementary to the previous question on Ispra and that another part is not supplementary .
Mr Nogueira should not have asked it since it could lead to confusion .
I would ask you to repeat the first part of the question which was supplementary , if that is convenient .
Mr President , Commissioner , the first part of my question is crucial ; it is absolutely fundamental .
Spain 's national hydrological plan absorbs a fundamental part of the Cohesion Fund for that Member State .
The Commission 's attitude to this financing is decisive for Spain 's national hydrological plan to be taken forward or not .
I believe the Commissioner is aware of this and she should have clarified and explained this decisive point .
Mr President , I would like to congratulate the Commission , because I have the impression - from its answers to various questions - that in relation to the Spanish national hydrological plan , it has so far been able to distinguish between the technical and the legal problems .
Given , however , the pressure and harassment from certain Members who believe that we politicians have the right to interfere in the intimate informal relations between the countries and the Commission and particularly in the role of technical experts , I would like to ask the Commissioner , are you prepared to guarantee freedom of work for the experts in the Ispra meeting , which is technical - as she has said - and to prevent politicisation as a result of individual and specific interests ?
Because we could also interfere in relation to some issues , such as nitrates in the Netherlands , amongst others .
My question is , are you prepared to guarantee the intimacy and freedom of experts to work so that their work is not interfered with or subjected to pressures ?
Thank you very much , Mrs Wallström , for the information you have contributed to Parliament this afternoon .
We will begin the final part of Question Time .
Mr Vitorino will answer these questions .
Questions to Commissioner Vitorino
Question No 40 by Bernd Posselt ( H-0139 / 03 ) :
Subject : Common border policing
What is the Commission 's view of the latest efforts to introduce joint border policing with the applicant countries , and what steps are planned in the near future with a view to achieving EU border policing ?
Thank you , Commissioner , for that very important information .
Now , I would just like to ask you further whether you can give me answers on two specific points .
Firstly , what is the situation as regards the training of the border guards , particularly as regards the project for a European police academy ?
Secondly , I would like to ask you when you think the Council will or might come to a formal decision on the project for a European border police force - or is that , at present , purely a figment of the imagination ?
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , we know that there are various weak points on the shared external border , for example with Slovakia , where there is still a border line running for some forty kilometres , which is difficult to police properly .
Could you envisage a force of this kind being deployed on a short-term basis in especially vulnerable border areas where help and protection might be needed ?
Question No 41 by Sarah Ludford ( H-0141 / 03 ) :
Subject : Crime : EU-wide measures to prevent mobile phone theft
The number of mobile phones stolen in the EU , often by international gangs , is probably in the millions every year , and a recent Eurobarometer survey showed that one-fifth to one-third of people in most Member States fear being the victim of such a theft .
In the UK reprogramming of a stolen mobile has been made illegal and there is now cooperation among UK operators through the GSM Association , with a shared database of IMEI numbers of stolen handsets so they can be immobilised .
Continental operators have also joined but only around 20 out of a total of some 500 European operators are signed up .
What steps is the Commission taking to encourage the setting up of an EU-wide industry IMEI database equivalent to the UK scheme , so the crime can be tackled through barring of stolen handsets on an EU basis ?
Will the Commission consider putting forward a proposal , under Article 34 TEU , for an EU decision on a common offence of mobile phone reprogramming ?
Question No 42 by Alain Krivine ( H-0174 / 03 ) :
Subject : Franco-German charter flight
On Monday 3 March 2003 France and Germany collectively expelled 54 Senegalese and Ivorian nationals on a Euralair Horizons charter flight .
On board the aircraft hired by the two governments were 30 Ivorians and 23 Senegalese , who had not been admitted to France or whose request for asylum in France had been rejected , and who had been detained in the transit area at Roissy airport , and a Senegalese who had come from Germany by road , having been expelled from that country .

Does the Commission consider that Article 4 of Protocol No 4 to the European Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms and the first paragraph of Article 19 of the Charter of Fundamental Rights , as ratified at the Nice Summit , have been respected ?
Does the Commission consider that the second paragraph of the same Article 19 of the Charter of Fundamental Rights has been respected with regard to the Ivorians rejected to a country currently in a situation of unrest and that the asylum procedures guaranteed by the Geneva Convention of 28 July 1951 and the protocol of 31 January 1967 relating to the status of refugees have been respected ?
What measures does the Commission intend to take to ensure that the treaties , in particular the provisions thereof on the right of asylum and protection against removal , expulsion and extradition , are respected ?
Mr President , as has already been pointed out , in the debate we will have to have on cooperation at an operational level between Member States regarding the repatriation of illegal residents , joint charter flights are one of the measures for strengthening operational cooperation laid down in the repatriation action plan approved by the Council in November 2002 , on the basis of a Commission communication .
Legally speaking , these joint charter flights currently mean two or more national removal operations carried out at the same time in one and the same aircraft .
These joint charter flights have nothing to do with collective expulsions , which are prohibited by the European Convention on Human Rights and the European Union Charter of Fundamental Rights .
Joint repatriation flights , with a certain number of people on board , are organised for logistical reasons , but the underlying expulsion decisions are always made individually .
Each case is examined individually according to the personal circumstances and legal situation of each person .
In other words , everybody on board a flight of this kind has been the subject of an individual procedure that has led to an individual rejection of any application or appeal to obtain legal residency .
Therefore , the decisions are based on individual grounds and not collective grounds .
In connection with the case mentioned by Mr Krivin , the Commission has received no indication and has no reason to suppose that the specific circumstances of each of the people on this flight was subject to an infringement of any instrument of international law , or , in other words , that the people on this flight had not had their applications examined individually and effectively by the Member States that adopted the expulsion measures .
Thank you very much for your cooperation this afternoon , Mr Vitorino .
As the time allotted to questions to the Commission has elapsed , Questions Nos 43 to 80 will be replied to in writing
( The speaker began in Macedonian .
The following paragraph is a translation )
Mr President , distinguished Members of the European Parliament , it is with great appreciation and pleasure that I speak to you today .
The European Parliament embodies a vision of Europe that is shared today by millions of people , not only inside but also outside of the current European Union , including by the citizens of the Republic of Macedonia .
It is vision of a continent of diversity , where different traditions , cultures and languages meet on the basis of mutual respect and common interests .
It is the vision of an integrated space for people , of freedom of movement , of a common market and European policies to address common concerns .
( The speaker continued in English )
This vision of the European founding fathers has today become a reality for the citizens of the European Union , for millions of students studying at universities outside their country , for businessmen linked through trade and investment , and for politicians and civil servants who meet on a daily basis to develop joint responses to the challenges of our age .
Soon the European Union will embrace 10 new countries , with their citizens partaking in the European dream of common peace and prosperity .
Elected representatives from these countries will sit in this Chamber , as a result of one of the greatest achievements of international politics : the peaceful pooling of sovereignty on the basis of shared values and common interests .
I want to use this opportunity today to share with you my thoughts on what this vision of a united Europe means to the people of my country , the Republic of Macedonia .
The citizens of the Republic of Macedonia share the same values and have the same interests as the citizens of those other countries that will soon join the Union .
There is a strong political consensus that accession to the European Union is the overriding political objective .
There is a strong commitment to do what is necessary to meet criteria for accession and to undertake the required efforts .
Two years ago some - in the European Union and in the Republic of Macedonia - might have had doubts about whether European accession would actually become a reality in our lifetime .
The State then faced the most serious crisis in its recent history .
We were all looking into an abyss and feared the worst .
Then , however , we managed to step back .
I want to express the appreciation of the citizens of my country to all those , in this Chamber and in other European and transatlantic institutions , who stood by the Republic of Macedonia in these difficult moments and supported our efforts to move from armed conflict to peaceful , political conflict resolution .
When a conflict is resolved peacefully and no longer makes newspaper headlines it is sometimes quickly forgotten , but the ceaseless efforts made by Romano Prodi , Javier Solana , Chris Patten and Lord Robertson deserve to be remembered as one of the most successful and timely interventions ever undertaken by the European Union and by NATO .
In this difficult period , Macedonia discovered that it had many friends - including in this Chamber , where parliamentarians from all political groups , have supported the cause of stabilising our state and reassuring our citizens .
The role of the special representatives has also been very important and much appreciated .
Today , Macedonia has returned to peace and we are more determined than ever to make up for lost time .
Progress in implementing the Framework Agreement is steady .
We recently signed a new agreement with the International Monetary Fund .
The Republic of Macedonia was , of course , the first country in the region to sign a Stabilisation and Association Agreement with the European Union .
It is my conviction that the momentum created in the last two years , and which has allowed my country to move from armed conflict to renewed progress on the road to European integration must not be lost .
The Republic of Macedonia is taking part in the development of a common European security and defence policy .
The SOFA Agreement of the EU forces has been unanimously adopted by the Assembly , which clearly reflects the trust of European defence and security capabilities .
This European mission must be a success , and it will be a success .
This is important , and not only to those who want to see the European Union play an active role beyond its borders .
I have stressed how much progress has been made recently - bringing hostilities to an end , strengthening the rule of law , implementing the Framework Agreement - and how important the role of the European Union was in this effort .
It would be a mistake , however , to become complacent and overlook just how much remains to be done to move not only Macedonia but the whole region towards a point where a return to instability becomes inconceivable .
Let me now turn to the challenges of the present and of the near future .
Let me stress what efforts we - the elected representatives of Macedonia - will undertake to meet those challenges , as well as express concrete ideas about what contribution the European Union and its institutions can make to help us in these efforts .
To secure the investment made - in particular by the European Union - in the stability of the whole region , we must be bold and visionary .
There are concrete steps which we must take that will require no less commitment than we have shown in the past two years .
Macedonian citizens are looking forward to the historic enlargement of the European Union in 2004 and then in 2007 .
We must make sure that there are no fears arising that , following these enlargements , the Western Balkans could become isolated from developments in the rest of Europe .
There are three things that need to and must be done : we need to continue our efforts to strengthen the rule of law and combat organised crime and corruption .
We need to refocus our attention to deal more effectively with issues of economic and social cohesion .
And we need to work on realising the vision of a Europe not just for states but also for citizens , enabling free movement of the citizens of the Western Balkans across the borders of the European Union .
There is today a clear consensus on the importance of strengthening the rule of law across the region .
This is , above all , the responsibility of our governments .
We need to strengthen our institutions , improve our legislation and work on our border management .
Recent months have seen substantial progress across the region .
Our states are not so weak that they cannot take on organised crime , and our citizens support our institutions when we do .
There is much that the governments of the region can do , and there is much that is being done .
The Republic of Macedonia is in the final stage of preparations to organise a Regional Conference on Border Security and Management in Ohrid to take this agenda further .
The reality is that the effects of economic transition , the consequences of a decade of hostilities in the region , social dislocation , the creation of new borders and the formation of new and sometimes weak institutions combined create challenges that will take some time and a lot of effort to be met .
The most important thing is our determination and the support of our citizens in meeting them .
Ensuring lasting stability is also linked to success in the field of economic development .
In this respect , the governments and the people in the region have high hopes for the upcoming Thessaloniki Summit .
As the point is shifting from post-conflict reconstruction to development , our citizens are increasingly focused on issues related to economic and social cohesion : high unemployment , decaying or absent infrastructure and the need to adapt skills to new economic realities .
There is an obvious link between success in implementing the Framework Agreement , the success of the first EU Military mission and a concrete prospect for economic development .
Unemployment , particularly among the young , is extremely high .
Economic reform will require further painful decisions which might raise it even higher .
This makes the development of a vibrant private sector all the more important , not just for economic reasons , but also for social and security reasons .
In the next few years the European Commission will make a major effort to help the new candidate countries to catch up with the rest of the European Union .
It will also undertake a major effort to help Bulgaria and Romania , our eastern neighbours , to catch up with the new candidate countries .
This builds on the astonishing success the European Union has had in helping other emerging democracies - in our region , our southern neighbour Greece - to catch up and develop a strong private sector driven economy .
This is why we support so strongly the idea of the Greek Presidency to make pre-accession assistance available also to the countries of the Western Balkans .
We are very much hoping that , at the Thessaloniki Summit , a European commitment to the Western Balkans might lead to the creation of a complement to CARDS , with instruments of structural policies offered for pre-accession , as has been discussed by some EU Member States .
We are aware that such assistance will impose many conditions on us , including the need to co-finance projects with our resources .
However , such conditionality will help us to strengthen our administrations and prepare for a future in Europe .
We do not want to be treated as a humanitarian case but want to take ownership of processes of development in genuine partnership with the European Union institutions .
This brings me to the third issue which I wanted to raise today , and which is of great significance to the citizens of my country and the whole region .
The idea and the reality of Europe is the idea of mobility , of freedom of movement for goods and for people .
There are potential advantages of a visa-free regime in relation to the democratisation process in general .
A positive democratic and economic evolution will be nourished by simplified international exchange and travel possibilities for students , researchers and businessmen .
The successful continuation of the reform process depends on a new generation of responsible citizens with international experience and knowledge .
The Republic of Macedonia with its 2 million citizens borders the EU .
It has strong trade links with the EU .
Until the break-up of Yugoslavia our citizens travelled to all EU countries without restrictions and the Republic of Macedonia is not a country of transit .
I have been following very carefully the debates in your Parliament on the issue that has been imposed on us , related to the usage of the constitutional name , the Republic of Macedonia .
Coming from a country with a rich cultural tradition , which has always seen itself as having European values at its heart , I can only be inspired by the principles that are the very foundation of the European Parliament and which are safeguarded by you , the parliamentarians .
It will take much more effort and more time until the Macedonian State will be able to become a full member of the Union , although I am looking forward to the day when Macedonian Members will sit in this Chamber .
( Applause )
In this I am hoping also for your support .
Let us forge a strong joint partnership and work together to ensure that the European dream will come true also for the young people of the Republic of Macedonia who look forward to being proud citizens of Europe in the 21st century .
( Applause )
We thank President Trajkovski for taking the time to be here , for his shared European vision , for his message of partnership and for his expression of hope for future developments and opportunity , both in his country and region and in their relations with Europe .
We thank you .
( The formal sitting was closed at 12.25 p.m. )
The next item is the continuation of the debate on the report ( A5-0086 / 2003 ) by Mrs Cerdeira Morterero , on behalf of the Committee on Citizens ' Freedoms and Rights , Justice and Home Affairs , on the amended proposal for a Council directive on the right to family reunification ( COM ( 2002 ) 225 - C5-0220 / 2002 - 1999 / 0258 ( CNS ) ) .
Mr President , I too should like to start by warmly congratulating the rapporteur on the excellent standard of her report , as the Commissioner acknowledged earlier , and I should also like to say how pleased I am that the Greek Presidency managed , after long consultations , to close - it did not start but it closed - this chapter on reuniting the families of legal immigrants , which had been pending before the Council for several years .
However , Commissioner , it is my opinion that you should take also serious account of the proposals of the European Parliament .
As chairman of Parliament 's Committee on Women 's Rights and Equal Opportunities , I think this initiative on family reunification is important , because it will be especially helpful to the women and children who are often not in a position to follow their husbands in their attempt to emigrate to the countries of the European Union in search of a better fate for themselves and their families .
Let me give you an example . Three years ago , I was invited to a general assembly of the Bangladeshi community in Athens .
I entered a room where there were thousands of people , but only a few women .
It was when I asked why the women were not taking part in the assembly that I realised for the first time the extent of the problem .
They replied that their women and children were back home , in their countries , because they did not have the right to bring them here .
I am highly satisfied , therefore , that - even with this decision by the Council which does not fully satisfy Parliament - a serious decision has been taken on this matter .
Similarly , one particularly positive point of the directive is that the rights of the members of the reunited family are defined , rights relating to education and employment , in order both to ensure that they are smoothly integrated into the society of the Member State and to safeguard their employment rights , so that they do not turn into cheap labour on the job market .
Finally , I must stress that family reunification does not just form part of efforts to achieve a cohesive immigration policy ; it is also a means of strengthening the Community 's own social policy .
Mr President , I would like to thank the Commissioner , as well as all the Members who have stayed here until this time , but I believe that the occasion warrants it , since this is an important issue and we have been waiting for it for a long time .
I entirely agree with what the Commissioner has said , but there have been certain statements made during the debate which I would like to clarify .
At no point does this report on family reunification allow for situations such as those Mr Pirker has mentioned : polygamy or the possibility of applying this directive to future wives and I would like this to be recorded in the Minutes because I think this is a very serious statement which can only be born of ignorance or bad faith .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon .
The next item is the joint debate on the following three reports :
A5-0107 / 2003 by Mr Turco on behalf of the Committee on Citizens ' Freedoms and Rights , Justice and Home Affairs , on the initiative by the Kingdom of Denmark with a view to adopting a Council Act amending the Council Act of 3 November 1998 adopting Rules on the confidentiality of Europol information ( 13875 / 2002 - C5-0553 / 2002 - 2002 / 0823 ( CNS ) ) ;
the initiative by the Kingdom of Denmark with a view to adopting a Council Act amending the Staff Regulations applicable to Europol employees ( 13873 / 2002 - C5-0555 / 2002 - 2002 / 0822 ( CNS ) ) ;
on the initiative of the Hellenic Republic with a view to the adoption of a Council Decision adjusting the basic salaries and allowances applicable to Europol staff ( 6314 / 2003 - C5-0066 / 2003 - 2003 / 0806 ( CNS ) ) ;
A5-0106 / 2003 by Mr von Boetticher on behalf of the Committee on Citizens ' Freedoms and Rights , Justice and Home Affairs , on the initiative by the Kingdom of Denmark with a view to adopting a Council Act ( 13254 / 5 / 2002 - C5-0001 / 2003 - 2002 / 0814 ( CNS ) ) drawing up , on the basis of Article 43 ( 1 ) of the Convention on the Establishment of a European Police Office ( Europol Convention ) , a Protocol amending that Convention ;
A5-0116 / 2003 by Mr Turco and Mr von Boetticher on behalf of the Committee on Citizens ' Freedoms and Rights , Justice and Home Affairs , on the recommendations to the Council on the future development of Europol ( 2003 / 2070 ( NI ) ) .
Mr President , I am slightly at a loss , for the necessary political interlocutor in a debate such as this , the Council , is not here .
I feel that the presence of a high-level representative is necessary in a debate on an issue to which Parliament attaches such great importance .
That said , and I would like it to be recorded in the Minutes , at least , I would particularly like to thank all my colleagues in the Committee on Citizens ' Freedoms and Rights , Justice and Home Affairs , especially Mr Deprez and Mr von Boetticher , for their hard work which has enabled us to achieve a common position .
I would like , first of all , to point out that Parliament has repeatedly called upon the Council to reform the Europol Convention to allow for concrete democratic control and powers over Europol , notably in the Nassauer , Karamanou and Deprez reports .
With these reports , we are calling once again today for greater European Parliament involvement in the Europol budget procedure and for Europol to be funded through the Community budget .
We are calling for European Parliament involvement in the appointment and dismissal of Europol 's Director and Deputy Directors , and for two European Parliament elected representatives to take part in the Management Board meetings .
We are calling for full respect of Parliament 's rights to be informed and consulted .
We are calling for the revision of the Europol Convention to bring it into line with higher standards and methods of democratic control .
We are calling for the strengthening of judicial control by the Court of Justice . Lastly , we are calling for the communitarisation of Europol .
The European Commission has already expressed itself on the issue of democratic control , proposing to establish a joint committee , consisting of members of both the Member States ' and European Parliament committees responsible for police matters .
The issue of democratic control of Europol has also been recently debated in the Convention Working Group ' Freedom , security and justice ' .
According to the Minutes of the Working Group , during a hearing , the Europol Director , Mr Storbeck , affirmed that ' parliamentary control of Europol is currently unclear ' ; he stated the difficulties in being accountable to too many national parliaments and that stronger and more efficient democratic control would be in Europol 's own interest .
He mentioned the prospect of control by the European Parliament as a possible solution .
The same Convention Working Group has drafted a final report which states : ' Europol activities will need in the future to be subject to democratic accountability to the European Parliament and to the Council , as well as to judicial control by the ECJ in accordance with the normal Treaty rules ' .
Notwithstanding all these repeated appeals and specific proposals , here we are today discussing a Protocol to the Europol Convention on which the European Parliament is being consulted .
Not only does it not solve these issues , it does not even address them .
The results of a comparison between the current powers of democratic control over Europol and the proposed reforms contained in the Protocol are extremely disappointing .
In the face of all this , we in the committee - and , I hope , tomorrow , the House - noting that repeated requests and proposals for real , improved democratic control and powers on Europol have been ignored , can only condemn the fact that the proposed changes are mainly aesthetic and make a mockery of the European Parliament and the European citizens which elected it .
The Council has not followed Parliament 's repeated requests for increased powers over the Europol budget and in the appointment and dismissal procedures or for European Parliament representatives ' participation in the Management Board .
Neither has it followed the Commission proposal for a joint committee , or the Europol Director 's view in favour of increased democratic control .
Under these conditions , the European Parliament will keep its current role with regard to Europol : discussing without anybody listening and making reports without anybody implementing .
Inevitably , one day , the Council will have to realise that increased democratic control and powers with regard to Europol are the only guarantee for its correct functioning and administration in everybody 's interest .
Our rejection of the initiatives and the resolution we have tabled confirm this : as I said , it was a difficult decision ; we discussed the matter at least four times in committee , but , in the end , all the political groups agreed on this document .
I know it has been said countless times before , but the Council cannot be allowed to continue to ignore this position - which is no longer just Parliament 's position - ad infinitum .
I hope and trust that Commissioner Vitorino will have a helpful suggestion as to an effective course of action , as he has proposed many effective measures in the course of this legislature .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to follow on directly from Mr Turco 's speech and respond to it with my own thanks .
In this instance , we agreed on a common approach , one that would involve rejecting the Danish and Greek initiatives and adopting our own recommendation on Europol 's future development , but , despite the common draft , our arguments do of course differ to some extent .
It is the case that , in the past , we in the European Parliament made matters easy for ourselves by rejecting every proposal for amending the Europol Convention .
Our justification for doing so was the lack of democratic and judicial control over Europol , for , belonging as it does to the third pillar , Europol has hitherto not been subject either to parliamentary control by the European Parliament or to judicial control by the European Court of Justice , whilst the national parliaments mainly had no interest in controlling it either .
There were a number of extensions of Europol 's competences that we in the European Parliament were unwilling to agree to without increased powers of control .
The Danish proposal , though , on which I am reporting , contains precisely this increase in Parliament 's opportunities for control , in that , according to it , Parliament is to be consulted on numerous issues , including the collection , processing and utilisation of personal data , the transmission of data to third states , the establishment of rules on secrecy and the protection of confidentiality in relation to personal status and , finally , any amendment of the Europol Convention as well .
Even the proposed facility whereby national authorities should in future be able to communicate directly with Europol would be a real step forward .
It strikes me , for a start , that it would not make sense to reject all this , and , even though this has been the line we have taken in the past as a matter of principle , I considered welcoming the proposal , on the grounds that it should be seen in the context of the debate in the Convention , where , at this time , Working Group X had proposed the dissolution of the European Union 's third pillar - Justice and Internal Affairs - and the transfer of Europol to the first pillar .
This would entail both judicial control by the European Court of Justice and parliamentary control by way of the European Parliament 's budgetary rights .
Seen in this light , then , it initially made sense to anchor a consultation procedure in the Europol Convention .
Now , though , the proposals put forward by the Convention presidium have caught up with the Danish initiative , something for which thanks are especially owed to Commissioner Vitorino .
I will be honest , Commissioner , and concede that I did not at first think it possible that the Convention would indeed bring itself to make Europol subject to a codecision procedure , to be termed in future a legislative procedure , with equal rights for Parliament and for the Council , but what I asked for at the end of each of my previous speeches has now been granted .
In this area , the Convention has indeed demonstrated courage .
Whilst , when I consider the amendments tabled by members of the Convention , I do find a few asking for the Council to reach unanimous decisions in this area , I can find not one single amendment intended to curtail the role envisaged for the European Parliament .
That being so , we can assume a broad consensus , and so the Danish initiative , with the consultation procedure it contains , can be shelved .
It is , nonetheless , possible to make improvements to the presidium 's proposals .
For a start , the Council 's authority to draw up guidelines should be done away with , as , secondly , should Article 9 's restriction on control by the Court of Justice .
Thirdly , in general terms , unanimity in the Council in matters concerning Europol , as requested by a number of members of the Convention , is something to be rejected .
Fourthly , the legislative procedure must make it possible for Europol to conduct its own investigations , in collaboration with the appropriate officials in the Member States .
Such a transfer of competences could , in the first instance , also be subject to unanimity , although Parliament 's rights must under no circumstances be curtailed .
Fifthly , Europol must also be able to act in defence of the EU 's financial interests when asked to do so by Eurojust or of the Public Prosecutor yet to be appointed as part of it .
This is where cooperation with this institution must be regulated in even more precise terms ; it must not be left to internal agreements , as was the case before .
Sixthly , control by Eurojust will be meaningful only when Europol has had real executive powers handed over to it , for , until they have been , the fact that Europol remains subject to the control of national public prosecutors will result in structures being duplicated .
The seventh point is that Europol must be given access to the various computer systems - among which I will mention only the Schengen Information System , the Customs Information System , and Eurodac - which are to be united in one single uniform computer system with different entitlements to access it .
My eighth point follows on from this .
Europol has to have standardised data protection along the lines of Directive 46 / 95 , and it needs simple language rules .
Last but not least , the requirement that the Member States cooperate with Europol needs to be enforced more strictly .
Many Member States are still sending Europol too few data or none at all .
We now urge the Council not to go on blocking the use of EU Budget resources to fund Europol in its counter-terrorist activities until such time as the Intergovernmental Conference has adopted such a constitutional treaty .
The public cannot be persuaded that their security suffers when the Interior Ministers feel that their competences have been trespassed upon .
In any case , the Convention leaves room for a generous interpretation .
At the same time , the Council must make preparations for the Europol Convention to be carried over into legislation .
It is now for all of us to ensure that the Convention is a success .
I believe , indeed , that our success is predestined , for without these advances we will , in the long term , fail in our attempts to combat crime in Europe .
So , today too , I will end with words that even Mr Coelho will endorse : by the way , it is my opinion that the Convention must be even more courageous .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , first of all I should like to congratulate Mr Turco and Mr von Boetticher on the reports they have drawn up , which aim at analysing the initiatives taken by certain Member States both to improve the operation of Europol and to align the classification levels of Europol documents with the classification levels of Council documents .
The Commission shares Mr Turco 's opinion that it would be difficult for European Union citizens to understand that the classification system of Europol documents should be different from the classification system of European Union documents .
As a result of this initiative , Europol would have four levels of classification corresponding to those adopted in the Council decision of 19 March 2001 and the Commission decision of 29 November 2001 .
Mr Turco refers in his report to Council Regulation No 1049 / 2001 .
I should like to call this House 's attention to the fact that this regulation addresses the question of public access to documents . It is not , however , a regulation that sets the levels of classification of Council or Commission documents .
With regard to the rules on public access to documents held by Europol , Members are certainly aware that the Danish initiative provides that Europol 's Management Board should adopt rules on access to Europol documents taking into consideration the principles and limits laid down in Regulation No 1049 / 2001 .
In the Commission 's opinion , this means that officially Europol 's Management Board only has to adopt such rules when the Danish initiative is ratified .
Nevertheless , given the importance of this issue , I should like to stress that in our view there is nothing to stop Europol from acting straight away to adopt rules on document access that take Regulation No 1049 / 2001 into consideration , as suggested by the rapporteur .
With regard to Mr von Boetticher 's report , the objectives of this initiative are to define the competences of Europol better , to make Europol the point of contact in the European Union for issues relating to the counterfeiting of the euro , to improve contacts between Europol and the Member States ' police forces , and lastly to provide a better basis for informing the European Parliament about Europol activities .
It is clear to me that these initiatives we are discussing do not solve the basic problems raised regarding the status of Europol . I am of the opinion , however , that they are moving in the right direction .
I do , of course , understand Parliament 's position of wanting to show its disagreement with the insufficiency of the solutions by recommending that the initiatives by the four Member States should be rejected .
But it must be remembered that the questions raised by these initiatives are at the same time being examined by the Convention on the Future of Europe . Rejection of these initiatives would probably be a bad sign for change in the right direction .
I believe Parliament agrees with the Commission that the Europol Convention needs to be replaced with an instrument that is more easily adapted and allows for adequate legal and democratic control at a European level .
The Europol Convention should be replaced right now , today , through a Council decision , just as Eurojust was set up on the basis of a Council decision .
Europol 's budget should be financed from the Community budget , and the information given to the European Parliament should likewise be looked at from a different viewpoint .
In fact , in the communication that the Commission presented to Parliament on the democratic control of Europol , we recommended that a joint supervisory body should be set up composed of representatives of the European Parliament and of the national parliaments .
Lastly , as regards the field of data protection , the rules that exist in the current Europol Convention must be extended .
These objectives are only very partially achieved by the Member States ' initiatives .
As Mr von Boetticher has just pointed out , however , the Convention on the Future of Europe is right now discussing a draft article on Europol which , as I see it , addresses precisely the concerns I have just mentioned .
This should not , however , prevent the adoption of the initiative by Denmark .
It is true - and I recognise Mr von Boetticher is right - that the ratification process for this Convention is going to be slow and cumbersome because we know that all conventions under Title 6 of the Treaty have been extremely slow and cumbersome .
We only have to recall that the Convention on the Protection of the European Communities ' Financial Interests was ratified by all the European Union Member States only last month , yet it dates back to 1995 .
This is a good reason for getting rid of the ' convention ' instrument within the Area of Freedom , Security and Justice .
We should not forget , however , that the outcome of the Convention on the Future of Europe , that is , the Constitutional Treaty , will also be subject to a process of ratification by the parliaments of all the Member States , all twenty-five Member States , and will therefore be a similarly slow and cumbersome process .
The immediate triggering of the ratification process for these amendments to the Europol Convention does not conflict with the Constitutional Treaty , since the rules of the Constitutional Treaty will prevail over the rules that are now the subject of this initiative by the Member States .
Finally , I should like to express my support for Parliament 's position when , in the recommendation to the Council , it refers to Article 22 presented by the Convention Praesidium .
I should like to point out that the objective with which the Commission has approached the debate on the Convention is to make Europol an agency of the European Union with a normal statute within a single institutional framework .
This means Community financing , a legal basis that can be changed more easily , a European Union law and the use of the normal legislative procedure , that is , the qualified majority and codecision rule .
All these elements are welcome ; they are in line with the Commission communication of December 2002 on the institutional architecture of the European Union and I believe they fit in with the objectives of more effective police cooperation in the European area .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the European Parliament has been consistent in giving its support to various initiatives aimed at broadening Europol 's mandate .
We want to help Europol become an effective instrument in the fight against organised crime and to take on a primary role in cooperation between the Member States ' authorities on investigations into cross-border criminal activities .
While we support the introduction of operational powers in Europol , which the Treaty of Amsterdam itself provides for , however , we have also repeatedly pointed to the need for the strengthening of its role to be accompanied by measures to ensure both democratic control and jurisdictional control .
In this respect we have consistently rejected all the initiatives with which we have been presented that ask us to decide on questions of detail concerning Europol .
As the representatives of the European citizens , we have repeatedly asked for the necessary powers so that we can exercise the desirable democratic control over Europol .
The rapporteurs , Mr Turco and Mr von Boetticher , are rightly asking us once again to reject these Danish initiatives , to which a Greek one is now added , to remain consistent with the positions that this Parliament has been adopting .
This rejection must be used as an opportunity to restate our position .
First , that Europol cannot continue to be maintained within the framework of simple intergovernmental cooperation .
The Europol Convention should be replaced with a Council decision under Article 34 ( 2 ) ( c ) of the Treaty on European Union , to which the Commissioner has just referred , which will allow changes to be introduced through a simplified procedure and the adoption of executive measures by a qualified majority ; it would thus become integrated into the European Union system of institutions .
Secondly , the role of the Court of Justice must be aligned with the provisions of the Treaty of Amsterdam , so that there can be effective judicial control .
Thirdly , Europol clearly needs to be subject to an adequate level of democratic control , putting an end to the current situation in which the European Parliament has been playing a purely marginal role .
We very much welcome the result of the Convention 's work and the proposal by the Convention Praesidium , which clearly requests a move towards the communitisation of Europol with the incorporation of Europol into the first pillar , the Europol Convention being replaced with a Council decision .
In addition , Europol 's structure , working methods , fields of activity and missions would be defined in a codecision procedure by the European Parliament and the Council .
The Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats therefore supports the motion for a resolution that Mr Turco and Mr von Boetticher have tabled asking the Council and the Member States to support the Convention 's proposal .
Mr President , I am going to do something unusual , but I believe it to be necessary .
I think it is a pity that I cannot put my laboriously-crafted four-minute speech on the record , but it is apparent to me that my speech would have been a mere repetition of everything that has been said so far , and which has also been true .
For that reason , I do not , at twenty to ten in the evening , want to repeat what has already been said .
I have nothing to add to what has been said by Mr von Boetticher , Mr Coelho or Commissioner Vitorino .
We are all in agreement .
My group endorses the proposal made by Mr Turco and Mr von Boetticher , and we approve the position they have taken .
I do not think that there is more to be said on the subject .
My colleagues can use my speaking time if they really want to .
Thank you very much , Mr Ceyhun .
Perhaps I might respond to your observation by commenting that the well-known German comedian , Karl Valentin , once visited the Bavarian Parliament .
Halfway through a debate , he left the room .
To a journalist 's question , ' Why did you do that , Mr Valentin ? ' he replied that everything had already been said , but not yet by everybody .
With that in mind , many thanks for your contribution .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the reports before us take considerations of principle as a reason for rejecting the Danish and Greek initiatives on the development of Europol .
That is only right , as the only possible response to the continued attempts at letting Europol carry on working as it did before is to say that the Europol of the future must not function without being influenced and monitored by Parliament , nor will it if this House has anything to do with it .
I therefore want to thank both rapporteurs for having again put this message in unambiguous terms .
I find the goings-on in this sensitive area scarcely credible .
A number of reports by Parliament have , over and over again , demanded real Parliamentary control of Europol , but to date nothing has happened .
Instead , Europol is to continue to be strengthened and extended .
I find this quite simply scandalous .
In view of what is going on in the background at the European Convention 's discussions , the various initiatives by individual governments seem positively Kafkaesque , for they go beyond the proposals before the Convention on the reform of internal affairs and judicial matters .
Being a member of the Convention , I therefore support the idea of this House again putting its main demand before the Council and the governments and confronting them with it .
I also endorse Mr von Boetticher 's demand for there to be no amendments made to the Europol convention before the European constitution is ratified .
I think this should be obvious if the Convention and its work are to be taken seriously .
I endorse the demands in the motion for a resolution , for Europol to be transferred to the first pillar and funded from the EU Budget , thus becoming subject to Parliament 's full Budgetary control , and for the constitution to contain a legal basis for clear and utterly stringent data protection , with public access to documents not being able to be improperly restricted .
The most important thing , though , is something that my fellow-Members have already emphasised , namely that Europol should be entirely subject to Parliament 's control .
As a member of the Convention , I can only ask you to continue to observe carefully the negotiations in progress in the Convention on this issue , for , in my view - if I may give an example - the basic thrust of the proposals on Europol from the Convention 's Praesidium is that it should be , to a large degree , left to its own devices when it comes to laying down precisely what its role is .
As I do not regard that as acceptable , I have asked that it should be the legislatures alone - by which I mean specifically the Council and Parliament acting together - that should legislate to define the precise functions of these authorities along with all their ramifications .
Mr President , the atmosphere is a lot more pleasant this evening .
Parliament is as united now in rejecting the Council initiatives with regard to Europol as it was divided this afternoon in the debate on the UN Conventions on drugs .
In both debates , Parliament demonstrated the alternative ways in which it can exert influence in spheres in which it does not have legislative competence : this afternoon as a political and public forum in which debates sometimes become heated , and now as a guardian of the rights of our citizens .
It is clear to us all that the present situation is unacceptable , as Europol is under neither democratic nor legal control .
We are not joining in the game , therefore ; we are not dutifully delivering our opinion .
I should particularly like to thank the two rapporteurs - Mr von Boetticher and Mr Turco - most sincerely for ensuring an approach and a solution according to which , on the one hand , we are able to openly voice our criticism - which we do by rejecting the Council proposals and , on the other , we are able to express our positive , constructive suggestions in a recommendation , such as our recommendation that Europol be made part of the first pillar .
I think that this is a very constructive approach .
I am also pleased that we tightened up the wording yesterday by means of an amendment explicitly stating that Europol must bring access to documents into line with the European rules on transparency ; for public access to information must also apply to Europol .
That does not mean , of course , that there is not sometimes good reason to keep something confidential , to not put it in the public domain , but objective criteria must be applied , and those are worded excellently in Regulation ( EC ) No 1049 / 2001 .
That Regulation must be applied .
I welcome Commissioner Vitorino 's confirmation , according to which Europol can simply apply that Regulation now , in anticipation of formal rules being drawn up .
Finally , I wish to try to win you over to the amendments that my group has re-tabled .
If I succeed in this , I think that it is abundantly clear that this debate is radically different from this afternoon 's , because this afternoon everyone was , first and foremost , absolutely convinced of being in the right .
I want it to be clear from the Europol database where the data come from .
Do they originate from individual investigations , or were they obtained through national police or intelligence services ?
This is important , because in some countries certain data may and other data may not be used as evidence in criminal cases .
If there is no clarity , there is a risk of evidence being termed illegal and thus inadmissible .
My amendment to Recommendation No 5 argues in favour of clarity as regards the origin of evidence , due to the importance of this clarity for legal cases .
I hope it will have your support .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , one of the thoroughly positive effects that Europol 's excellent work makes possible is the high visibility of the European Union 's internal security policy .
We must , however , seek to adapt Europol 's position to its present tasks , and to give it the best working conditions possible .
This , though , is where we have the problem referred to earlier , in that , even though we transfer functions to the EU level , we still have to use the tools provided by intergovernmental cooperation , because that is what the legal base requires , and we need unanimous resolutions .
We will , tomorrow , decide to enlarge the European Union to twenty-five Member States by adding another ten , and , when we have done that , we will have to give some thought to whether this arsenal can indeed remain functional when there are twenty-five Member States .
My fear is that Europol is no longer able to perform its functions , and no further amendments will be feasible if we wait for twenty-five states to ratify the convention .
So it is the debates currently in progress that once again call on us to emphatically demand what the two rapporteurs have demanded in their joint report - the necessity of securing for the future Europol 's existence and that of the European Union 's security policy .
We must therefore press home the demand for those things envisaged by the rapporteurs - communitisation , that is to say , transfer to the first pillar ; control , as is necessary , by Parliament ; allocation of the budget to the European level , and , most essentially , the transfer , subject to appropriate controls , of operational competences .
What other speakers have already mentioned must of course be added to this - namely , more intensive coordination between the computer data systems that we have , in order to conduct investigations into organised crime and criminality in an even more efficient manner .
We have no more need of systems that work in parallel or that hinder each other ; what we need instead is one system , to be used in the same way by all , combined with a single system of data protection .
Here is a wealth of options , of which we may well be aware , but of which we must now make use if they are to be implemented with the help of the Convention documents and with full backing and support from all parties in the European Parliament .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the European Police Office having functioned for ten years as an intergovernmental institution of control , European policing is now to be put on a Community-wide basis .
Some may object that Europol is thereby being transferred from the third pillar to the first and thus being removed still further from the European nation states ' control .
That is both true and irrelevant , for the character of the Police Office is not determined by which state body is meant to be controlling it .
The new plans for Europol are even more repellent than policemen are in any case required to be .
In any case , it is the police who , by upholding public order , enforce all the constraints of employment and citizenship .
It would be ridiculous for this Chamber to lament such an utterly vile stunt , as these are constraints of which you all approve !
Even if you are unwilling to understand rational criticism of bourgeois society , you can - if you want to be bourgeois humanists , refuse to endorse these plans , for Europol 's true nature is apparent from its areas of responsibility .
Pride of place goes to the efficient organisation of Fortress Europe , in other words deportation for outsiders and the maximum of control within the European area , so free and secure and just as it is .
Not only people-smugglers and dealers will be affected by this .
It is irrelevant whether they do what they do as a matter of conviction or because capitalism obliges them to .
More and more citizens will find themselves targeted by the Persecution Authority , for communitisation will enable the Euro-police to be deployed more flexibly , and Europol 's competences will be capable of being extended by a simple Council resolution .
Its operational powers will be introduced along with communitisation , representing the final step towards the completion of an EU police force with the powers of a secret service .
In any case , communitisation makes the police force even more important .
To be sure , the Europol convention has to be done away with and replaced , but by a protocol abolishing it rather than by creating the legal basis for even more surveillance .
Mr President , there is no reason to doubt the good democratic and legal policy aspects that are behind these reports and , in particular , the recommendation on the future development of Europol .
I would , however , question both the realism of the proposal and its political wisdom .
Since the proposal 's ambitions cannot be realised on the basis of the existing treaties , those tabling the proposal have taken their arguments from the expectations of the European Convention , the aim of which is clearly - as has been said several times - to transfer these topics from the intergovernmental pillar 3 to supranational regulation .
A supranational Europol is nothing less than a federal police force .
It is both an objective of , and a means of establishing , a European federal state .
The logic behind Europol is a lesson in EU integration .
Random parts of the regulation that until now has been the responsibility of the national states are removed .
Nations are forced to lift national border controls .
Free movement opens up the borders to the best-functioning part of the internal market , namely cross-border crime .
Consequently , Europol is created .
In short : the federal state is built up by knocking down the national state .
Without , as mentioned previously , doubting the good intentions behind it , as a Scandinavian I am convinced that the rights of control that we have over our Danish police - and which are far from satisfactory - do however serve democracy and the rule of law far more securely than any supranational system .
The existing control arrangements with regard to data protection that it is proposed be continued are a parody of the rule of law .
As a Northerner , I say that we can do better ourselves , at least while we have not yet squandered the whole of our heritage in terms of legal culture .
The debate is closed .
The vote on the first two reports that we debated will take place tomorrow at 12 noon .
The vote on the report by Mr Turco and Mr von Boetticher ( A5-0116 / 2003 ) will , for technical reasons , take place on Thursday at 12 noon .

Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the initiative that has been proposed seeks to set out the measures that may be taken by the authorities to provide assistance for the purposes of the removal , with or without escorts , of third-country nationals .
This proposal is one of numerous initiatives seeking to combat unorthodox immigration .
If the European Union has to have a common immigration and asylum policy and has to provide itself with the means to manage migratory flows , this policy should respect the human rights and fundamental freedoms that are universally recognised and acknowledged by the Member States .
This is why we cannot support an approach which seeks to make the deportation of third-country nationals who do not have the right papers a populist tool at the service of a repressive policy on the reality of immigration .
Too many expulsions by air have ended in the death of human beings because of the way in which they have been treated .
Everyone remembers Semira Adamou , who suffocated in a plane in Belgium while being deported .
Last month , again , in France , two other immigrants who did not have the necessary papers died at the hands of the same violence .
Recently , on 3 March , France and Germany expelled a group of 54 Senegalese and Ivorians who had not been admitted to these countries , had had their asylum applications dismissed and had been kept in a waiting zone .
This sounds to me very much like forced and - at the very least - mass repatriation .
Were Article 4 of the European Convention on Human Rights and Article 19 of the Charter of Fundamental Rights , that was ratified at the Nice Summit , respected ?
Furthermore , in the Ivorians ' case they were sent back to a country where there is currently unrest and civil war .
Were the procedures for applying for asylum that are guaranteed by the Geneva Convention relating to the Status of Refugees also respected ?
Furthermore , there is no guarantee that the principle of non-refoulement , that is recognised in asylum law , was fully respected .
The security-based approach that is being proposed to us today is entirely in keeping with the Union 's practices , which , we have to admit , have not enabled the problem of illegal immigration to be resolved .
We urgently need to recognise that the myth of zero immigration and its corollary , the all-repressive approach , are a failure .
So far the Member States ' repressive immigration policies have not caused a decline in illegal immigration .
Quite the opposite : they have reinforced it by breeding more immigrants without the proper papers and they have sent hundreds of thousands of people underground , people who are now in the grip of networks of exploitative criminals , traffickers in human beings and advocates of modern slavery .
This failure demands a thorough revision of the immigration and asylum policy .
This is a major and complex issue with a great deal at stake in the long term and our democracies have an important responsibility to assume for it .
In rejecting a Community policy so as to meet the national demands of the Member States , in putting the rights of migrants and their families at risk , thus handing them over to the violence of deportation , and in refusing to recognise the wealth that these citizens , whether legal or not , bring to the project of European integration , this proposal is based on a philosophy that runs counter to our conviction that Europe should be a place of openness and solidarity , and that is why the Group of the Greens rejects it .
We call on the Council to establish a genuine Community asylum and immigration policy that respects human rights and fundamental freedoms .
We recommend a European campaign to legalise the situation of all those who do not have papers , who have ties in the host country and who reside there on a long-term basis .
We recommend putting an end to the injustice of people being punished twice and sometimes even three times because of the readmission agreements .
We urgently need to remedy the contradictory situation of people who can neither be deported nor given legal papers , by finally recognising the right to live in a family .
After the minimalist proposal for a directive on family reunification that we examined just now in this House , we can only imagine the kind of discrimination that the European Union intends to reserve for the most marginalised and weak in the future .
We are against these practices and assure you that we will remain vigilant and active in our efforts to ensure that all those who reside in Europe can be full citizens and enjoy equal rights .
Whatever their nationality or their administrative situation , these people should be treated with the dignity that all human beings deserve .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon .
Mr President , Commissioner , I would like to warmly thank everyone present for taking part in this debate .
The report presented for debate is intended to be the European Parliament 's response to the Commission 's Communication of 2 July 2002 on an information and communication strategy for the European Union .
In order to briefly present the report I will point out that its main characteristic is that it makes information a condition of citizenship .
My hope is that , in the future , following the recognition of the legal personality of the European Union , this citizens ' right will combine with the European Union 's right to express itself , in what we could call the European Union 's right to an image , the European Union 's right to explain what it is and what it does , and the combination of these two rights provides a firm legal basis on which to create a genuine information and communication policy .
The report opts decisively for the consolidation of interinstitutionality in the three phases of the process , that is to say , in the production of messages within the Interinstitutional Information Group , in application , using for this purpose the representations of the Commission and the offices of the European Parliament , as well national , regional and local authorities and interinstitutionality , and also in the assessment both within the Interinstitutional Information Group and by means of an annual debate on the information and communication policy .
With regard to the conditions for information , I will simply comment on the analysis of the languages in which information is provided and the accessible style of language .
Languages should not just be the official languages , but also the co-official languages and all those languages by means of which the message can reach the citizens in the most direct manner , with the participation , of course , of local , regional , national and Community authorities , in accordance with the scope of their competences .
With regard to the content , I will focus on just two points .
On the one hand , the content should indicate the European Union 's influence on the daily actions of the citizens , rejecting the European Union 's frequent image as an arena for confrontation , with opposing interests on the part of the different Member States .
On the other hand , we should consolidate a permanent flow of basic information for the citizen .
It will be difficult for the citizens to become involved in the priorities which I am about to mention if they are not conversant with the fundamental and basic operation of the European Union .
With regard to the current priorities , those already included in the Prince programme are taken up , that is to say , enlargement , the future of Europe , the area of freedom , security and justice , the establishment of the euro and the role of the European Union in the world .
And attention is drawn to the imminence of the 2004 elections , which are of symbolic significance because this will be the first time that 25 countries will elect their direct representatives to this House .
The analysis of the report raises certain critical questions .
On the one hand , the question of the legal basis .
The time has not yet come to create a legal basis for the drawing up of the programmes , but the Convention and the future Intergovernmental Conference provide the opportunity to support the idea that the future Constitution should include - within the democratic life of the European Union - a reference to the citizens ' right to information , so that they may be genuine citizens .
Secondly , I will refer to the issue of sectoral information , which - I am perfectly aware - as the representatives of the Commission have tried to demonstrate , is the exclusive responsibility of the Commission .
The truth is , however , that the European Union 's image is either promoted or harmed directly as a result of the actions resulting from the various sectoral policies .
Coordination of the various sectoral policies , orienting sectoral policies towards a common objective - the development of the European Union - should be subject not to decision , of course , but at least to consideration , within the interinstitutional information body .
Thirdly , there is the issue of whether it is better to provide systemised , basic , pedagogical information , or whether we need the impact of spectacular campaigns which demand the attention of the citizen and for the fundamental elements to be expressed through them .
Finally , the national authorities act as a filter .
The citizens perceive Europe by means of their national authorities , for whom a success is something they have won from the rest of the Europeans and for whom harm is anything that they perceive as negative .
Partnership and integration amongst the Member States and the regional and local authorities is fundamental for this purpose .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , following our communication of 2 July on an information and communication strategy for the European Union , the Commission is very pleased to note Parliament 's support for this initiative , which is expressed in the report by Mr Bayona , whom I should like to congratulate .
Indeed , in view of the interinstitutional strategy that we wish to develop to bolster the European Union 's image , it is particularly important for all of the institutions to support this initiative and participate in making our shared objective a reality .
Following the adoption of a particularly positive position by the Council of Ministers on 10 December and the first report of the European Parliament , which was drafted by Mr Andreasen , the Commission therefore welcomes Parliament 's commitment to this cause and the specific proposals that Mr Bayona makes in his report , which combine technical expertise with an awareness of the political sensitivity of the subject .
I should like to respond to these under two headings .
I will speak first about the general objectives of this joint strategy and then about how it will be implemented .
We clearly cannot define and implement an information and communication strategy for the European Union without the support and active participation of the Council , but also and in particular the Member States .
This causes us to reflect for a moment , as Mr Bayona invites us to do , on the link between information and citizenship , in particular with a view to next year 's elections .
For the Commission , the main objective of a proactive information and communication strategy has to be to improve the perception that the public has of the European Union : in essence , it should improve the public 's awareness of the European dimension of their citizenship .
The Commission therefore takes good note of the rapporteur 's proposal to have an explicit reference in the text of the Constitution , which is currently being drafted , to the need for an information and communication policy as a condition for the exercise of European citizenship .
The Commission also fully supports your proposal that information distributed by the Union should highlight common European values , namely democracy , pluralism , security , solidarity , equal opportunities , cohesion and so on .
The objective is indeed , Mr Bayona , to show citizens the practical advantages in their daily lives of belonging to the Union .
With this in mind , as you yourself underline , the policy of distributing information in all of the Union 's languages is something that we need to continue and build on further .
The visible expression of this citizenship should be active participation in the next European elections .
There is no doubt that this decisive milestone in the democratic life of the Union should be our shared objective .
It goes without saying that this alone provides ample justification for stepping up our interinstitutional cooperation .
But is not the best way to encourage the public to turn out to vote to provide objective educational information to help them better to understand the major issues at stake in the project of European integration ?
That is why we have agreed on four major information themes for 2003 to 2004 after the big campaign on the euro : enlargement , the future of the Union , the area of freedom , security and justice and the role of Europe in the world .
Alongside other issues , in particular the social and economic agenda , these themes , especially enlargement and the future of the Union , are a priority concern today , particularly given that they are running on parallel timetables .
They are therefore the best vectors for raising awareness amongst national public opinion of the importance of the major milestone in 2004 .
On this subject , I should like here to give full reassurance to the House .
The Commission will scrupulously respect the priorities adopted by the European Parliament at the vote on the budget and has no intention of modifying the balance - in terms of either the detail or the broader picture - of the Prince programme as adopted by the budgetary authority .
Nevertheless , allow me to point out - and I do so entirely objectively - as I have done several times previously , that the doubling of the appropriations allocated to the Prince programme that was approved by this House for the 2003 Budget , is obviously going to raise some serious practical problems when it comes to implementation .
The Commission would have appreciated being given advance warning of this state of affairs at a prior meeting with the competent authorities in Parliament , as befits the spirit of interinstitutional cooperation that should prevail in the running of the Prince programme .
As far as the practicalities of implementation are concerned , in response to the rapporteur 's invitation requesting , with a view to the 2004 elections , an information campaign making particular use of television - it being understood that this campaign should be promoted and coordinated by the Commission - we have decided to launch a huge call for audiovisual proposals , which will cover both the theme of enlargement and that of the future of Europe .
This integrated approach , which befits the complementary nature of these two subjects , will have a significant and renewed leverage effect for the audiovisual sector in Europe .
The effect will be felt as much by the programme producers as by the audiovisual distributors and will enable us to reach the public more directly using their media of choice to find out more about the Union .
As you know , the role of the European Union is viewed much more favourably by third countries than from within the Member States themselves .
At our last meeting of the interinstitutional group , we thought it was essential to start working this year on information actions , targeted initially at opinion formers and the appropriate intermediary information providers , on the role of the Union in the world .
As the European Parliament 's Committee on Foreign Affairs , Human Rights , Common Security and Defence Policy rightly stresses , rapid progress needs to be made on this dimension of our information and communication strategy .
This is all the more justified in the light of the seriousness of recent events .
At this stage , and with the Council 's full agreement , it is proposed to adopt a three-pronged approach to this theme .
First , globalisation , which ties in with the Cancun meeting this autumn .
Secondly , the proximity policy , which will accrue renewed geostrategic importance after enlargement .
And finally , the common foreign and security policy and its initial work on defence policy .
As you are aware , in order to do this , the Commission has submitted a supplementary and amending budget .
From now on then the amount of work that is done on this new theme as of this year is in your hands .
Mr President , those in a few words are the Commission 's main observations on Mr Bayona 's excellent report .
As you will have noted , there is no doubt that our joint approach , the result of long interinstitutional experience , is bearing fruit .
But to be effective , it is vital for a majority of Member States to follow the example of the coordinated approach adopted by the institutions .
Only a structured partnership with the competent national authorities will enable us to exploit this strategy to its full potential , a strategy which is now co-owned by the institutions , and to ensure that it has maximum impact at regional and even at local level , in the general interests of the Union and for the benefit of all of its people .
Mr President , it is true that public opinion is bombarded nowadays with a plethora of news , messages and information , thanks to the multiplicity of means of communication and easy access to them .
So you would expect , under these conditions of global knowledge , information and communication , that every citizen would be given the chance to obtain a tangible picture of reality .
And yet , the result is increasingly intense confusion of public opinion , with all that implies , by which I mean a warped or distorted image of reality , an uncritical rejection or acceptance of facts , information , advice , perceptions and opinions and , hence , the opportunity for leading people by the hand .
These are all consequences that cannot be combated , as we know from experience , with individual information programmes and strategies .
The information given to the citizens of the European Union should therefore be objective and free from the influence of political or other authorities .
Citizens must be told about European stands and policies , especially as regards important issues such as foreign affairs and issues relating to the security and defence of the European Union .
Special attention must be paid to issues such as political legitimacy , democratic control and transparency in decision making .
In addition , information must be clear and documented .
This means that the mass media need to report not what they consider to be essential reporting , but any decision taken on matters of importance to the Member States .
This will give all the citizens of the European Union a clearer understanding of the decisions taken by its institutions , which are often wrongly presented , with the result that impressions are created that have absolutely nothing to do with reality .
Top priority issues , such as enlargement , the links between European policies and daily life and the problems of European citizens , especially following the accession of new countries to the European Union , which is expected to bring about considerable changes in European agricultural , budgetary and financial policy , need to be the subject of full , substantiated information .
There is a serious problem in the regions , where information is either limited or totally lacking .
In these areas , closer and more fundamental cooperation is needed with local agencies in each Member State , so that information is accessible to everyone .
More immediate and more objective information could be achieved with live coverage of important events , such as decision making in plenary sittings and at committee meetings , for example in the Committee on Foreign Affairs , Human Rights , Common Security and Defence Policy , on television channels or , in order to avoid high costs , on the Internet .
Proper , objective information for citizens is a necessity .
Proper information for European citizens is also an appropriate and necessary condition for extending European integration and strengthening its role in the world .
Consequently , efforts and initiatives need to be stepped up and systematised , given the deficit in this sector , and citizens need full , documented , clear , accessible information .
The report we are debating today is the very substance of the issue of information and policy on this strategy of communication with the citizens of the European Union and I should like to take this opportunity of thanking and congratulating the rapporteur , Mr Bayona , on his excellent work .
Mr President , I would firstly like to congratulate the rapporteur , my friend and colleague , Juan José Bayona , on his work and his good ideas in this report , and also the Commissioner , Mr Vitorino , on his initiative .
When we talk about Europe , it reminds me a bit of school , where we always said ' I have passed ' or ' they have failed me ' .
Here , when something goes well , it is the country or region that claims all the credit , but when something goes badly , or there is a disaster , Europe is usually blamed .
When they say , ' it is Europe 's fault ' , the citizens do not even know which institution they are referring to , because in reality they do not know them , and they cannot distinguish between them .
We must acknowledge that we have not made it at all easy for them .
There may be languages in which it is not so difficult , but in Spanish we have the Comisión Europea [ European Commission ] and the comisiones [ committees ] of Parliament , the Consejo de Europa [ Council of Europe ] and the Consejo Europeo [ European Council ] .
We know that they are completely different things , but the public in general does not know , and we must acknowledge that these coincidences or similarities are very unfortunate .
That is why I believe that this report on the European Union 's information strategies and subsequent implementation of the programmes are so important and vital to the citizens of the Union .
Please allow me now to relate this issue to my field ; the field of sport .
We must not forget that sport is a great instrument for communication and has a genuinely important multiplying effect .
If we in this Parliament support the inclusion of an article referring to sport in the new Treaties of the European Union , we may have sport programmes which have a great impact , and this would benefit all of us .
Furthermore , if we bear in mind that the essential thing is to educate and inform young people , who will be the real protagonists of the European Union within a few years and who will be its future , and that it is they who sporting information can mostly reach , we would truly be completing a circle which would be of the greatest interest and benefit in terms of the image of all the institutions of the European Union .
Mr President , I would like to protest at the absurd nocturnal and almost clandestine hour allocated to a debate which should be one of the most important debates of the year .
Mr President , we are dealing with a great report , which is timely and of a high quality , on which my fellow Member , Mr Bayona de Perogordo , deserves the congratulations of the Socialist Group , and I am very happy to express them .
In the Andreasen report this Parliament has already defined , together with the Commission , an information strategy intended to reach all the citizens .
However , despite the fact that we are in the middle of the process of creating a Constitution , opinion polls are still indicating a certain lack of interest in European construction .
We could sum up the situation by saying , like Marianne Thyssen , ' Europe has been created , now let us create the Europeans ' .
To this end , the information flowing from our institutions must not be neutral , we must create feelings of citizenship and of belonging to Europe in every European .
We Europeans have an historic duty : we can and we must identify with each other and this must be accompanied , promoted or even provoked , if necessary , by the European institutions .
In contrast with what happens in the individual countries , European construction is not the result of feelings , but of reasons . It is not driven by peoples , but by political , economic or media elites .
Many things are still lacking , including a European civil society , in other words , a system of intermediary organisations , which are relatively independent from the States and from the market , which are able to gather information , to deliberate , to make decisions and to act in a joint and cross-border manner .
The priority tasks for the Commission , for the European media and for opinion-formers in general - including us in this Parliament - must be empowering the European political area , the development of a European image and identity , strengthening - as the Commissioner has said - a core of common values , the debate on the future of Europe and the European approach in all types of information .
In summary , the task must not be to restate the identity of Europe over and over again , but to seek , define and consolidate the bases on which the Europeans can identify with each other .
Mr President , the approval of this report and the fact that Commissioner Vitorino has been charged with implementing these policies , are , in my view , significant reasons for us to be hopeful .
Mr President , I share your and Mr Aparicio Sánchez 's concerns regarding the fact that we are discussing such a fundamental proposal so late .
I would also like to thank Mr Bayona de Perogordo and congratulate him on the report on which we are now finally adopting a position .
It is a comprehensive report , and I know from experience that the work involved in such a report is fairly demanding .
The report takes us a good step closer to our goal of a comprehensive coordinated and decentralised information and communication policy , or in Commissioner Vitorino 's words in the ' Friends of Europe ' debate : ' the fight against apathy and ignorance regarding the EU ' .
I would also like to thank you , Commissioner Vitorino , for your great commitment to this issue .
I would also express my regret at the form of debate that we are having here in Parliament , since it excludes you from being able to answer questions here and now .
Although we have made some great progress , many questions remain unanswered , and I will mention some of them and will happily send them to you as well , for it is important that we do not rest on our laurels in the information and communication strategy at a time when so much is at stake concerning enlargement and the future of the EU and when we are also coming up to elections to the European Parliament .
That is why I ask : how far has the feasibility study got and the opportunities for a European ' C-SPAN ' that the Commission is to implement ?
How far have we progressed in the work on the ' Channel Europe ' concept ?
How far have we got with establishing a common visitor centre for the institutions in Brussels ?
How far have we got with calculations and costs for the initiatives proposed previously ?
How far have we got in our efforts to get the information offices of the Commission and of Parliament under the same roof in the capitals ?
I know that nothing has happened in Copenhagen .
Allow me finally to ask the Presidency of Parliament : would it not be an idea , Mr President , for us to hold a debate in plenary on Parliament 's role in the information strategy up until the 2004 elections ?
Mr President , the results of Europe-wide surveys clearly show that the European public are distancing themselves more and more from the Community ideal , and one substantial reason for that may well be the way in which many EU citizens have been given false information over recent years .
For example , 43 % of Europeans continue to believe that a work permit is required if they want to work in any other Member State .
It is regrettable that the advantages offered by the EU are not always recognised as they should be .
It is clearly evident from this , and also from many other examples , that the EU 's existing information and communication policy is not working .
Negative public opinion is of course reinforced by the EU 's inability to get a grip on corruption , and by its failure to effectively dismantle the bureaucratic apparatus - I am thinking , for example , of the way our Parliament meets in two places .
We should be a better state that what the public has at home .
We have to take urgent action , by which I mean that the EU has to take a position on the things that have gone wrong , do away with them and put together an additional package of measures .
For example , the EU could be introduced in schools as a specific subject , and pupils could be offered more opportunities to inform themselves locally about what is going on in the EU .
Such measures would be a step in the right direction , so that negative preconceptions about the EU could be eroded and public support for the Community ideal would be restored .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , we are on the eve of the European Union 's greatest political project - the overcoming of Europe 's enforced division into two parts .
Tomorrow , we will be deciding on the enlargement of the European Union by the addition of ten new Member States .
Despite this success for the European Union , the Eurobarometer published in March 2002 clearly shows that fewer than one-third of the members of the public questioned regarded themselves as well informed about the European Union .
Most indicators confirm that a large section of the population - 50 % - is completely ignorant of the European Union or indifferent towards it .
Voter turnout has fallen from 63 % in 1979 to 49 % in 1999 .
There is something not quite right here .
I believe one of our main problems to be the fact that we speak of the European Union as a distant structure .
That also came across from what Mr Ilgenfritz said .
The European Union is made up of all of us !
I do believe that the main cause of our problem is the mental and emotional distance between people , wherever they live , and the European institutions .
The political will to make European policy into internal policy is lacking .
The political will to reduce the distance between Europe 's citizens and its institutions is absent - not from the European institutions , but from the Member States .
Does , for example , every government state that there is no EU competence without the Member States ' consent ?
Are people in the Member States told about how no directive can be enacted without the Member States ' consent ?
Is it being stated openly that enlargement of the European Union cannot go ahead without the European Parliament , the Heads of State and of Government , the Member States and the candidate countries agreeing to it ?
No : whenever there is any doubt , people are told , ' Brussels is doing it to us ! '
The public do not know about the shared responsibility of the Member States for all European decisions , because this is not lived and communicated .
Let me end by asking whether the regional parliaments are performing their task of exercising parliamentary control over their representatives in the Committee of the Regions .
No , they are not !
Are the national parliaments performing their task of exercising parliamentary control over what the Council does ?
No , they are not !
Is the European Parliament adequately discharging its duties in exercising parliamentary control over the Commission and in working on legislation ?
Not satisfactorily so !
If we do not fully perform our parliamentary functions at regional , national and European level , the connections between them and the interlinked decision-making mechanism cannot be presented in a transparent way .
The best public information campaign is of no use if the public are not aware that they , through their governments , have a part in every decision .
Mr President , I would like to congratulate Commissioner Vitorino on his initiative , although I know that his hands are tied as a result of a lack of budget and because it is not so easy to introduce anything new in the European Union .
I would also like to congratulate Mr Bayona de Perogordo because he has listened , he has taken account of many opinions and , in fact , the final document is a document of consensus , enriched by Parliament , which has many new figures and many new initiatives , and I believe that that is the way to work in terms of institutional cooperation .
I believe we still have to take a further step , because the model in force , with the offices and the current system for disseminating parliamentary policy , is essentially a bureaucratic model . I believe we must change to a model of open and direct communication .
Another point which I believe to be extremely important , and which I believe must also be revised , and in relation to which this document introduces a very clear request , is the issue of languages .
Parliament 's reform policy on languages reduces the equality between them , it creates differences between some languages and others , and , in particular , in terms of translation , there is a difference between the dates for the delivery of documents .
What does this mean ?
That in terms of communication , we are moving backwards , because some citizens will receive the information first and others later .
And given the speed of many processes , there will be some citizens who do not receive the documents in their language and will hardly have the opportunity to present amendments on time .
I therefore believe that the guarantee of the maintenance of languages is an essential point , particularly in view of the fact that the new technologies allow for much more direct dissemination .
I therefore support an improvement in terms of the issue of interpreting .
Another issue in this document which I believe to be essential , and which must be taken into account , is something which a previous speaker mentioned : there can be no communication without participation .
And in view of the new technologies and the current capacity for communication , the citizens will not feel connected with these institutions unless they can participate in dialogue .
And I believe that Parliament and the Commission must establish communication departments which , as in the case of other national parliaments , allow for an open system by means of which there can be access to what we are doing from any place and in any language .
The new technologies make this effort and this investment possible .
And I am surprised that , in the reform , including of buildings , there has been no intention to broaden languages and communication , but rather a reductionist spirit has prevailed .
I would therefore call for equality between all citizens to be respected and for the reform of communication to be dealt with from a more modern point of view .
Thank you , Commissioner Vitorino .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon .
Announcement by the President
Self-evidently none of these were points of order , but they reflect the deep concern of colleagues and so I was prepared to take them .
As regards today 's business , as you know , we are about to begin a joint debate on two reports and ten recommendations , on behalf of the Committee on Foreign Affairs , Human Rights , Common Security and Defence Policy , with regard to the most ambitious enlargement in the history of the European Union .
It is , in the life of our Parliament , and in the life of the European Union , one of the most significant votes that elected representatives have been called upon to take .
I have to tell you , with considerable regret , that I have been informed by the Inter-Trade Union Committee of the European Parliament that it has decided to organise a strike today at 11 a.m. to coincide with this debate .
I want to tell you that I altered my schedule on Monday night here in Strasbourg in order to meet with the representatives of the Inter-Trade Union Committee .
I indicated to them my willingness to intervene at the highest level with the other institutions to express the concerns that they had drawn to my attention .
I want to point out that they have no dispute at this time with the Parliament as their employer .
Indeed Parliament , as an institution , is perhaps their closest ally in terms of respecting the interests they expressed to me .
Nonetheless , I was not prepared to make this intervention under duress and invited my interlocutors from the Inter-Trade Union Committee to suspend the proposed action .
I was informed yesterday afternoon that they intend to proceed .
It is to be deeply regretted that the work of parliamentary democracy , at a time like this , should be called into question .
I am not sure precisely what will happen at 11 a.m. today .
I would like to appeal to you as colleagues in the House for your understanding and your assistance at that time .
Should it be the case that some of the ordinary facilities which surround our debates are not available , it would still be my preference to ensure that our parliamentary engagement should continue if possible .
I guarantee you that the debate that we have today will be translated with urgency into all the languages so that should there be any breakdown in the ordinary procedures for interpretation - although it would not be optimum nor entirely consistent with the Rules of Procedure - I will use every endeavour to inform people in all languages at the earliest stage .
This is a choice for Members of the House .
Members are entitled to invoke the Rules and insist that the President suspend the sitting in the event that not all the facilities are available .
I do not yet know what the case will be , but in the context of what we are doing today , our political duty , if we can , is to proceed with our business with serenity .
I invite you to cooperate in doing so , in voting at midday as we plan , and to keep our rendezvous with European history .
Thank you , Mr President , for handling matters in this way .
Let me say this in all seriousness to all the staff and officials of this House : where your legitimate interests are at stake , we are on your side , but do not use this historic day , when the admission of ten countries to the European Union is at stake , as the occasion for enforcing interests that may or may not be legitimate .
We have to do proper work today , we have to vote , and I ask you to discharge your great responsibility so that we may be able to do our duty .
Mr President , it is a practice both in trade union and in other negotiations to use one 's strength at a time when it is calculated to cause the most difficulty for those with whom one is in dispute .
But in Parliament we rarely have days or votes of such significance as today .
The action being threatened by the unions does not reflect fairly the mutual respect which exists within the House between the different partners , or indeed the good relations that we have generally enjoyed .
You are right to proceed with our business and I would appeal to the staff of the House to assist us in carrying through today 's historic task with the maximum goodwill on their part .
Mr President , I would like to support you on behalf of the Socialist Group , while pointing out that we have fought bravely with the groups in this House , in the desire to include the right to strike in the Charter of Fundamental Rights and for this Charter to be incorporated into the European Constitution .
From this point of view , we respect the exercise of the right to strike .
But we also appeal to the responsibility of the workers of Parliament 's administration to in turn respect the event taking place today .
We therefore believe , Mr President , that we must continue with our agenda at this historic moment .
I deeply appreciate those sentiments .
With all the respect that we have for staff we must also respect , if we can , our own prerogative as parliamentarians .
I should like to welcome to the diplomatic gallery the ambassadors and diplomatic representatives of all the candidate countries .
They are here to follow our debate .
The next item is the joint debate on the following :
Report ( A5-0081 / 2003 ) by Elmar Brok on behalf of the Committee on Foreign Affairs , Human Rights , Common Security and Defence Policy on the conclusions of the negotiations on enlargement in Copenhagen ( 2003 / 2014 ( INI ) ) ;
Report ( A5-0117 / 2003 ) by Reimer Böge and Joan Colom i Naval , on behalf of the Committee on Budgets , on the proposal for a decision of the European Parliament and the Council on : 1 . The adjustment of the Financial Perspective for Enlargement presented by the Commission in accordance with point 25 of the Interinstitutional Agreement of 6 May 1999 on Budgetary Discipline and Improvement of the Budgetary Procedure ( COM ( 2003 ) 70 - C5-0053 / 2003 - 2003 / 2025 ( ACI ) ) ; and 2 .
The review of the Financial Perspective ( COM ( 2003 ) 185 - C5-0161 / 2003 - 2003 / 2025 ( ACI ) ;
Recommendation ( A5-0089 / 2003 ) by Jürgen Schröder , on behalf of the Committee on Foreign Affairs , Human Rights , Common Security and Defence Policy on the application of the Czech Republic to become a member of the European Union ( AA-AFNS 1-6 C5-0115 / 2003 - 2003 / 0901 ( AVC ) ;
Recommendation ( A5-0090 / 2003 ) by Michael Gahler , on behalf of the Committee on Foreign Affairs , Human Rights , Common Security and Defence Policy on the application by the Republic of Estonia to become a member of the European Union ( AA-AFNS 1-6 - C5-0116 / 2003 - 2003 / 0901A ( AVC ) ) ;
Recommendation ( A5-0091 / 2003 ) by Jacques F. Poos , on behalf of the Committee on Foreign Affairs , Human Rights , Common Security and Defence Policy on the application by the Republic of Cyprus to become a member of the European Union ( AA-AFNS 1-6 - C5-0117 / 2003 - 2003 / 0901B ( AVC ) ) ;
Recommendation ( A5-0092 / 2003 ) by Elisabeth Schroedter , on behalf of the Committee on Foreign Affairs , Human Rights , Common Security and Defence Policy on the application by the Republic of Latvia to become a member of the European Union ( AA-AFNS 1-6 - C5-0118 / 2003 - 2003 / 0901C ( AVC ) ) ;
Recommendation ( A5-0093 / 2003 ) by Ioannis Souladakis , on behalf of the Committee on Foreign Affairs , Human Rights , Common Security and Defence Policy on the application by the Republic of Lithuania to become a member of the European Union ( AA-AFNS 1-6 - C5-0119 / 2003 - 2003 / 0901D ( AVC ) ) ;
Recommendation ( A5-0094 / 2003 ) by Luís Queiró , on behalf of the Committee on Foreign Affairs , Human Rights , Common Security and Defence Policy on the application by the Republic of Hungary to become a member of the European Union ( AA-AFNS 1-6 - C5-0120 / 2003 - 2003 / 0901E ( AVC ) ) ;
Recommendation ( A5-0095 / 2003 ) by Ursula Stenzel , on behalf of the Committee on Foreign Affairs , Human Rights , Common Security and Defence Policy on the application by the Republic of Malta to become a member of the European Union ( AA-AFNS 1-6 - C5-0121 / 2003 - ( 2003 / 0901F ( AVC ) ) ;
Recommendation ( A5-0096 / 2003 ) by Jas Gawronski , on behalf of the Committee on Foreign Affairs , Human Rights , Common Security and Defence Policy on the application by the Republic of Poland to become a member of the European Union ( AA-AFNS 1-6 - C5-0122 / 2003 - 2003 / 0901G ( AVC ) ) ;
Recommendation ( A5-0097 / 2003 ) by Demetrio Volcic , on behalf of the Committee on Foreign Affairs , Human Rights , Common Security and Defence Policy on the application by the Republic of Slovenia to become a member of the European Union ( AA-AFNS 1-6 - C5-0123 / 2003 - 2003 / 0901H ( AVC ) ) and
Recommendation ( A5-0098 / 2003 ) by Jan Marinus Wiersma , on behalf of the Committee on Foreign Affairs , Human Rights , Common Security and Defence Policy on the application by the Slovak Republic to become a member of the European Union ( AA-AFNS 1-6 - C5-0124 / 2003 - 2003 / 0901I ( AVC ) ) .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , please permit me to start my statement with an expression of thanks to the staff of the Committee on Foreign Affairs , Human Rights , Common Security and Defence Policy and also to the staff of the groups , who , over the past years - just as much as the rapporteurs on the individual countries - have taken such trouble in dealing with this issue in depth , so that we have always been enabled , by broad majorities , to do justice to our task .
Please allow me also to express my appreciation for the good cooperation with the Commission 's successful negotiator , and thank Commissioner Verheugen personally for this cooperation .
With the task we have given ourselves today , it is in our hands whether this continent is reunited or not .
It is now for us , after centuries of disputes between them , not to abolish the nation states , but to bring them together in such a way that they will never again be able to wage war upon each other .
We are in a position to extend the area of stability , peace and prosperity , which we have had in Western Europe over recent decades , to Central and Eastern Europe , and to do this , not by any sort of coercion , but by the free decision of the peoples .
At the same time , we are in a position to bring this European continent together in such a way that it will not only have the strength that comes from peace at home , but will also be able , in the outside world , to manage peacekeeping tasks and to defend its own interests .
We therefore wish to specifically remind all present and future Member States of Article 11 of the Treaty of Nice , which contains the obligation to work together on foreign issues too , in a spirit of solidarity .
This point is , I believe , of particular significance at the present time .
Let me also , at this point , make an observation as a German .
This enlargement of the European Union will mean that my country will no longer have an external border , with the exception of the border with Switzerland , and thus no border that could be fought over in war or be the occasion of conflict .
What this , in terms of our history , means for my people is something I do not need to enlarge upon in this place .
I believe that we are thereby fulfilling the wishes of Konrad Adenauer , who once said that Germany had to be led out of its geographical situation by political means .
I believe it to be also the best thing we can do for peaceful development , and , at this time , I would also like to thank those from the peoples about to join us who have stretched out their hands to us .
It is those hands that we grasp in order thereby to bring the peoples closer together , even though governments have not , in all areas , always grasped what that means .
In this context , let me also thank the President of the Czech Republic , Vaclav Klaus , for his statement in March of this year .
There is still much to be done , however .
The candidate countries will be obliged to make further substantial progress in the areas of administration , a competent judiciary , the combating of corruption and the guaranteeing of minority rights .
The monitoring process that is to be set in motion will need to be closely accompanied by the European Parliament , in order thereby to ensure that the acquis communautaire can be adhered to in every case , allowance being of course made for teething troubles and the transitional arrangements that also have be built in .
This will also involve , in the same way , the citizens of the European Union acquiring the same rights , with no possibility of discrimination remaining , with legal protection from discrimination , which also provides a crucial security .
It is for these reasons that it makes sense to bring the peoples of Europe together in this way .
I believe it to be extraordinarily important that I should say , in this context , that the European Union can of course be extended to include more countries , and Bulgaria and Romania are waiting for this .
This enlargement , though , requires of us that we determine anew how large this European Union can become without it taking on too much .
We have created a Union which is something entirely new when set alongside all alliances , that being a Union that makes conflict resolution within a state into an instrument for resolving conflicts between peoples .
Its common legal order and its shared institutions mean that it is no ordinary alliance like those that formerly existed .
If we are to say that the European Union can go thus far , but cannot manage any further , that has to be said after we have seen just what this quasi-State is capable of .
In addition to that , we have to continue with the reflections recently initiated by the Commission , as to how we then organise our relations with our neighbours , preventing the development of new walls in Europe , and enabling those who cannot be Member States of the European Union , or do not want to be , to enjoy a privileged position as neighbours with whom we can coexist in peace .
On behalf of the Committee on Foreign Affairs , Human Rights , Common Security and Defence Policy , I wish to call upon you to approve the accession of all ten countries today .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , we managed at the very last minute to reach a compromise on the adjustment of the Financial Perspective for 2004-2006 and thus to guarantee our ability , today , to do justice to our historic responsibility whilst at the same time defending this House 's budgetary powers and rights of codecision .
As the Committee on Budgets ' rapporteur on the financial arrangements for enlargement , I want again to make it clear that these difficult negotiations have never been about calling into question the Copenhagen agreements with the candidate countries , but about treating them as a minimum to be guaranteed also by us .
So let me say again , loud and clear , that we , the European Parliament , in our previous resolutions - for example in June and September of last year - have , again and again , lent massive support to certain proposals by the Commission , for example the candidate countries ' progressive integration into the common agricultural policy , and , for another example , the special cohesion rules for them .
The fact is that we have managed , at the very last minute , to avert an interinstitutional crisis , one into which the Council had manoeuvred us either deliberately or by negligence , by its intention that Annex XV should be given the status of EU primary law .
It would surely not have done them any harm to keep on negotiating , right up to second reading , on the adjustment of the Financial Perspective , or even , if necessary , to go back to Article 272 of the Treaty , but many people out there might have taken this to be the wrong signal .
The compromise before us has been brought about , after a fifth trialogue , by the use of what I have to call legal artifice , and by renovation and repair in a process that we are unable to properly explain to anyone out there .
I might add that this is evidence of how necessary it is to reform the way the institutions act in relation to each other .
Commissioner Schreyer , I would like to state openly that you , on Monday evening , made an important contribution on behalf of the Commission , when your great perseverance helped to make this result possible .
I would also like to express my thanks to the Greek Presidency of the Council , which , as what one might call the hostage of the Council 's negotiating mandate , did everything humanly possible to the very end of a difficult process , making it possible for us to come to an arrangement .
One thing , though , will be apparent from Mr Brok 's resolution , and that is that if even one word of the joint statement is called into question or broken , then the Interinstitutional Agreement , too , lapses and is broken .
( Applause )
We have found a way whereby it is made clear in specific terms that the adjustment of the Financial Perspective on the basis of item 25 of the Interinstitutional Agreement is being carried out on a proposal from the Commission and jointly with the Council and with Parliament .
We have secured for ourselves in Heading 3 on internal policy the necessary leeway for the codecision procedures that have to be seen through in the course of this year - in programmes with added value for Europe , programmes that are important to the public , such as research , Erasmus , Youth for Europe - so that we can then complete codecision in a proper procedure with the supplementary sum of EUR 480 million at 1999 prices .
We also saw it as important to make clear that if , by way of a de facto revision of financial aid for Turkey , sums are transferred from Heading 4 to Heading 7 , that heading must in future be entitled Pre-Accession Strategy .
What has been made clear is that there are here , so to speak , two groups of countries - Bulgaria and Romania with pre-accession aid on the one hand , and aid for Turkey as a candidate country on the other .
We also have to clarify again that , in the 2004 Budget procedure , which will now surely run its course in an orderly way , the issue of adjusting the Financial Perspective can be resolved without any sort of discrimination , in sub-headings or by means of capping , against the new Member States .
In a most difficult process , and on the basis of necessary repair work , we have managed to defend all of Parliament 's budgetary powers and rights of codecision , while , at the same time , at the end of this difficult process - even though it was almost a dead end - the European institutions have again been able to demonstrate their capacity to act .
This sends a positive message to the candidate countries and to the citizens of Europe .
( Applause )
Mr President , today is a great day , and proof of this is the fact that we have 25 flags accompanying the common European flag .
You know that I am one of those who would like to see just one flag in this House , but today I believe that the presence of all of them is justified .
The budget is not usually an emotive subject .
But I must acknowledge that , particularly perhaps for those of us who have spent more than half our lives under a dictatorship , reaching an agreement today to fund the democratic reunification of Europe is a sensitive and emotional issue .
I must say that everything was going well , apart from what I would consider a mistake on the part of the Council , which tarnished the end of the process and created unnecessary difficulties ; the introduction of Annex XV , which had no precedents in previous enlargements .
And the annex affected the basic competences of Parliament .

There were two equally valid alternatives : to consider the presence of Annex XV as an implicit violation of the interinstitutional agreement and act accordingly , pursuant to Article 172 - and this will explain the final vote of certain Members - or to negotiate with the Council .
This is the option Parliament chose , there were tough negotiations , in which we must acknowledge in particular the skill of the chairman of our Committee on Budgets , Mr Wynn , and as a result of which we have reached an entirely acceptable compromise which I will recommend to the House .
We have achieved the objectives set for us and I believe that in some cases we have gone further than adjusting the financial perspectives for the purposes of enlargement .
As rapporteur for many years in this field I would like to stress that this is the first review of the financial perspectives achieved in more than a decade .
We will therefore have a Heading 3 for internal policies , which can operate in the coming years , which is sufficient if not comfortable .
There will be no discrimination between old and new Member States .
We have achieved a declaration from the representatives of the Member States , those who sign the Treaty .
A declaration of an interpretative nature , which preserves the democratic rights of Parliament and of our future colleagues from the new Member States .
Furthermore , we have achieved a new situation for Turkey , in heading 7 , which has a dual significance : it contains a political message for that country and it allows us room for manoeuvre within heading 4 on foreign policy .
Therefore , although , to be frank , I would have preferred to remove Annex XV , I am in a position to recommend to the House that you approve this agreement and I believe it will allow the Union and Parliament to move forward in the right direction .
I would like to place on the record my deep appreciation of the work of the Committee on Foreign Affairs , Human Rights , Common Security and Defence Policy and the colleagues and staff who have brought us to this point today .
Also , in more recent weeks , in addition to the regular burden of work , I should like to draw attention to the extraordinary negotiations that have been conducted by our colleagues in the Committee on Budgets which happily , at the eleventh hour , has produced a satisfactory , if not ideal , outcome to our encounters .
Mr President , Commissioners , ladies and gentlemen , as President-in-Office of the Council of the European Union , I have the honour and pleasure today of addressing the European Parliament on the highly important subject of enlargement and I consider it a privilege to be present today at this debate .
Today is an historic day for the European Union and the European Parliament .
In a week 's time , on 16 April , Greece will have the pleasure , as the presiding country , of hosting the historic ceremony of the signing of the Enlargement Treaty , at the historic site of the Ancient Agora beneath the Acropolis .
Despite the present use of the word ' agora ' to mean market , the Ancient Agora in Athens has its place in history for another reason .
It was here that the concept of democracy was actually born and developed 2500 years ago and the symbolism of this ceremony , which we have chosen to hold on this particular site , lies in the fact that democracy and the many other values linked to democracy are the common denominator which penetrates every corner of the European Union .
We are a community of values and , if the Union and enlargement are a success , it is because these values are going from strength to strength .
The countries about to join the European Union share our common history , heritage and culture .
Their accession marks the end of the artificial division of our continent .
Today we are putting our objective of building a Europe founded on the ideals of democracy , pluralism , the rule of law , respect for human rights and the free market economy into practice .
The European Union has always been committed to this objective .
That is also the reason why , as soon as the Berlin wall fell , the Union responded to the challenge and reacted decisively and proactively to the change in the European political landscape .
It offered a framework and prospects for a unified Europe .
It offered a Europe based on free choice and solidarity between its citizens .
Relations between the Union and the candidate countries have gradually been strengthened through various procedures , association agreements , structured dialogue on a series of issues , accession criteria , accession negotiations and pre-accession mechanisms and procedures .
During all these stages , the European Union 's position has very clearly been to safeguard the global , evolutionary and substantial character of the accession process , with all the candidate countries participating on an equal footing and acceding to the European Union with equal opportunities .
At the beginning of accession negotiations , the Union made it perfectly clear that accession implied complete acceptance of the actual and potential rights and obligations connected with the Union and its institutional framework , including in the foreign relations sector , and that accession implied proper , practical application of the acquis communautaire , including the establishment of a reliable working public administration .
Bringing the negotiations to a conclusion was no easy task .
Far-reaching , often painful economic reforms were needed in all the countries which were to accede .
However , thanks to persistence and determination on all sides , these negotiations were conducted in a thorough , efficient and transparent manner and I think that I speak for everyone involved when I say that we are proud of this process and its outcome .
I should like to take this opportunity to offer my special thanks to Mr Verheugen , the Commissioner responsible for the negotiations who is present here today , for his huge contribution to the success of this entire process .
As you know , negotiations with the 10 acceding countries were completed in Copenhagen on 13 December last year .
The terms of accession are common knowledge and are contained in the draft Treaty and in the Accession Act submitted to the European Parliament .
The results of the negotiations do , we feel , reflect the best possible outcome and a fair agreement .
As we pointed out in 1993 , the Union must be able to absorb new members without allowing European unification to lose momentum .
The results of negotiations have achieved this institutional equilibrium .
There is a balance between the wish to ensure , on the one hand , that the acceding countries will benefit fully from the various policies of the European Union and the need , on the other , to ensure that the Union will be efficient and competitive within the context of globalisation .
In addition to the Herculean and unprecedented task carried out by the Council and the Commission during this process , I should like to highlight the continuous and important effort also made by the acceding countries .
I should also like to offer my sincere thanks to the European Parliament for the political support it has given us throughout this process .
We particularly appreciate the open and constructive political dialogue with your democratically elected partners in each of the acceding countries .
The work carried out by the joint parliamentary committees was invaluable , as was the work of so many of the parliamentary committees .
It helped enormously in clarifying exactly what accession to the European Union implies for the acceding countries .
Today , all the citizens in the acceding countries are looking towards us .
Some have already expressed their will .
The positive outcome of the referenda in Malta and Slovenia are a clear and decisive sign of their trust in the Europe of tomorrow .
Enlargement gives us every reason to be optimistic about Europe , even in the present climate , with the international economy or the war in Iraq overshadowing developments .
Nonetheless , there are many reasons which justify this optimism .
The European Union as a whole has a healthier basis from an economic and financial point of view , in comparison with much of the rest of the world .
It has succeeded in setting up a pole of relative stability .
It has created a creditable single currency and a common framework within which to exercise a policy which guarantees the reliability of EMU as an international currency pole .
The European Union has developed a Community standard which , despite its diversity , acts as a shield against uncertainty and falling confidence .
The European Union has a unique development model which combines the economic element with a broader spectrum of social elements covering employment , social integration and a whole series of other issues .
The European Union uses delicate manoeuvres to set the renewal of its policies in motion in a series of crucial sectors , such as structural policy or agricultural policy , in order to safeguard its potential for growth , social cohesion and its ability to face up to its international challenges .
The European Union deals with internal concerns by renewing its institutional framework , especially in the sense of extending the process of European integration .
Finally , on a series of issues such as trade , investment flows , the transfer of technology and the movement of workers , enlargement is bringing about new operating conditions for the Union and hence creating new opportunities for the European approach and the European model within the global framework .
I should like to conclude my speech with two comments .
My first comment is that these are tense times .
As Member States , we need to show that we can achieve a rapprochement of views through self-imposed limitations , reciprocal concessions and the political will to support the momentum of the Union , and by strengthening the values of democracy , human rights and solidarity .
Solidarity , of course , means more than negotiating financing under the Structural Funds or protecting the common agricultural policy and other individual questions .
It cuts across a broad range of Union policies .
My second comment is that it is important at this stage for the enlarged Union to succeed on a number of fronts in the immediate future .
We need to repair the damage done by the differences which have arisen in the foreign policy sector and which marked the issue of Iraq .
We need to convince the citizens of the European Union and of countries outside the European Union that we stand for the values of peace , stability , confidence and support for growth and we must make a systematic and sincere effort to repair our relations with all our basic partners .
Ladies and gentlemen , Europe belongs to the citizens of Europe without exception or discrimination .
Everyone has a right to share in this future .
Enlargement brings this vision much closer .
The European Union is ready to receive its new Member States , secure in the knowledge that it is acquiring a new configuration and new momentum , the sort of momentum demonstrated in these countries , during the transitional period , on economic , political and social issues and reforms .
It is incumbent upon all of us to make enlargement a catalyst for faster European unification , a force which will ensure that Europe is able to meet the challenges of a new era of global relations .
Mr President , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , ladies and gentlemen , you will today be deciding on one of the most important questions for the future of our continent .
You alone , in the European Parliament , have the right to say yes or no to the accessions of ten new Member States .
No other parliament in Europe will have the opportunity to say yes or no to individual countries ; all the others will merely have to ratify the treaty as a whole .
This means that this decision is certainly one of the most important that this House has had to take in all its history .
We are , then , for the time being , at the end of a long , long road , a road marked by the determination to put an end to the division of Europe once and for all .
I am eternally grateful for the way that the European Parliament has never wavered in its support .
I believe that it is worthy of note that the European Parliament was equalled by few in Europe in keeping the open wound of the divided Europe a live issue even during the Cold War , putting the case for a European future in which its peoples could determine their destiny in freedom and by democratic means .
The primary subject of our discussions today is human destiny and the fate of peoples .
Today , we are talking about the people in Europe - over 70 million of them - who have looked forward to this day with boundless hope and expectation , but whose courage and determination have also made straight the way for a free and united Europe .
These peoples naturally belong among us , and they have earned their place in our midst .
These millions of people have for many years shouldered the burden of difficult and radical reforms and changes in order to build modern societies .
If I might take a sideways glance at reform policy or discussion about reforms in one or other existing Member State , my comment is that I wish those Member States implemented reforms with at least some of the strength , courage and determination that we have found in the future Member States .
Who are the peoples we are talking about ?
What will they bring to the European Union ?
The Poles have their thousand years of history as a European nation that , being obliged to live under Communist hegemony and martial law for many years , never even for one day resigned itself to its fate , but instead defended themselves , becoming the undoubted originators of the great movement in Central and Eastern Europe that eventually led to the total collapse of Communist rule in Europe .
We are talking about the Hungarians , who rose up as long ago as 1956 .
Last week , I was speaking in Hungary , and in my speech I said that no doubt all European politicians of my generation still had the cries for help from the leaders of the 1956 Hungarian uprising ringing in our ears , that we could not forget them , and that these cries for help even today , fifty years later , still represented a beacon for the European democracies .
Fifty years had to pass before we could give the right response .
We are talking about the Slovaks and the Czechs , whose attempt , in 1968 , to change the course of European history resulted in much suffering for them , and who , with Charter 77 , also made a significant intellectual contribution to freeing Europe from totalitarianism and dictatorship .
We are talking about the Lithuanians , the Latvians and the Estonians , victims of the Second World War whom nobody had asked whether they wanted to be part of the Soviet Union , who , for decades worked desperately to maintain their national and cultural identity in the face of a policy of Russification , and who succeeded in doing so .
When one person or another says , as they sometimes do , that we have to take great care not to accept new Member States that might not share our values , I am sometimes tempted to ask who it was who once , unarmed , faced up to Soviet tanks !
That happened in Vilnius , just over ten years ago .
We are talking about Slovenia , a country that tried to go its own way even in the days when Tito ruled Yugoslavia , which , as soon as Communism had collapsed in Yugoslavia , set a determined course for Europe and which , having secured 90 % support in a referendum on accession to the European Union , has shown how attractive our Europe still is to young nations .
Lastly , we are talking about Malta and Cyprus , two countries that want to join with us in maintaining and defending our common values and objectives in the Mediterranean .
Those are the countries and peoples of whom we speak .
You , honourable Members , have for many years accompanied these countries on their journey towards the European Union .
I can only confirm what has already been said here .
As regards the strategy and the individual steps , there was close understanding between the Commission , the European Parliament and the Council .
I am deeply grateful for the constructive teamwork that this made possible .
There is no doubt that the success of the project depended on it .
For me , then , to say a word of thanks to you , Mr President , is not a required formality , for I really do feel profoundly indebted to you , to the Group Presidents , to the rapporteur and chairman of the Committee on Foreign Affairs , Human Rights , Common Security and Defence Policy , to the rapporteurs on the individual countries and to the joint chairs of the joint parliamentary committees .
All of you have made an important and indispensable contribution to the success that we have achieved .
You have not always made things easy for me , but that is not what Parliament is for .
I would , though , like to say that your observations , your interventions and also your criticisms have helped to highlight problems more clearly and enable common solutions to them to be found .
The President-in-Office of the Council has observed that we are now on the threshold of signing the Accession Treaties , which is due to be done on 16 April in Athens .
He has already mentioned the great symbolic significance of this place .
It is not only where democracy was given to the world , but also the source of a few other old European ideas , such as the idea that societies must be governed justly , and the idea that it is the responsibility of individuals that holds a community together .
Those are a few ideas that we are not keen to abandon .
However old they may be , they are still tremendously up to date .
In this place , we are showing how Europe 's national identities and cultures , which we value so much and which we want to defend , arise and flourish from strong common roots .
Once the Accession Treaty is signed , it will have to be ratified .
I am firmly confident that the referendums to be held in the future Member States will all produce an unambiguous and convincing yes to Europe , showing that the European project is gaining new impetus and new dynamism .
I do not envisage any insuperable political difficulties resulting from the ratification process in the individual Member States , and am confident that ratification will be completed in due time .
I would nonetheless like to reiterate the need for efforts at communicating with the public and informing them to be stepped up , so that the citizens in the Member States may really know what is going on .
While we are not running an election campaign , we are ready to inform , to explain and to answer the questions that citizens are quite entitled to ask .
This is where I have to say something again about Cyprus . It is something I have said before ; that it really is deeply sad that we have got to within centimetres of the goal , but have ended up not managing to find a political solution to the Cyprus question .
The chances of resolving the conflict in Cyprus have never been as great or as strong as they are now , but we must not abandon our efforts .
I again want to underline the Commission 's willingness to support any further efforts by the United Nations to find even now a lasting political solution to the Cyprus problem .
The Commission will therefore do whatever it can to promote projects in Cyprus that help to reduce and alleviate the increasing disparities on the island and to foster trust between the two - Greek and Turkish - communities there .
The work in the candidate countries is not yet complete .
Reforms have to be proceeded with and no effort must be spared in pressing on with preparations for accession .
I can assure you that the Commission will monitor very closely how commitments made in the course of negotiations are implemented .
Six months prior to the accession date , that is , this autumn , the Commission will submit a comprehensive monitoring report , in which we will list in detail the areas in which safety precautions might be considered if omissions are not rectified in due time .
A first phase of monitoring has already been completed , and its results were , I might add , remarkable when one considers the thousands of undertakings that had been given ; having examined these , we found only 25 instances in which we had asked future Member States to take urgent action in order to avoid delays .
That adds up to a very good result . Apart from that , I am able to inform Parliament that in all these instances , the measures requested by us have now been taken .
I have this to say to the future Member States . The development of efficient administration and of a properly functioning judicial system must , even after accession , be continued with and supported .
The fight against corruption and criminality continues to be of fundamental importance .
The upholding of human rights and the protection of minorities are still on the agenda .
Although many countries have succeeded in coming a long way , some issues remain open and there are still challenges of which the enlarged Union must remain aware .
The same applies to the actual implementation of equality of opportunity , an area that still causes me some concern , not only in the new Member States , but also in one or two of the present ones .
This is about what impact the transformation of a society has on its weakest members .
Whilst I am sure that the European Parliament will , today , open the door wide to the ten new Member States , I am also aware that , at the moment of decision , not everyone in this House , and not all the European public at large , will be completely free of doubts about the enlargement process .
Some may wonder what we are letting ourselves in for , and others whether the Union will be put under too great a strain .
To this I would like to respond by saying that it is true that the integration we have achieved to date has been a success , and that we have gained peace , reconciliation and prosperity .
At the same time , though , we in Europe have had to pay a high price , especially those whom the end of the Second World War , and its political consequences , obliged to live behind the Iron Curtain .
It is they who have had to pay for it all , for Europe , divided , knew no real peace and only incomplete freedom .
Only now have we been handed this opportunity by the peoples of Central and Eastern Europe , who never reconciled themselves to being cut off from the free part of this continent .
So I do believe that we must now seize this opportunity to shape the future in such a way that twenty-first century Europe will be characterised by peace and freedom , security and prosperity .
So let me give straight answers to these crucial questions .
Are the new Member States sufficiently prepared , both politically and economically ?
To that , I say that this is the best-prepared enlargement in the history of the EU .
The prospect of enlargement was combined with a far-reaching reform process in the countries of Central and Eastern Europe , and gave direction to this transformation .
Not everything will be perfect , and I can predict that there will be difficulties , but the Commission is firmly convinced that the Community 's policies and programmes will work even when there are twenty-five Member States .
Will the new Member States support further integration , or will integration grind to a halt ?
The answer is perfectly clear .
It is in the interests of the new Member States to want a strong Community .
They will strengthen , rather than weaken , the Community idea , and they deceive themselves who believe that we are being joined by Member States who will eventually cause the European Union to revert to being a free trade area .
This is what will not happen ; rather , what we will be getting is new enthusiasm , new zest and new dynamism .
Do the new Member States understand that Europe is a community of values rather than a system for transferring money ?
To this , too , the answer is clearly ' yes ' .
I made that clear earlier when I briefly spoke about the past that the new Member States have behind them .
They do not need us to give them lessons in democracy .
They are also , of course , counting on solidarity , but is not the least consideration that such solidarity is equally in our own interest ?
I know that the new members will not pursue narrow national interests .
Will the new Member States allow themselves to be part of a common European foreign policy ?
Here too , I say ' yes ' , an emphatic ' yes ' !
The problems we have had in recent months did not come about because the new Member States did not want to fall in line ; they arose because we could not answer the question of what was the common European position to which they might adhere .
( Applause )
What this means for the new Member States is clear .
It means that only a strong common foreign policy can protect them from such conflicts , and that is why they are all in favour of such a combined approach .
The last question , honourable Members , is one we must ask of ourselves .
Are we ourselves sufficiently prepared ?
My answer to that has to be more tentative .
From the technical point of view , we are .
All the decisions the organisation of enlargement requires have been taken , but I do believe that enlargement means that reforms which would have been urgent in any case , have now become even more urgent and must not on any account be further delayed .
That is why the Convention 's work is so important and must be crowned with success .
There are those who say that it would have been better to do all this beforehand .
That may be so , but I know that we could not leave the European peoples , who have for thirteen years been preparing for this great moment , waiting any longer .
To them I say that the European home into which they are due to move is not yet ready .
They now have the opportunity to join in the discussions and decisions on what that home should actually look like .
By the time the ten new Member States have joined us , we will have made further progress in negotiations with Romania and Bulgaria .
Both are approaching the goal .
There will very soon be 27 of us , and only then will the present enlargement round be over .
Helsinki , in 1999 , saw the door opened to Turkey , which , in Copenhagen , last December , was given the political road map .
The decision on whether or not Turkey meets the political conditions for accession will be taken at the end of next year .
I encourage Turkey to keep on its course towards Europe , and the Commission can be relied upon to make a fair and objective judgment .
The Balkan countries have prospects of accession .
The time it will take to turn these prospects into reality will be dependent on their own efforts to carry out reforms .
Honourable Members , whilst the imminent enlargement does not guarantee Europe political and economic strength , it does improve our chances and make us more able to fit Europe to the challenges of the twenty-first century and to offer its citizens a century of peaceful development , personal freedom and individual opportunity .
Now that , today , the decision is upon us , I therefore ask you to vote in favour !
( Applause )
Mr President , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , Commissioner Verheugen , ladies and gentlemen , this is a momentous and historic day , a day of great joy and of profound gratitude .
Let me speak personally ; it is my privilege to have been a Member of this Parliament since 1979 .
If , when Parliament was first directly elected , someone had told me : ' On 9 April 2003 , you will decide whether the three Soviet republics of Estonia , Latvia and Lithuania , the Warsaw Pact states Poland , the Czech Republic , Slovakia , Hungary , and Slovenia , and then also Malta and Cyprus , will join the European Union ' , I would have said in reply , ' That is a tremendous dream , that is a fantastic vision . '
Yet this dream , this vision , is now becoming reality , and let us be deeply grateful for it and rejoice !
We also think back over Europe 's history , for we cannot shape the future unless we know the past .
Our thoughts go back to the terrible , criminal years of National Socialism from 1933 to 1945 .
We think back to 17 June 1953 , to the Soviet tanks in Budapest in 1956 and in Prague in 1968 , and cast our minds back to the great freedom movements of the 1980s , remembering Solidarity , the popular desire for freedom in Central and Eastern Europe , and 9 November 1989 , the day when the wall came down .
Robert Schuman - whose name our Chamber bears - said , as long ago as the 1960s : ' One day , all Europeans will belong to the European Community , to the European Union , in freedom and in peace . '
Our group has always had that as its objective .
I would like to extend my sincere thanks to all those who have played their part in this , above all to Mr Brok for his work as rapporteur , but also to the Committee on Budgets ' rapporteurs , Mr Böge and Mr Colom i Naval , and also to all in the Commission , whom you , Commissioner Verheugen , represent .

The candidate countries can now look back on the massive efforts they have accomplished , but there are still more massive efforts ahead of them .
Above all else , we must bring Europe together and reconcile it , both morally and intellectually .
It is for that reason that we would have very much welcomed it if the Czech Government under their great President Vaclav Havel and his successor Vaclav Klaus , had had the strength and the courage to utter even one word of regret and sorrow about the people who were expelled .
We have to use truth to bring about reconciliation , and now we all have to look to the future together .
To those who believe that our European home is not yet finished and that they should therefore not give their approval to enlargement , I say this : we have succeeded in bringing the Convention into being , and we will work hard to get us a European constitution soon , and to set all Europeans on their shared journey into the future on the basis of law .
A quite overwhelming majority in our group - it is almost unanimous - says ' yes ' to every one of these countries , bidding them welcome to the European Union , to our community of values .
Let us , together , take into the future this old Europe , which keeps on renewing itself !
That is what we want for our continent .
( Applause )
Mr President , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , Commissioner , I would like to thank you for your work and congratulate your team .
Ladies and gentlemen , today we have a date with history , with our future as Europeans .
We are at the gates of the greatest enlargement we have seen .
My group , the Group of the European Socialist Party , will vote to fling these gates wide-open so that we can take a great qualitative leap forward , allowing the majority of the population and the surface area of our continent to be reunited , thereby increasing its wealth and diversity .
We have put the use of pre-emptive war as a pretext , and wars of conquest , which desolated our continent for centuries , behind us .
We have established peace as our rule and a shared destiny as the solution and this is enshrined in a Union based on common values , respect for human rights , good governance and the rule of law .
It is a secular union in which there is separation between the secular and the religious and respect for religious beliefs .
The President-in-Office of the Council has said that we are going to hold this event next week in the Agora in Athens , which reflects democracy and the market - which is where we began .
I would also like to remind him of our debt to the Middle East - and not just in a religious sense - the oldest legal text we know of is the Code of Hammurabi , from Mesopotamia .
This date will clearly be established as a political milestone in the history of our Union , overcoming Munich and Yalta .
Europe is being reborn as a geographical and political unit , fulfilling the words of Willy Brandt on German reunification ' Jetzt wächt zusammen was zusammen gehört ' [ Now what belongs together , is growing together ] .
I would also like to point out , as a personal memory , that 12 years ago , as President of the European Parliament , I announced the award of the Sakharov Prize to Alexander Dubcek , who was a political prisoner , and a year later he received that prize in this Parliament .
And Walesa , who was a dissident , also visited Parliament a year later as President of Poland .
This is the leap we have taken and now we have to complete it by ensuring that we genuinely have a shared destiny and solidarity .
This is not the end of our journey but rather a beginning , and ours is an unprecedented superproject , an enormous challenge for all of us in which we have to overcome doubts , frustrations and fears , particularly at a time when there is a tremendous irony of history and great concern amongst our fellow citizens about the unilateralism of the Bush administration , which has caused great upheaval in the European Union , even though the United States has been one of the decisive elements in the creation of this Union .
There are some in this House who believe we should recover our unity and repair what has been broken before enlarging .
Others fear that there will be more division .
I would like to say on behalf of my group that we believe , following Copenhagen , that pacta sunt servanda , that we must respect our commitments .
And also say to the new partners that they are not responsible for our internal quarrels , but that what we have to do is to build together with a view to the future , in a spirit of solidarity , overcoming national egotism through Community solidarity .
If the President-in-Office of the Council will allow me to make a proposal , next Wednesday , 16 April , in the Agora , there will be a great ceremony with our Heads of State and Government , the fifteen current ones and the ten who are joining us ; why do you not round off this ceremony with a joint European statement based on our values ?
That is , propose a common will on the part of all of us to deal with the future of the Iraqi people , firstly through humanitarian aid and then by ensuring their future within the framework of the United Nations .
I believe that would be the icing on the cake to conclude that important ceremony .
I would suggest that you say this to President Simitis , I believe it would be very important .
And this would allow us to make progress with the European project , to move towards a united Europe that really works .
Please allow me , Mr President , to refer to overcoming the budgetary conflict .
I would like to thank the chairman of the Committee on Budgets , as well as the chairman of the Committee on Foreign Affairs , Human Rights , Common Security and Defence Policy , and all the rapporteurs who have been able to find a new approach to a problem which could have led to a very difficult situation within this House , and which could , furthermore , have dramatically altered and reduced the powers of the European Parliament .
I believe that if we vote yes this week - and my group is in favour - we will achieve a stronger and more cooperative Europe , reinforcing our foundations by means of a Constitution , which will allow the tree of the old Europe to blossom once again and we will be able to guarantee peace for us and for our children and also consolidate peace throughout the world .
Mr President , the great majority of my group will vote to allow the Accession Treaty for the ten new countries to be signed .
We cannot however approve Mr Brok 's report on the conclusions of the negotiations between the European Union and the candidate countries .
You may ask why we are voting in this way .
If Parliament were not to vote in favour of enlargement , the candidate countries would automatically be shut out of the Union , regardless of the views of the citizens of the countries in question .
Whatever we think of the circumstances surrounding enlargement today , we believe the people of each of the countries concerned should have a free choice on the matter .
On the other hand , the Council 's show of force on the budget aside , adopting the Brok report would amount to awarding a gold star to the fifteen Member States for the way in which the enlargement negotiations were conducted and concluded .
This is precisely where the shoe pinches .
In our opinion , we will need , sooner or later , to change the fundamental objectives of the current enlargement process and European integration as a whole .
We agree with Mr Brok that enlargement can help to build , I quote , ' an ever-closer union among the states and peoples of Europe ' .
It will allow disagreements to be dealt with through negotiations within the common institutions , so promoting peace and security in Europe . Enlargement will also , I quote , ' assure influence for the citizens of Europe ' in world politics .
We therefore support enlargement .
I am very much afraid , however , that this is merely wishful thinking and that the basic issues concerning the future of Europe are not being addressed .
This is why Mr Brok is delighted with , I quote , ' the consensual outcome of negotiations ' .
We should ask ourselves whether the outcome really is a consensual one .
It may have proved consensual in official meetings , but what about the feelings of the people of the countries in question ?
Has the House forgotten about the candidate countries ' vehement rejection of the stance of the Fifteen on support for agriculture , the obvious inadequacy of credits available until 2006 and the restrictions on the free movement of people ?
Has the House never been asked for the liberal acquis imposed on the candidate countries to take better account of their social problems , the employment situation , the fragile nature of their economies and specific national issues ?
Each country has its own history .
The Copenhagen criteria require countries to have ' the capacity to cope with competitive pressures and market forces within the Union ' . For the sake of this requirement , these countries have in fact been pushed into privatising and jeopardising many industries and into liberalising trade , even if this meant creating a huge commercial deficit .
Low salaries have become a comparative advantage in the competitive market .
The market was increased but people 's rights were not .
Where will this leave Europe if we allow enlargement to 25 members to proceed in this way ?
Furthermore , if Europe does not have the confidence of the peoples of the Union , how can it hope to have an influence in world affairs ?
In fact , this experience compels us to open a great public debate , both in Member States and candidate countries .
This debate must engage society as a whole , not just governments .
We must consider what kind of Europe we wish to present on the international stage , faced with the unwavering and bellicose unilateralism of the United States .
We must consider how best to move from a Europe based on liberalism , towards a Europe truly based on social values and solidarity .
The House should also contemplate how to reform our institutions to involve citizens in the great process of the transformation of Europe .
We should take account of these questions when it comes to the main items on the agenda for 2004 , namely enlargement , the new treaty and the European elections . We should campaign on them everywhere from Strasbourg to Warsaw , and from Helsinki to Nicosia !
Mr President , I would like to point out that the first objective laid down in the Treaty on European Union is to promote economic progress .
I hope that no one will forget that in relation to the accession of the new countries .
Another thing : these new countries include Cyprus .
Part of Cyprus is occupied by foreign troops .
As long as Cyprus is an independent state , that is a matter for the Republic of Cyprus , but when Cyprus joins the European Union , part of our Union will be occupied by Turkish troops , and I consider that to be unacceptable .

Mr President , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , Commissioner Verheugen , if , as I hope , the European Parliament today votes by a very large majority for the accession of the Czech Republic to the European Union , individual Members ' motives for that decision may differ to some degree , but their motives will coincide on one point , namely that with our vote we want to seize an opportunity , an historic opportunity !
I am fully aware how carefully the term ' historic ' ought to be used .
But there are situations where it would be a mistake to ignore the actual dimension of events , and we are faced today with one such situation with historic consequences .
As rapporteur responsible for the Czech Republic , I have no reason to react with exuberance , let alone euphoria .
The many unqualified statements by some Czech politicians in the past , statements made with an eye to the various election campaigns , have been too frustrating for that .
We should be careful , though , not to deny the Czech people , a people at the heart of Europe , accession to the European Union simply because some opportunists , whose names will probably be almost forgotten in ten years ' time , have been guilty of verbal gaffes .
We are left with the objection that the problem is not so much the many opportunists , both small and great , but the question of the possible continuing effect of the presidential decrees known to us as the Bene ? Decrees .
So far as this point is concerned , the Czechs have taken upon themselves the obligation to comply with the Copenhagen criterion that there can be no discrimination against minorities .
Should anyone in the Czech Republic nevertheless be in breach of that after European Union accession , as a community of justice the EU can and will take appropriate action .
The fact that neither government nor parliament in the Czech Republic have so far responded to our Parliament 's resolutions is disappointing and regrettable , as our group chairman has already made clear .
President Vaclav Klaus 's political gesture should not , however , be played down .
It is an encouraging sign that , a few weeks ago on the anniversary of the German occupation of Bohemia and Moravia in March , the highest Czech representative expressed regret for the expulsion of the Sudeten Germans .
It is a step in the right direction , which we may hope will be followed by others .
In any case , we still need patience in our dealings with one another because coming to terms with history is something on which it is hard to impose a time frame .
No one should think that the Czechs are the only ones having problems in dealing with their past ; the phenomenon is not only found in all the countries of the former Eastern bloc , even long standing Member States of the European Union sometimes have problems with it .
There is one thing of which we should be careful when dealing with the past . We are right to oppose collective condemnations , but are not those who do not want the Czechs in the EU simply because a few Czechs are unreasonable doing much the same thing ?
Someone has already pointed out today that we are not admitting governments , we are not admitting parties and groups , but we are admitting people , we are admitting nations .
In this case , it is the Czech people that we are admitting , and integrating them into the European Union must and will be the key to developing a new legal culture , the European Union 's legal culture , in that country too .
If the Czechs remain outside , we will have gained nothing .
First , if the Czech younger generation in particular is able to move and develop in a wider democratic environment , the wounds that doubtless still exist on all sides will close and hopefully will one day heal completely .
The people in today 's Czech Republic , who cannot be held personally responsible for what happened before they were born , should and must be given the opportunity to have a part in the European community of values with equal rights and equal obligations .
Today we are holding the most important vote of this legislative period .
Let us be aware of the historic implications of this vote ; let us seize this opportunity by voting for the accession of the Czech Republic by a large majority .
And , as a Member from Saxony , I would like to say to my neighbours : Drazí p ? átelé , vítáme Vás srde ? n ? .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , as rapporteur for Estonia I am pleased to be able to recommend that this House should today vote in favour of Estonia 's accession to the European Union .
Anyone who , like myself , has had the privilege of visiting that country regularly in various capacities for ten years can see the progress Estonia has made since regaining independence .
When you realise what additional disadvantages Estonia had to overcome compared with the non-Baltic former communist countries of Central Europe , it is almost a miracle that Estonia was in the first group to begin accession negotiations .
It was two years late in commencing reforms .
Having been annexed as part of the USSR , it had to start almost from scratch with the building of government structures at national level .
It needed to integrate Russians who had been settled there over decades and to deal with the enormous environmental damage from the Soviet Union 's military legacy .
Despite many changes of government , the Estonian reform model has always been and still is a consistent one : in privatisation , in monetary policy , in matters affecting the tax system and in other respects .
They said an unreserved ' yes ' to the opportunities of technological change .
The willingness with which people in the private sphere , in the economy and in administration made use of the opportunities of modern technology can be described as exemplary for other parts of Europe .
What else can a small country with few natural resources do than make something from a combination of brain and technology ?
Estonia 's export structure shows that they are now successfully achieving this high-tech added value .
The fight against corruption is proving more successful than in other countries in the region .
In its 2002 progress report , the Commission says that ' corruption generally appears to remain a relatively limited problem in Estonia ' .
The fact that no ethnic tensions have arisen in Estonia and other Baltic states despite the large Russian-speaking minority and despite the tragic role the Soviet Union played in their history must be ascribed to the level-headed policy of the Estonian Governments and their willingness to follow proposals made by their European partners along the road to the EU .
One thing I would like to say a word about to the Estonian citizens direct is the referendum on 14 September .
If you still have any doubts about whether you should vote in favour , then please consider whether a country the size of Estonia and in its geographical location can stand alone in today 's world .
So far as the material advantage is concerned , all experience so far has shown that ultimately everyone involved in every enlargement has profited , which means that Estonia , too , will develop better if it is part of the EU .
I am also shadow rapporteur for Lithuania and there , too , I also share the view of my fellow rapporteur , who will be recommending accession .
Lithuania 's reform process has not been quite so consistent or brisk as in Estonia , especially not in the first half of the 1990s , but I am impressed by the speed with which Lithuania has caught up , especially since 1996 , and , as in all the countries , there was a lot to be done in every area covered by the acquis .
One particular problem , both in discussions with the EU and with its own public opinion was the task of working out and paying for a plan for the closure of the nuclear power station at Ignalina and giving the people in and around the town of Visaginas a future .
I believe we have found the right way forward together there .
In the matter of a satisfactory arrangement for transit to and from Kaliningrad , the former Königsberg , we must not leave Lithuania alone to meet our demand for Schengen compatibility .
I am not satisfied with how it is actually going .
The thing I warned against several times has happened . Travellers are , in practice , faced with complications and more bureaucracy , and there is scope for tension in relations with Russia .
That cannot be in the interests of either party involved , and , with Belarus being Lithuania 's eastern neighbour , there is additional uncertainty as to whether all this will work .
Despite all the problems that remain to be solved , we are , today , writing a piece of European history .
I share the view of many of my fellow Members that this vote on the accession of ten countries is the most important vote of this legislative period .
I am glad that with my vote I can make a lasting contribution to turning the wheel of European history a lot further on .
I say to those who believe they must vote against : history will pass you by and show how false both your pretended and your actual motives are .
You still have the chance to decide for the common future of a greater Europe without losing face .
To Estonia , Lithuania and the others I shout a warm welcome to the European Union : kõike head , Eesti ja tere tulemast Euroopa Liidu and viso kogeriausio Lietuva ir sveiki atvike ?
Europos S ? jung ? !
Mr President , as rapporteur for the accession of Cyprus , it is my honour and pleasure to ask all my fellow Members to give their assent as laid down by Article 49 of the Treaty .
I would like to take advantage of my last speech as rapporteur to thank my colleagues on the Committee on Foreign Affairs , Human Rights , Common Security and Defence Policy and the joint parliamentary delegation , who have provided me with a great deal of support over the years .
I would also like to thank the Commission , in particular Commissioner Verheugen , Mr Maurer and Mr Van Der Meer , and the Government of the Republic of Cyprus and its ambassador , Mr Theophilou , who have provided us with full , regular updates on the progress of the negotiations .
We are all sorry that the UN plan for global resolution of the Cypriot issue presented by the Secretary-General came to nothing .
The constitutional structure proposed for the reunited island corresponded to the model of a modern , democratic federal State and fully respected the cultural identity and autonomy of both parts of the island .
It also provided a European perspective for the two island communities .
Those who rejected the plan for global resolution because they are still in favour of the existence of two separate States bear a heavy historical responsibility .
As Mr Kofi Annan wrote in his report of 1 April 2003 to the Security Council , Mr Denktash , despite the profound changes that have taken place , still hopes that the situation ' on the ground ' will one day be enshrined in law .
According to the law , however , Cyprus does not comprise two separate States .
Security Council Resolution No 541 ( 1983 ) declares the TRNC 's proclamation to be legally invalid and calls upon all Member States not to recognise any Cypriot State other than the Republic of Cyprus .
After the signing and ratification of the Accession Treaty , therefore , the whole island of Cyprus will , legally speaking , become a Member of the European Union .
In fact , however , for the duration of the Turkish occupation , it will not be possible to apply the jurisdiction of the European Union and the Community acquis in the northern part of the island .
That is why the Accession Treaty contains an enabling clause empowering the Council , at the proposal of the Commission , to negotiate the necessary adjustments for application of the Community acquis in the north of the island once the obstacles to reunification are removed .
The UN Secretary-General 's peace plan is still on the table .
The parties concerned - Greek Cypriots , Turkish Cypriots and , in particular , Turkey - are being motivated by many arguments to overcome the barriers which , thus far , seemed insurmountable .
The European Union is prepared to welcome a reunified Cyprus at any time , provided that the rules governing it comply with international law and with our own principles .
In the meantime , the European Union should be proud that it has opened its doors to a country that is indisputably European .
Its cultural and economic contribution is irrefutable and will be further increased considerably when sustainable peace is achieved in the Middle East .
We also anticipate a strong impetus and active cooperation from Cyprus in terms of politics .
In conclusion , I would like to point out that , in the Iraqi affair , Cyprus refused to allow access to its territory for any military operations and stated that it wished to align itself fully with the common positions adopted by the European institutions .
As rapporteur , I see this as exemplary behaviour , which I would recommend to all current and future Member States .
Mr President , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , Commissioner , I am able to report to you today on the conclusion of a successful process .
Latvia has satisfied the conditions for membership of the European Union .
I am not the one who should be applauded today for this success .
It is our colleagues in the Latvian parliaments , it is the Latvian Government , it is the people in the Latvian administrations , and it is the population of Latvia whom we ought to congratulate on a magnificent marathon of adapting legislation and preparing for membership of the European Union .
I have simply had the honour of being able to have a part in this success story and of accompanying it a short way emotionally .
For that , I would like to take this opportunity of thanking my colleagues in the Saeima , the government representatives , administrations and the people of Riga , Liepaja and Letgale .
That is to name only a few , but there are many more who took time to discuss with me the best way of shaping this accession process .
It is they who had to cope with a really painful adjustment process , and they did so with no concern to protect vested rights .
Everything was called into question ; everything was examined to see whether it was suitable for integration into the European Union .
So the one thing I can recommend is that you vote for Latvia 's accession to the European Union .
What is true of other candidate countries is also true of Latvia .
Here , too , there is criticism that important things still have to be made perfect .
I am thinking of the need to strengthen the administration at regional level in particular , so that it can carry out its tasks in enforcing the acquis .
I am thinking of the fact that more still needs to be done to make the judicial system work better ; I would also like to see the programme for integrating the Russian-speaking population pursued with greater enthusiasm and the obstacles to citizenship lowered .
Nevertheless , we do not want to deprive ourselves of joining with Latvia , its culture , its language and its willingness to reform , because that is also a gain for us .
But , and here I agree with some of the previous speakers , the problem we have with this enlargement lies with us .
Let us take a look at ourselves here in the European Union .
What has happened to the enthusiasm for institutional reform ?
Where is the enthusiasm for agricultural policy reform ?
What has become of the courage to reform the Structural Funds ?
Where is the courage to tell the public that we have to stop protecting vested interests if we are to reshape a successful Union ?
What has become of the honesty involved in admitting that reforms sometimes hurt ?
The twenty-five of us must look for new ways together , and I am convinced that it is not Latvia that is putting the brake on , but that we are applying it here .
We must not put the blame on Latvia and the population there simply because the Union is too lethargic to shape this historic process , because Latvia was willing to reform whilst we were not .
That is why we must also see to it that changes are made here , and I am convinced that Latvia 's experience , enthusiasm and courage can help us in this .
If Latvia becomes a member of the European Union , if its enthusiastic and youthful population becomes part of the European Union , it will also be part of the engine driving forward reform here in the European Union .
I am highly optimistic about this .
In conclusion , I would like to address a quite personal word to you .
For me personally , today sees a wish come true , namely that our friends the Czech Republic , Poland and Hungary , who gave us in the GDR the courage to change , will be able to join us and will be able to help us shape Europe .
To them , too , we owe the unification of Germany .
We should not forget that , and I would like to say that in particular to those of my fellow Members who are thinking of not voting for the Czech Republic 's accession .
We owe our neighbouring countries a great debt of gratitude .
Mr President , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , Commissioners , ladies and gentlemen , may I start by thanking my honourable friends in the Committee on Foreign Affairs , Human Rights , Common Security and Defence Policy who , in appointing me as rapporteur for Lithuania , gave me the opportunity to take part in today 's extremely interesting and important debate in the European Parliament .
I should also like to thank Mr Gahler , who has just added a number of thoughts on Lithuania , although I was here .
Ladies and gentlemen , as one of the ten countries joining the European Union , Lithuania brings with it the same historical baggage of culture , conflict and history that the whole of Europe carries .
We have all decided from time to time to change this course , to rally all the European nations around values and around principles .
Lithuania has its own problems .
However , now is not the time to discuss how much progress has been made in resolving the problem of Kaliningrad or Ignalina or anything else .
We need to focus on the political reference points we are all adopting .
We have all felt that the Europe we are building is not only a Europe of values , culture , history and adventure ; it is also a Europe of the future , a Europe of hope .
If we ask the European nations today what they expect of us , what political expressions they expect of the leaders of Europe , they will say peace , democracy , growth , social justice and freedom .
It is to precisely these values that we have to respond .
Lithuania , I repeat , has had its share of adventure , as we all have .
But today we are treading a path with hope , a path with visions , a path which is expected to prove very interesting along the way .
As a Greek , I am keenly aware that the historic name of Europe which applies to all of us has Greek origins and brings with it overtones of culture and civilisation .
Europa was Zeus 's consort . The mother of Minos , Sarpedon and Rhadamanthus .
However , if you study historical developments in conjunction with their mythological aspect , you will notice that they describe cultural , economic and other contacts between nations and citizens in the central and eastern Mediterranean basin in general . The cultural element has always been present .
The element of quality has always been present .
Ladies and gentlemen , allow me , precisely because of my origins , to say how moved I am that Cyprus will be acceding to the Union at the same time as Lithuania and the other countries , and to thank Mr Poos in particular and all the institutions of the European Union , for doing such an excellent job of addressing such a serious issue and finding the best possible outcome .
Cyprus , the island of Aphrodite , or in the words of the modern poet , ' the golden green leaf tossed into the sea ' .
Ladies and gentlemen , today we need to be both serious and optimistic .
We need to put everything we have debated and grumbled about on occasion behind us and realise that we are defining a new perception .
We are all Europe .
Not new Europe and old Europe .
We are the Europe we have built , the best thing man has given mankind .
And a word to the Greek Presidency , given that we all agree it is the element of civilisation that unites us in Europe .
There are two important texts , the ' Tomb of Pericles ' and the ' Oath of Alexander the Great ' ; what a good idea it would be to have them translated into all the languages , including the new languages of the European Union , as statements of principles , values and civilisation .
Allow me to close by saying , welcome Lithuania , welcome Cyprus , welcome Malta , welcome all of you who will join the European Union this year and all of you who will join later , in 2007 , and everyone else who accepts the principles and values we all share .
Mr President , amongst the countries that have distinguished themselves in their efforts to fall in step with the European Union , with a view to becoming members , we have Hungary , whose development and current situation I have sought to portray with objectivity as rapporteur for this Parliament .
Today , the time has come for the European Parliament , pursuant to the Treaty on European Union and to its Rules of Procedure , to formalise its position on the application of these countries .
We are talking , in the case of the countries of Central and Eastern Europe , about States and peoples that are hoping to find within our Union the respect for their identities and independence , the collective security and the economic prosperity that were denied them by the communist dictatorships that subjugated them for almost forty years .
We therefore have a huge responsibility not to disappoint their expectations .
Perhaps this is why , at one point in his report on the conclusions on enlargement Elmar Brok says that accession is not an end in itself , but rather a starting-point for new efforts to be made .
We must acknowledge the truth of this , but it is equally true that the step we are taking today constitutes a historical milestone of the greatest political importance , given the repercussions it will inevitably have , not only for the enlarged Union but for the entire European continent with which , due to its size , the Union is beginning to be confused .
It is therefore to be expected that questions are asked and that fears grow about the challenge of bringing together two worlds which , unfortunately , have experienced such different levels of development in recent decades .
It must also be emphasised , however , especially at this time of uncertainty created by the Iraq crises and also at a time when confidence in our capabilities is waning , that the accession of ten new countries is solid evidence of Europe 's vitality , which clearly demonstrates its political will to respond positively and democratically to the challenges that history sets for it .
Mr President , Hungary submitted its application to join the European Union on 31 March 1994 .
Accession negotiations for were opened four years later , in March 1998 .
From the outset Hungary had been one of the applicant countries where progress , not least in adapting to the requirements of the internal market , had been most striking , and this had helped to maintain the dynamic of the negotiations .
Despite maintaining a high public-sector deficit , the Hungarian economy is characterised by one of the highest rates of growth in Europe , by the lowest inflation recorded over the ten previous years and by a relatively low rate of unemployment . It is consequently one of the most best-performing economies in the region .
Furthermore , Hungary has attracted one of the highest rates of direct foreign investment of any applicant country and its gross national product accounts for nearly 13 % of the total GNP of all twelve applicant countries .
This exceptional economic performance undoubtedly counted in Hungary 's favour in the negotiations on accession , especially if we bear in mind the speed at which this country has adapted to mechanisms befitting a market economy , after forty years of central planning , and the fact that Hungary has paid the social price that this process entailed for the most disadvantaged .
This does not mean , however , that it was easy to reach agreement on all chapters of negotiations .
In the sensitive areas of competition policy for example , or of cultural and audiovisual policy , or even on budgetary and financial issues , amongst others , we have seen the ongoing efforts that both the Commission and the Hungarian authorities have made in an attempt to overcome the difficulties .
Apart from the technical aspects of the negotiations , however , I wish to recall some facts that have marked the Hungarian socio-political situation during the period in which these negotiations have taken place .
In the resolutions adopted over recent years , Parliament has given prominence to a number of recommendations , in particular those aimed at encouraging the introduction of reforms in the areas of integration of the Roma peoples , improving the social dialogue , efforts to combat corruption and organized crime , strengthening an independent judiciary , increased concern to reduce regional disparities , and , not least , scrupulous adherence to rules governing public-sector tendering .
We have insisted on the need to establish an effective institutional and administrative framework for programming and implementing the structural and cohesion funds .
Progress has certainly been made in those areas , and the contribution by the Hungarian authorities has been substantial and will certainly continue .
Mr President , we have listened to various Hungarian political leaders proclaim that Hungary is determined to move forward on the road to integration , and wants the Union to be strong and united , not forgetting the need to preserve national identities and cultures .
These leaders think they have better prospects of achieving their objectives within the European Union than by going it alone in coping with the impact , favourable or unfavourable , of globalisation .
This is the crucial question that has been asked of the Hungarian people , who in the next few days will express their views in a referendum .
Ladies and gentlemen , the people , as always , shall be sovereign and shall determine their own laws , which we must fully respect .
As for our role , I am sure that Hungary , one of the oldest of European States , will regain its place in Europe , a place that has always been reserved for it , as a member of the European Union on 1 May 2004 .
This is why , in my capacity as rapporteur for Hungary in this assembly , I am honoured and happy to ask my fellow Members to support this application , which concludes years of efforts and work and which opens up prospects for a new Europe .
Mr President , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , especially our dear friends in the candidate countries who are keenly observing our decision today , I have been involved in the enlargement process ever since I became a Member of the European Parliament .
I have helped to shape it in a great variety of capacities - as Chairman of the EU-Poland Joint Parliamentary Committee , now as Chairman of the EU-Czech Republic Committee and as rapporteur for Malta .
Like all of us , I am witnessing an historic process that will change the EU permanently .
Never before has there been an enlargement on this scale , with ten new countries of Central , Northern and Southern Europe .
Parliament was therefore right to be mindful , even before the Council and Commission were , that Europe should not again be divided and that each candidate country should be considered individually on the basis of the progress each has made .
I am pleased that today I , together with the entire Austrian People 's Party delegation , can give our assent to the results of Copenhagen in the Brok report and to all the candidate countries .
Let me first , as rapporteur , give my reasons for assenting to Malta 's accession application .
This small island state is a country in an exposed geopolitical position , one that has been profoundly marked by European culture and history .
Like all the candidate countries , Malta , too , has had to make far-reaching political and economic decisions in order to meet the Copenhagen criteria .
That has , however , resulted and is resulting in a modernisation of the economic and social structures of a country that has made and will make the leap from a sheltered island society to a social economy able to face competition in the European internal market .
In this , the European Union has shown Malta understanding and generosity with , for example , transitional periods in such sensitive areas as shipyards , second residences , even in the question of its desired tax exemptions and of course also with the possibility of agricultural subsidies .
Malta has recognised this opportunity .
It was the first country to hold a referendum , with an extraordinary turnout , voting 53 % in favour of EU accession .
But that referendum is not binding .
The Accession Treaty still needs to be ratified in parliament .
The forthcoming election on 12 April will decide whether there will be a parliamentary majority in favour of it .
As rapporteur , I have always tried to avoid interfering in the country 's internal political decisions .
That is still my position and I do not in any way want to anticipate how the Maltese people will vote in this election .
Let me just say this much : we in the European Parliament have always supported Malta 's application to join the EU and we welcomed the fact that the application , which had been suspended for two years , was renewed in September 1998 and that the Helsinki European Council decided to open accession negotiations with Malta .
It is a unique opportunity for Malta .
There will not be a second opportunity of this kind .
I very much hope that we will be able to welcome Malta as an EU member on 1 May 2004 .
The enlargement of the EU to take in the Baltic States also has a Northern and a Central European dimension , however .
I am speaking now as an Austrian .
Today , our country has the longest external border in the Union and yet we lie at the centre of Europe .
Enlargement moves Austria from a position on the edge of the EU to its centre , the centre of an area from which we Austrians in particular can expect economic stimuli , growth and employment .
The Austrian People 's Party has always supported the European Union and its enlargement .
Today , through the delegation to which I belong , and through the Austrian federal government at the summit in Athens , it will be voting in favour of this enlargement .
We are not looking only for economic advantages from this enlargement , however .
As Chairman of the EU-Poland and EU-Czech Republic Joint Committees , I have always stressed this .
This enlargement is a reunification of Europe .
Above all , we are looking for good neighbourly relations with the countries with which we were associated historically for hundreds of years and from which we were separated as a result of two World Wars and the cruel division of Europe in the Cold War .
I am not taking it for granted that we will be able to solve all our problems with our neighbours as soon as they have joined , but we shall certainly be able to resolve them better and more easily when they have done so .
That is why I am canvassing for assent for all the candidate countries and asking Parliament to give that assent .
It will be an important historical act , an act that will also help us to come to terms with the past and to make it easier for our neighbour the Czech Republic to make the gestures we expect of it .
I am confident that we can count on such gestures , especially after what Czech Vice-Premier Mare ? said to our group yesterday .
I am canvassing towards this end on behalf of my delegation and give its assent , in the European Parliament , to the accession applications of the ten candidate countries .
Mr President , today , in this House , we are witnessing an act of moral justice : European countries , countries which are just as European as those which are already part of the Union but which , by a twist of fate , found themselves , through no fault of their own , on the wrong side of an artificial line drawn across our continent , are coming back to Europe , coming back to us .
We welcome their return with joy and admiration , admiration for their endurance in the face of so much suffering , for the heroism they have shown during the long decades of communist dictatorship .
Of all the countries returning to Europe , Poland has a particular role and particular importance , not just because it is the largest country but because it is there , in Poland - as Commissioner Verheugen pointed out , and we would like to thank him for the immense amount of excellent work he has done - that the battle for freedom from tyranny started which subsequently served as an example and encouragement to other countries .
Without Poland and - I would like , if I may , to remember here a leader who is now forgotten - without Lech Walesa , the Berlin Wall might still be standing .
It would be difficult at such an important moment for Parliament not to look back over the four years of accession negotiations , negotiations which were often problematic , often complex , because of the difference and disparity between the respective levels of development .
However , if the Poles have succeeded in overcoming the difficulties and reaching the end of the negotiations today , it is thanks to a huge effort on the part of society , thanks to its enthusiasm and to the commitment of the successive Warsaw governments , all of which , all of them , irrespective of their political creed , have fought to achieve the common strategic objective of their country 's accession to the European Union .
Clearly , we have not reached the end of the process .
We must continue to fight and strive to modernise the country so that it can derive maximum benefit from accession .
At this juncture , I must say that we continue to feel some concern , as I have already said on past occasions , regarding the transparency of the public administration , corruption and the independence of the media , but I am sure that Poland will be able to succeed in these areas too .
Parliament too has played an important part , giving powerful impetus to the accession process .
We have sent messages of support and encouragement and occasional warnings , but we have always been consistent and determined , and that is why the citizens of the candidate countries have viewed the European Parliament as a credible assembly which is seeking to reintegrate the part of Europe which had been cut off so that justice is done .
The decision we took to open up Europe to the countries which were already part of the continent was a political decision , not an economic decision , not a decision based on figures and calculations which would not have justified this process , but a decision based on the ideal of justice .
In this connection , it pains me to see that some of the Members of this House do not feel this need to see justice done and are preparing to abstain from the vote today or even to vote against accession , for reasons which we may be able to respect but which I , at least , cannot endorse .
The least acceptable attitude is to vote against accession in retaliation , almost as a way of punishing those countries which have declared their support for US intervention in Iraq .
That would be to deny the candidate countries a right which , thank goodness - and I repeat , thank goodness - some of the countries of the Union have exercised freely .
If I may , Mr President , I would like to end on a personal note , with a parenthesis .
I am half Polish and half Italian , and I can assure you that , in this matter - the war in Iraq - I am much prouder of my Polish half , for Poland has had the courage to send 200 troops to Iraq to fight , as on many other occasions in history , for our freedom , for the freedom of us all .
Mr President , new cultures will bring added value and more security to the individual States and the European family .
This may be the time when the glass is half full , a time of optimism and benefits , but the time will , of course , come when there are difficulties , when the glass is half empty .
The European Socialists have consistently and determinedly fought for enlargement .
The countries bordering on the Mediterranean , which are the gateway to Central Europe , have played a major role in this process .
We make it clear that we want to open our doors to those who wish to become part of our European family , but there is no automatic right to join our club .
As the negotiators of the candidate countries know , a lot of hard work is necessary before full membership is granted .
I am the rapporteur for Slovenia , the wealthiest of the candidate countries , which also has a European institutional tradition .
The main problem during the preparatory phase was speeding up the judicial procedures and resolving the problems left over from the previous regime .
Thus , Slovenia 's situation was similar to but less complex than that of some of the other candidate countries .
Even when Slovenia joins Europe , everybody will still be responsible for making good the undertakings given .
The international organisations ' reports on Slovenia talk about a functioning market economy and observance of the Copenhagen criteria setting the standards to be achieved in the field of fundamental rights .
A paragraph was erroneously included in the report relating to combating fraud , corruption and the trafficking of drugs .
These are phenomena which continue to be present but to a much lesser degree than in other countries , and it is possible that the reference to them might , therefore , unbalance the text .
The best solution would be to delete the paragraph .
Another technical point : the term ' denationalisation ' I used in the original text was translated as ' privatisation ' , which is a different concept .
We have now come a long way along the road to the new Europe , and today 's sitting is almost a dress rehearsal for how the House will look one day in the future .
Parliament is endorsing the work achieved by the candidate countries , on which the European Council will pass judgment .
The Treaty of Nice established the fast track to enlargement and fixed the schedule to be followed .
Despite all the difficulties , thus far it has been observed .
Just as in previous cases accession to Europe brought economic benefits and strengthened democracy and the institutions , we are confident that that will be the case this time as well .
. ( NL ) Mr President , when , in 1997 , the European Parliament appointed me as the rapporteur for Slovakia 's EU membership application , some of my colleagues looked at me with pity .
Did that country have any chance at all , given the shadowy , authoritarian style of the Meciar Government ?
If anyone had asked me at the time whether the country would accede to the EU at the same time as the other Visigrad 4 countries , I would probably have said no .
Fortunately , things turned out differently , and on this solemn occasion here today I can wholeheartedly recommend that Slovakia be admitted to the European Union .
It is in no way inferior to the other candidates who are on the membership list for next year .
Because Slovakia 's failure to meet the democratic criteria meant that it was not included in the first negotiation group , the quality of its constitutional state has been checked and tested more than that of the other candidates .
I have received the occasional complaint about that , but the country has , perhaps more than others , been made aware of the importance of the values on which the European Union is founded .
After the 1998 elections , which marked the end of the Meciar era , there has been a significant improvement thanks to the introduction of a directly elected president , the democratic decentralisation of the administration , the increased independence of the judiciary and the measures to improve the position of minorities .
There are , however , a number of problems that are so stubborn that they are unlikely to be resolved in the immediate future .
In a sense these therefore constitute a threat to Slovak society .
They are not unique .
Other candidates are also wrestling with them , but their seriousness is sometimes underestimated .
We should therefore welcome the fact that the Slovak Government has also submitted a serious approach to the European Parliament .
I am talking about the fight against corruption and an improvement in the position of the Roma .
We have been hammering away quite hard at both points over the last few years - too hard for some people 's liking .
We have apparently been too impatient .
It takes time to tackle these problems .
That may be true , but something is now finally happening thanks to our pestering - if I may use that word .
We have been given assurances on the basis of which we can always call the new Member States to account after their accession .
Two more criteria were formulated at the Copenhagen Council .
I have been able to ascertain that Slovakia meets the market requirements .
The internal debate on this subject is at times so radical that I sometimes wonder whether people have actually taken the trouble to find out what the principles of the social market economy are really about .
Slovakia also needs an active government that strives for social equilibrium and makes every effort to support the development of the poorer regions .
As far as her ability to implement all the community rules is concerned , this country is no different from the other candidate Member States .
She has already achieved a great deal , but the task is not yet finished , and a lot has already been said about this today , including with regard to the other countries .
We await the next progress report from the Commission .
I hope , however , particularly when it comes to preparing for the use of community funds , that the Slovakians are ready in time so that they are actually able to absorb this money .
So neither my last report , again today , nor the explanatory note I wrote with my recommendation are completely free from criticism .
In Slovakia , they have gradually come to expect that from me .
In all the years that I have been doing this work , I have tried to present myself as a rapporteur of the European Parliament and not as an ambassador for Slovakia .
That is the task of others , and they have been doing an excellent job .
Naturally I am rather biased because of my intensive contact with Slovakia and her people .
They absolutely do not deserve the reputation Meciar has given them .
I admire the way in which one of the youngest states in Europe has been able to wrest itself from a complicated past and the speed with which it has brought itself up to the same level as the others .
The time has now come to go forward together .
Mr President , first of all , I would like to thank Mr Brok for the high quality of the work he has carried out enabling us to vote today on a decisive text in our history .
I fully support the general approach taken by this report and the encouragement it contains .
In my own report , however , I have taken the liberty of dwelling at greater length on certain factors which are fundamental to the creation of the internal market .
First of all , I have discussed the need for the judicial and administrative systems in the candidate countries to be truly independent .
Much remains to be done in terms of selection , training and evaluation procedures for judges .
Furthermore , coherent reform of the public administrations must be a priority objective .
Impartiality is essential in these areas .
Secondly , the free movement of persons , which is a cornerstone of the internal market , is all too often blocked , in particular by the lack of recognition of occupational qualifications .
Lastly , I would encourage our future Member States to step up their efforts to combat counterfeit and pirated goods , for that is the key to achieving compliance with intellectual and industrial property rights .
The factors that I have just mentioned are all elements with regard to which the European Parliament is committed to remaining vigilant .
This vigilance is possible thanks to the measures established at the appropriate times by the European Commission over previous periods and following accession .
Safeguard clauses specifically linked to the internal market may be implemented in the event of failure to comply with the obligations arising from accession and invoked as a warning prior to accession .
It should be made clear that these clauses create an additional safety net .
I would also invite the Commission to update us on progress in these matters in its final report , due to be presented in November 2003 .
Lastly , I would like to emphasise the importance of this time and of 16 April next .
Sadly , the past few days have been coloured by the conflict in Iraq , by the positions taken by governments in Central and Eastern Europe , and , lastly , by the problem of funding enlargement .
Failure to give our assent , however , would send an extremely unfortunate signal to the candidate countries , where referendums are underway .
The timetable must be observed .
We must make room for our common future .
Mr President , the European Parliament 's Committee on Constitutional Affairs welcomes the outcome of the negotiations with the ten candidate countries .
Whilst it is gratifying that this round of enlargement will enable us to help overcome the grim legacy of conflict and division in Europe , we must also emphasise that the process has not yet been completed .
Above all , we must not take public approval of enlargement for granted , either in the acceding countries or in the Member States .
In this context , we believe that a great deal of information is needed , and we should beware of engaging in propaganda .
Persuasion is the order of the day , and it is important , especially in border areas , that the efforts to persuade people are organised in such a way that they are well received by the general public .
There are a few specific details to be added to these general remarks , particularly as regards the choice of 1 May 2004 as the accession date .
In connection with this decision , the Committee on Constitutional Affairs welcomes the fact that , by that date , observers from the acceding countries will already be attending our Parliamentary sittings .
We welcome the fact that we shall also have new Commissioners and new members of the Commission in general on the first of May .
We consider it right and proper that the new Commission is to take up its duties quite soon afterwards , in November 2004 .
We deeply regret , however , that all of these decisions have been taken without Parliament having been consulted at all .
We call on the Council , as a matter of urgency , to provide Parliament with early information on developments in the accession process and to involve us in good time .
In general terms , we expect that many of the solutions which we have not really managed to find so far on the basis of the Treaty of Nice will be made possible by the work of the European Convention .
We are pleased to note that the representatives of the acceding countries are also fully involved in this work .
They will contribute to our consensus , to a consensus that will carry us forward in Europe .
Mr President , in view of the competences of the Committee on Citizens ' Freedoms and Rights , Justice and Home Affairs , which it is my honour to chair , I would like to stress three or four key aspects of this unprecedented event we are debating today .
Firstly , it is important to expand the debate on the European Union 's borders , which has recently been launched .
There is absolutely no doubt that successive enlargements lead us to the question : how far ? What are the Union 's limits ?
Knowing where the Union 's borders are is the key if we are to talk about a European identity .
Furthermore , it will determine the Union 's future action , in accordance with the possibilities offered by its new shape in terms of expanding the process of integration .
My second point is that enlargement is a challenge in terms of the monitoring and control of external borders .
In the new area of freedom we are building , it is clear that the decisions of one Member State have repercussions for the others , given the disappearance of internal controls .
It is therefore important to help the new Member States to take responsibility for this difficult and costly task , which is a clear example of the organisation of migratory flows .
Furthermore , we must reassess the cooperative relations with the new States which will become the Union 's border States .
Thirdly , enlargement is a challenge in terms of combating different forms of organised crime , such as terrorism , human trafficking or drug trafficking .
It is therefore important to promote intense police and judicial cooperation , the exchange of best practices and the compatibility of legal systems .
This will allow the Member States to quickly acquire the levels of guarantee currently enjoyed in all the Member States .
Finally , I would like to make a special appeal for the active participation of the ten candidate countries in the work on the Convention on the Future of Europe .
It is clear that the Convention is planning the form Europe will take in the twenty-first century and it is therefore essential that not just the current Member States but also the future ones , which will represent almost half of the new Union , feel they are co-authors of that Convention .
To sum up , in order to achieve the objective and for enlargement to be successful we must fulfil other objectives which are no less important , such as promoting stability and security , involving all the Member States in its shaping and in the respect for Fundamental Rights laid down in the Charter , and explain European construction to the citizens .
In summary , to lay the foundations for a European identity which is constantly evolving , whose lowest common denominator is essential for the consistency and endurance of what we have been advocating for more than fifty years .
Mr President , your reality actually consists of many years of dreams .
The process of enlargement , about which everybody has fantasised in the past , is now being given flesh and bones .
In a debate such as this , it is appropriate to congratulate the Commission and its services on this formidable task .
We have a Commissioner who has played and still is playing a major role in this enlargement , who has constantly kept us informed about what he was doing and with whom we have clearly always been on the same wavelength from a political point of view .
Furthermore , the Commission has used its best officials for the enlargement discussions , and so it has become a task that we will never forget .
I personally used to dream these dreams with Czech friends , and I am therefore extremely pleased that the Czech Republic will be one of the first ten countries to accede to the European Union .
The Balladur initiative has been on the agenda a number of times in the past , particularly with regard to borders and the rights of minorities .
It is odd that the Balladur initiative still forms one of the cornerstones of the political criteria of Copenhagen .
I would actually like to say something about borders .
This week we voted on the transit problems of Russians living in Kaliningrad .
At the time we thought : they all travel via Lithuania and we must reach agreement with Lithuania before Lithuania 's accession becomes a reality , because this is also a border problem .
On this point , Lithuania has adjusted very well to the general pattern of European Union negotiations .
I would , however , like to point out that the report on this is couched in such general terms that Latvia and Estonia are also included in it , and this is an opportunity for the Commission and the Council to take a look at the ratification of the border agreements between Russia and the Baltic republics , who themselves have ratified everything there has been to ratify , whereas the Duma still has this ratification hanging over its head .
Would this now not be a good opportunity to ensure , in the agreements about transit arrangements for Kaliningrad , that all ratifications also become a reality on the part of the Duma ?
I am pleased to see the Commissioner nod , and the Chairman of the Council as well .
There is another border problem that has regrettably not yet been solved .
This time , however , it is not the candidate Member State , Cyprus , that is at fault , given the fact that the President of Cyprus very recently approved the mediation of the United Nations .
To our deep regret , and certainly to our surprise as well , it was the Turkish side that did not do so .
Cyprus cannot therefore be blamed for this and can be wholeheartedly welcomed as a Member State of the European Union as long as the country is willing to continue to honour UN mediation as it has been doing in the past .
Turkey 's position makes us feel all the more gloomy , because Turkey now has a black mark against an important political criterion in this area .
I would like to call on Turkey to continue to meet the political criteria of Copenhagen , including in respect of this issue , because only then can we regard it as a true candidate Member State that is welcome in our ranks .
Mr President , in my younger days I was one of those who had a vision of a European Community which was not an exclusive club of Western European states but one which embraced the whole of Europe .
I am therefore immensely proud to stand here as my group 's Vice-President responsible for enlargement at the moment that this vision becomes a reality .
What a transformation to Europe we are seeing !
Twelve years ago six of the ten candidate countries did not even exist as sovereign nation states .
Now they will be working with us for peace , prosperity , stability and freedom .
The Socialist Group will be saying ' yes ' to the ten countries .
This is not a romantic ' yes ' , it is a ' yes ' which is a result of 15 years of profound economic and social change , 10 years of cooperation and preparation and more than 5 years of tough and difficult negotiations .
It is a ' yes ' which is a reward for the immense hardships suffered by the peoples of the candidate countries during their painful economic and social transition .
It is a ' yes ' which confirms that all ten countries have succeeded in fulfilling the political , economic and legislative criteria for membership of the Union through their persistence and hard work .
It is a ' yes ' that will see the EU enriched by the enormous cultural and intellectual traditions of the new countries and by their unique political and historical heritage : the battling Baltics - David to the Soviet Union 's Goliath ; the Prague spring ; the Hungarian uprising ; Solidarity ; brave Malta - the George Cross island , freedom 's bastion in the darkest days of the Second World War ; and people like my good friend , Vytenis Andriukaitis , from Lithuania , whose family led the resistance to the Soviets and suffered in exile and for whom now this represents the end of that nightmare .
When confronted by all of this I can only echo Shakespeare 's words in The Tempest : ' O , wonder ! ... O brave new world , That has such people in 't . '
Our job now is to build that brave new world .
It will not come by accident .
The candidates must continue to strive to be ready for the obligations of membership , particularly in the fight against corruption .
We have to show the imagination and courage to embrace institutional , political and economic reform .
Failure to do so will see the brave new world collapse into stagnation and mutual recriminations .
Today is a new beginning .
We must not miss the opportunities this new beginning brings .
I can conclude by no better commentary than that of Shakespeare in Julius Caesar : ' There is a tide in the affairs of men which , taken at the flood , leads on to fortune ; omitted , all the voyage of their life is bound in shallows and in miseries ; on such a full sea we are now afloat ; and we must take the current ... when it serves , or lose our ventures ' .
Mr President , today is an historic day , as has already been said many times .
The European Union is on the threshold of the biggest enlargement in its history , the fifth since European cooperation started in the 1950s .
The European model of cooperation must therefore be successful .
That was certainly the case when the Wall came down in 1989 , when enthusiasm for accession in Eastern European countries was exceptionally great .
Since then , this enthusiasm for the European issue seems to have diminished somewhat in Eastern European countries , although as far as that is concerned , those countries are looking increasingly like the members of the European Union themselves .
As far as I am concerned , they are wholeheartedly welcome .
I regard enlargement as a consolidation of the area of freedom and democracy , the common judicial area and the increase in prosperity that this brings with it .
I would like to say a few words about finance .
As far as I am concerned , the Copenhagen agreements are acceptable .
At least they were acceptable .
It is particularly disappointing that the Council tried at the very last moment to undermine the democratic rights of this Parliament .
It is also a bad thing because we have been setting high standards for the new Member States when it comes to democracy , and the Council chooses now of all times to try to undermine Parliament 's rights .
Fortunately we have been able to reverse this .
That has cost the Council money .
I can only hope that the Council will take a more positive stance in future .
The real work , however , is about to begin .
The administrative system in the new Member States is unlikely to be up to the task of efficiently managing the massive flows of money that they will be receiving .
There is a lot of talk of corruption , although , it must be said , not only in the new Member States .
All these shortcomings also exist in the old Member States .
I think that we should take this opportunity to significantly improve administration right across the whole of the European Union .
That means , for example - and we voted on this last month - setting up a European public prosecutor , reinforcing Eurojust and reinforcing Europol .
We must do all we can to fight organised crime and , coupled with that , to put better controls in place at Europe 's external borders .
If we make rules , we must also have sanctions to reinforce these rules .
As far as I am concerned , these sanctions are , at present , inadequate .
Particularly with regard to flows of funds from Europe , the Commission should have much more power to tell a country in which things are going wrong - whether it is an old or a new Member State - that we will temporarily stop paying the money until we are satisfied that its administrative system has been put back on track .
I hope that we are on the threshold of creating a Europe that is great and prosperous , and as far as Parliament is concerned , I think that it will cooperate fully in this .
Mr President , the enlargement reports are on the table .
There is much to be said about them , but unfortunately I can only deal with a few points .
As far as the Czech Republic is concerned , we should understand and respect the fact that history can be seen from two perspectives and that the Potsdam Agreement was international law too .
On 4 December 1989 , I apologised on behalf of the Government of the German Democratic Republic to the peoples of Czechoslovakia for the events of August 1968 , but at the same time I did not forget the 9 May 1945 .
We need vision and the courage to let wisdom prevail and to resist any inclination to do what we know to be wrong by swimming against the tide of history and creating new divisions .
As for the general historical context , consideration should be given to the post-war history of the whole of Europe , not only in its political dimensions , and all of us must act in full awareness of our historical legacy .
There are calls for the enlarged Union to speak with one voice .
These calls are certainly warranted , but that one voice must plead for peace ; it must uphold the rights of the United Nations , speak out against a new arms race and rally support for the fight against hunger and poverty in the world .
The historical dimensions of the present moment are beyond dispute .
What is questionable , however , is the way in which the European Union is proceeding , whether it is proving equal to the historic mission with which it has now been entrusted in fulfilment of Europe 's historical destiny and whether it is taking a sufficiently balanced approach to that mission .
If it fails to do these things , the future development of the Union will be more uncertain than many people are prepared to acknowledge today .
Mr President , the fact that there is such a racket going on outside naturally means that people in here are not paying proper attention , and I think that what is going on outside is scandalous .
Although I have every sympathy for social abuses , I do think that it is a bit steep that the best paid officials in Europe should be expressing themselves in this way on a day on which we are welcoming the worst paid and the least prosperous people in Europe .
Today , however , we are voting for the future of half a billion people , for a future of peace and peaceful coexistence in tolerance and in diversity .
The future does not lie in a world in which one world superpower and a couple of large Member States in Europe call the shots .
The future lies in the self-determined cooperation and coexistence of many small ones .
Today we would like to wholeheartedly welcome all those small ones and the big ones with minorities in their territories .
Although I endorse what our group chairman , Mr Cohn-Bendit , has just said , I would like to place the emphasis on the minorities and their lot .
Legislation that is still in place today as a condemnation resulting from so-called collective guilt should be a thing of the past .
The Bene ? decrees are an obstacle in the path of reconciliation between the state and its own citizens , not only in the Czech Republic but also in Slovakia .
Let me turn , secondly , to the Roma minority , which , in many countries , is severely discriminated against and socially disadvantaged .
It is a nation without a country , and its identity and culture must be respected and viewed as a driving force for social and economic development .
My third point is that the Soviet Union 's policies have resulted in the creation of Russian minorities in certain Member States .
We are arguing in favour of recognising all languages and all minorities , but we must also continue to recognise the rights of the speakers of historic languages to use them in their own regions and to have them recognised , including as a basis for education .
This not only applies to the accession countries but also to our own Member States .
Recognition of the small ones is our guarantee of democracy in Europe .
Mr President , in 1989 I witnessed the political upheaval in Central and Eastern Europe in person .
Among all the others , one particular cry of joy from that wonderful year has stayed with me : ' God has helped us ! '
This superhuman help is still essential , particularly as we are on the threshold of achieving an historical breakthrough in the West .
At the same time , the European Union is struggling with serious diplomatic and economic problems .
In this crucial phase , it will be all the more important for us to take responsibility together for future cooperation between Member States .
Peace and security are the prime objectives in this , not least for acceding countries , given their recent past .
This elementary fact is acknowledged in Paragraph 6 of the draft resolution of the Brok report , and rightly so .
According to this paragraph , the European Union therefore has a particular responsibility when it comes to strengthening transatlantic ties .
That applies in particular to the relationships between the EU and NATO .
Duly noted !
Indeed , in this regard , let the European institutions not dash the legitimate expectations of the citizens of the accession countries , for the sake of a more secure , more just world .
Mr President , I am cautious about drawing historical comparisons , but it is appropriate to do so today .
A generation of politicians in the Fifties - Konrad Adenauer , Robert Schuman , Jean Monnet , Alcide De Gasperi , Paul-Henri Spaak and others - had the courage and the vision to establish a European Community that would overcome a thousand years of antagonism between Germany and France and begin the unification of Europe in the West .
We , the present political generation , have the opportunity , for the first time in a thousand years , to bring the continent together by peaceful means and on a voluntary basis into a European Union , a union of freedom , peace and prosperity .
If we do not seize this opportunity , we will be failing in our historic mission .
The resolution of the European Parliament on the reunification of Europe will be adopted in one day , but the unification of the whole of Europe is a process , the task of an entire generation of politicians .
Its accomplishment demands strenuous efforts , not only on the part of the acceding countries but also on that of the present Member States , for the Union is not simply becoming larger - it is also becoming a different Union .
The new Member States will be more than a numerical addition to the membership of the present Union ; they will give the European Union a new character .
As they themselves are well aware , they are not only entering a market but are also acceding to a union whose desire and obligation it is to become a political union .
They are joining in the Convention 's work of building firmer foundations for this .
For both the old and the new Member States , membership of the Union confers rights but also imposes responsibilities , in particular the duty to work with all available means on the development and consolidation of our common future for the benefit of all , for the good of the whole Union , and not just to increase their own store .
Old Europe has fixed its eyes on a new future .
Today we are giving it the green light , and I am deeply grateful to be able to play a part in this .
( Applause )
Mr President , my approval of the accession of all the applicant countries does not alter my continued rejection of the violation of human rights inherent in the Bene ? decrees , which , I regret to say , are still politically significant in modern-day Czech society .
Let us hope that Czech accession will result in the application of the rule of law to an unjust policy , thereby enabling the parties concerned , by which I mean not only the representatives of the Sudeten Germans but also the many Jewish victims who have been scandalously defrauded , to assert their rights on the basis of European law with a greater chance of success than hitherto .
But for all the rationality of this case , let me emphasise that I , like so many others from my country , am speaking as a typical Austrian , with a mother who was born in Prague and a father from Vienna , and so the Czechs should recognise that this criticism comes from a friend rather than seeing every critic as an enemy .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , days such as today are an occasion to look back as well as forward .
We look back to the years of radical change from 1989 to 1991 , when the nations of the former Warsaw Pact strove successfully to secure their freedom and independence .
We look back on a difficult period of transformation , which is now giving way to a period of stability in our continent , a political stability that used to be almost inconceivable .
In this context , it is quite rare to hear the applicant countries being acclaimed for having largely fulfilled the political criteria of Copenhagen right from the start of the negotiations .
That is no mean achievement in view of their great economic difficulties , the residual effects of the planned economy and a sense of insecurity among the population .
When I think of Latvia , for example - a country towards which I feel a special sense of affinity and commitment - I wonder how much will-power it took for the Latvians to accept former occupiers as partners and fellow citizens .
I think of the referendum of 3 October 1989 , when 53 % of the Latvian electorate voted in favour of amendments to the country 's nationality laws , amendments which corresponded with European standards and were therefore beneficial to minorities such as the large community of native Russian-speakers .
An important development of recent years that we should preserve in the new European Union is the experience of intensive cooperation across the external borders of the Union .
How quickly Euro-regions materialised !
The cooperation proposals that have yielded such rich fruit in recent years should also be extended to the neighbours we shall have on our new borders .
Proposals to benefit ordinary people on the future external borders of the Union - the people of Russia , the people of Belorussia and the people of the Ukraine .
We must not be deterred by the present difficulties .
Even now we must cast our eyes beyond the external borders .
Cross-border cooperation should become a prime instrument of our future security policy .
Mr President , I should like to say first of all that I support the enlargement process , and I want to see the applicant countries as part of the EU ; however , what I am about to say may seem to contradict that .
The Commission proposal for the Enlargement Treaty was changed by the Council with the addition of Annex XV .
This , as primary law within the Treaty , is a direct attack on Parliament 's rights .
For the past few weeks , I , as chairman of the Committee on Budgets , have led the trialogue delegation seeking to alleviate the damage caused by Annex XV .
We have come to a conclusion which I consider to be a second-best solution .
The draft declaration agreed by Parliament and the Council includes , in its Paragraph 1 , a means of derogating from the Treaty , which I hope will safeguard Parliament 's rights .
The simple answer would have been to withdraw Annex XV , but that has not been done , and as long as it remains , then I personally have a real problem with this .
It is bad enough to see the Council trying to take unilateral action on an adjustment of the financial perspective from 2004 to 2006 , but to see the inclusion of a guaranteed ceiling on agricultural expenditure up to the year 2013 is totally unacceptable .
I consider the Chirac / Schroeder deal on this to be a shabby affair , a clandestine deal in this age of transparency .
That the other Member States agreed to this in Copenhagen was hard to believe , but for this now to be endorsed in the Treaty is just a step too far .
I cannot therefore vote for enlargement because to do so is to accept Annex XV within the Treaty and that is impossible for me .
I will therefore abstain , with a very heavy heart , on all the final votes .
I had the privilege two weeks ago on Sunday to be in Ljubljana for the result of a referendum where 90 % of the people - not the elite - voted ' yes ' to Europe .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the spread of democracy and the establishment of pluralism and the rule of law in the eastern part of Central Europe are common objectives not only of the region itself but of the entire continent .
This was said in May 1990 by the then Hungarian Foreign Minister , Mr Gyula Horn , when he received the International Charlemagne Prize in Aachen .
At that time , the three Baltic States were still part of the Soviet Union , and Germany had yet to be reunited .
Today this objective of our entire continent has been achieved , which makes this a momentous day .
In 1956 , Hungary bravely rose up against dictatorship .
Decades later , at a time when the Warsaw Pact still existed , East German citizens took part in a pan-European lakeside picnic by the Fertö Tó , or Neusiedler See , an event which our fellow MEPs Otto von Habsburg and Bernd Posselt had helped to organise , before striking out again on the road to freedom , and it was Hungarian border guards who stood aside and let them pass .
Shortly afterwards , the Hungarian Foreign Minister , together with his Austrian counterpart , Alois Mock , cut through the Iron Curtain .
That was the first step in a process which culminated in the fall of the Berlin Wall .
This is why we in this Parliament today shall say ' yes ' ten times over .
In the case of some countries , our ' yes ' will be more muted , more hesitant .
In other cases , it will be loud , instant and clear .
In Hungary , the European legal order has taken root .
In the Committee on Foreign Affairs , Human Rights and Common Security and Defence Policy , the Hungarian Prime Minister voiced his criticism of expulsion orders more plainly than the competent EC Commissioner and more plainly than several other heads of government .
And so I shall say ' yes ' ten times over today , but my clearest and most spontaneous ' yes ' will be reserved for Hungary .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , we have a unique opportunity today to bind the bulk of Europe into a single political entity for the first time .
We must not deny this opportunity to the peoples of Europe , for all the people of this continent are entitled to attain freedom , peace and prosperity within a political community - and I stress the words ' political community ' - almost 15 years after the collapse of Communism .
My home country of Austria has the longest common border with the acceding nations .
I know what the Iron Curtain meant , and I am also well aware of what an external border of the European Union means today for those on both sides of the border .
I myself am descended from Czech and Hungarian grandparents .
I was born in Austria , only a few miles from Bratislava , the capital of modern Slovakia .
I could just as easily have been born on the other side of the Iron Curtain , in which case I should have enjoyed far fewer opportunities than have been granted me in my life .
Even though the governments of some EU Member States have made it difficult for me through their illegal actions in relation to Parliament , and even though many of the applicant countries ' governments have made it difficult for me by supporting an illegal war , I shall cast an unequivocal ' yes ' vote , just like all the other Social Democrats from Austria , for I am convinced that the door to the European Union must be opened to the peoples of Eastern Europe and of Cyprus , though it is still divided , and Malta .
And with the same conviction we shall pursue the dialogues that still need to be conducted , whether they relate to the Bene ? decrees , to nuclear power stations like Temelin or to other power stations , secure in the knowledge that the pursuit of this dialogue benefits both sides , for enlargement is not a zero-sum game .
We shall emerge as winners , and so will the new Member States .
If European solidarity ever meant anything , it means something in this vote today .
Mr President , I would like to start by thanking Commissioner Verheugen , who has been most assiduous in following the enlargement process .

I would also like to thank Mr Brok and Mr Wynn - I agree with what Mr Wynn said in his speech - and the Greek Presidency .
Every moment is history in the making but not all moments are equally important , and this is one of the more important events .
This is not empty rhetoric : I am expressing my awareness of the responsibility we bear in saying ' yes ' or ' no ' in this matter .
We are gradually restoring Europe 's integrity and unity , reintegrating and reunifying its culture , traditions , peoples and children .
We have not yet completed this major building project .
Yesterday , we received a visit from the President of the Republic of Macedonia , and our thoughts are already turning to the Balkans , to that region in which we helped to achieve peace and which is starting to establish democracy , the rule of law , the welfare state , an economic fabric and international relations .
Then Moldova and Ukraine are potential candidates , assuming that Bulgaria and Romania will join the Union in four years ' time .
The process will require more work where Turkey is concerned , for Turkey 's idea of society will have to be brought into line with ours .
Lastly , we cannot fail to consider Russia , with which the European Union will have to have an increasingly close , organic relationship .
All the seeds we are sowing will take root if the Community method prevails .
The European Union will only survive and develop if , I reiterate , the Community method prevails in the Convention .
The most recent position adopted by the Budget Council is evidence of a completely opposite trend and is to be deplored .
If the egotism of the Member States leads to the intergovernmental method prevailing , Europe will suffer a heart attack , a setback , but history will continue regardless .
I therefore call upon the ten new Member States to stand shoulder to shoulder with Parliament in advocating a different line from that taken by the governments of the current Member countries , which have a pessimistic view of the Union .
Dear people of Slovenia , dear people of the other nine acceding countries , help us to build new European institutions in which we can all be equal and develop with full respect for the dignity of the individual .
Mr President , the June Movement wants to allow the candidate countries to decide for themselves whether they wish to be part of the EU .
We are therefore voting in favour of enlargement today , but we would recommend that the conditions be renegotiated .
The agricultural agreement would make the new countries desperately dependent and make it difficult to abolish what amount to lunatic arrangements where agriculture is concerned .
The agreement would force the candidate countries to sell agricultural land and summer houses , even though the price of land in the Netherlands is 30 times what it is in Poland .
The new countries would have to pay the full quota , while my own country , rich though it is , was given an 80 % rebate in the first year .
The majority of inhabitants of the poor countries would become net contributors , even though they are the people whom we are supposed to help .
The Treaty of Nice and the EU regulations have not been published in the languages of the candidate countries .
It is a democratic scandal that the candidate countries are in no position to know what they are voting on and that the Commission devises propaganda instead of making factual information available .
Those of us in the rich countries should be more generous towards our poor neighbours so that they might have something to thank us for and so that I might not just vote in favour but do so with gratitude while welcoming a Europe of democracies .
Mr President , we stand today at the brink of an historic process as we vote to finally reunite in democracy , peace and prosperity our divided continent of Europe , with the accession of ten new members .
The EU will now have a GDP of over USD 10 trillion .
As my group 's shadow rapporteur on Slovakia it gives me particular pleasure to support its candidature .
This small but proudly independent new country has made huge progress , since the Velvet Divorce ten years ago , in modernising its economy from a command one to a functioning market .
It has reformed its system of government and civic infrastructure and sensibly accommodated its problems with its Roma and Hungarian minorities .
It has confounded the pundits who said it would never survive without the Czech Republic , and today I proudly salute their combined cooperation with the Allies in Kuwait , where they are providing chemical warfare decontamination expertise .
I deplore the actions of those in this House who voted against certain candidate countries joining the EU because of their assistance in the war effort .
Instead they should remember the free Czechs and Poles who helped my country free the continent of Europe from another similar tyranny sixty years ago .
Slovakia will become an EU frontier country , and it must not be forgotten that there are Slovak minorities still living across the border in Ukraine with whom Slovaks share common historic links , since that territory was part of Czechoslovakia until 1945 , just as other large parts of Western Ukraine were historically part of Austria-Hungary , Poland and Romania .
We must ensure that this factor is not overlooked in the Commission 's new framework document for relations with our new European neighbours of Ukraine , Belarus and Moldova , which have a legitimate right to join the Union in future if they so wish .
Lastly , as a British Conservative , I welcome in particular Malta and Cyprus , two Commonwealth countries whose historically rich and entrepreneurial cultures will provide a new and valued contribution to the Union .
Mr President , as a pan-European , I have had the good fortune to have been able to work towards this day since the 1970s and to assist Otto von Habsburg in ensuring that an empty chair was placed here in 1979 in protest against the exclusion of the peoples of Central and Eastern Europe from the European Communities and as a signal for the process of reunification , the final stage of which we are initiating today .
I had the good fortune not only to help prepare the pan-European picnic which was mentioned a few moments ago but also to play a part in the democratic revolutions in almost all of the applicant countries and in the declarations of Estonian and Slovenian independence .
For this reason , let me state quite clearly that if we - a whole group of fellow Members and myself - deliver a critical vote on the Schröder report today , we are neither rejecting enlargement nor spurning the Czech people but are protesting , as people protested at the time , against injustice , against an injustice that still persists , against a serious infringement of human rights and its perpetuation through the continuing discriminatory effects of unjust decrees .
For this reason , my friends , we say categorically that the European Union must continue to aspire to a common system of law .
As a community rooted in the rule of law , we must ensure that unjust decrees are not brought into our legal system in the same way that viruses are introduced into computer systems .
The virus endangers the entire system , which is why we , together with the countries that are about to accede to the Union , must fight in the period following today 's complex vote and after the accession of the new Member States to identify injustices where they still exist and to ensure that crime is recognised as crime and injustice as injustice .
At the same time , we must cooperate in a spirit of partnership to create a Europe , a pan-European entity , that is built on the foundations of justice , peace and freedom .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the stands which have been taken are the best possible expression of the historic importance of this moment , which is why I do not think there is any need for me to add a single word to what everyone has said about enlargement and how important it is .
I asked for the floor merely in order to reply to Mr Crespo 's proposal that the presidency should consider making a statement on the role of the UN and humanitarian aid in Iraq on 16 April .
I should like to thank Mr Crespo for this very interesting proposal and to say that we have already taken the initiative of inviting the Secretary General of the United Nations , Mr Kofi Annan , on 17 April , when 40 Heads of State and 40 ministers for foreign affairs will be attending the European summit in Athens , precisely so that we can discuss the question of the United Nations and humanitarian aid and make the best possible use of this major meeting .
I hope that Mr Annan has already accepted this invitation .
We are in the process of finalising the arrangements for the meeting .
I hope that it will indeed manage to get these political messages across .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , it only remains for me to offer my sincere thanks to everyone who has participated in this debate for the clear and convincing welcoming signal they have given to our new members .
I believe we have done enough talking now .
The time has come for action .
Allow me one last attempt to appeal to those honourable Members who still harbour doubts by putting this one point to them : in thirty years ' time , no one will remember what Parliament and the Council have been arguing about during the last two weeks .
I also believe , Mr Posselt , that no one will be talking about the Bene ? decrees thirty years from now .
But in thirty years ' time the decision taken here today will still be remembered .
( Loud sustained applause )
In principle , we support the enlargement of the European Union , provided that this is the wish of the peoples of the applicant countries .
We cannot , however , allow Portugal 's interests to be called into question .
In the current context of enlargement , two negative aspects of the negotiations must be highlighted : the discriminatory way in which the applicant countries are treated , particularly in the areas of finance and agriculture , and the consequences of enlargement for Portugal .
Although we welcome the increase of around EUR 500 million , achieved as a result of the pressure exerted by the European Parliament , this sum is clearly inadequate for taking us towards economic and social cohesion .
We therefore have the medium-term prospect of reductions in the Structural Funds and in farm aid for Portugal , when all known studies state that whereas Germany will gain the most , our country will lose the most , given our remoteness and given the greater competition we now face from countries which offer lower salaries and a more highly-skilled workforce .
The most recent data produced by the Commission clearly show that , of all countries , Portugal has the weakest production structure and the most serious socio-economic shortcomings , which means that it could suffer very damaging consequences unless due care is taken to protect its interests in accession negotiations .
This is why we have abstained overall and have voted in favour in the particular case of Cyprus .
The next item is the vote .
Recommendation ( A5-0110 / 2003 ) by Carlos Westendorp y Cabeza , on behalf of the Committee on Industry , External Trade , Research and Energy , on the proposal for a Council decision on the position of the European Community on the draft Regulation of the United Nations Economic Commission for Europe concerning the approval of uniform provisions concerning the approval of : specific LPG retrofit systems to be installed in motor vehicles for the use of LPG in their propulsion system ; specific CNG retrofit systems to be installed in motor vehicles for the use of CNG in their propulsion system ( COM ( 2002 ) 567 - C5-0546 / 2002 - 2002 / 0248 ( AVC ) )
( Parliament adopted the text )
Report ( A5-0107 / 2003 ) by Maurizio Turco , on behalf of the Committee on Citizens ' Freedoms and Rights , Justice and Home Affairs , on the initiative by the Kingdom of Denmark with a view to adopting a Council Act amending the Council Act of 3 November 1998 adopting Rules on the confidentiality of Europol information ( 13875 / 2002 - C5-0553 / 2002 - 2002 / 0823 ( CNS ) ) ; on the initiative by the Kingdom of Denmark with a view to adopting a Council Act amending the Staff Regulations applicable to Europol employees ( 13873 / 2002 - C5-0555 / 2002 - 2002 / 0822 ( CNS ) ) ; on the initiative of the Hellenic Republic with a view to the adoption of a Council Decision adjusting the basic salaries and allowances applicable to Europol staff ( 6314 / 2003 - C5-0066 / 2003 - 2003 / 0806 ( CNS ) )
( Parliament adopted the text )
Report ( A5-0106 / 2003 ) by Christian Ulrik von Boetticher , on behalf of the Committee on Citizens ' Freedoms and Rights , Justice and Home Affairs , on the initiative by the Kingdom of Denmark with a view to adopting a Council Act drawing up , on the basis of Article 43 ( 1 ) of the Convention on the Establishment of a European Police Office ( Europol Convention ) , a Protocol amending that Convention ( 13254 / 2002 - C5-0001 / 2003 - 2002 / 0814 ( CNS ) )
( Parliament adopted the text )
Report ( A5-0117 / 2003 ) by Reimer Böge and Joan Colom i Naval on behalf of the Committee on Budgets on the proposal for a decision of the European Parliament and the Council on : 1 . The adjustment of the Financial Perspective for Enlargement presented by the Commission in accordance with point 25 of the Interinstitutional Agreement of 6 May 1999 on Budgetary Discipline and Improvement of the Budgetary Procedure ( COM ( 2003 ) 70 - C5-0053 / 2003 - 2003 / 2025 ( ACI ) ) ; and 2 .
The review of the Financial Perspective ( COM ( 2003 ) 185 - C5-0161 / 2003 - 2003 / 2025 ( ACI )
Before the vote :
President .
I should like to inform the House that on behalf of the 15 Member States this morning , at a meeting of Coreper , the declaration was formally and unanimously adopted by the Council .
We are aware of the painstaking work which has been put into this over the recent weeks by our colleagues - work which would have been unnecessary if the Council , in the first instance , had not unilaterally stepped outside the Interinstitutional Agreement .
Before we proceed to the vote , as President of Parliament I want to make it clear , particularly to the Council , that we will hold it to every word and every paragraph , and to all the meanings of every word and every paragraph of this declaration .
Should it deviate from this in any way , we will then revert to our rights under the Treaty .
( Applause )
( Parliament adopted the resolution )
Report ( A5-0081 / 2003 ) by Elmar Brok on behalf of the Committee on Foreign Affairs , Human Rights , Common Security and Defence Policy on the conclusions of the negotiations on enlargement in Copenhagen ( 2003 / 2014 ( INI ) )
Before the vote on Amendment No 19 :
Mr President , we had an agreement with the rapporteur .
His intention was to submit an oral amendment , whereupon we would withdraw our own amendment .
I ask that Mr Brok should be given the floor .
Mr President , I want to propose that we should adopt item 6 in the following form : ' ? recognises that peace and security have been crucial factors in the decision of the candidate countries to join the European Union and that special responsibilities consequently lie with the Union to strengthen transatlantic ties on the basis of European strength and equal rights . '
I can imagine that we would then be able to lay to rest the misgivings others have , and come to a common position on this .
Mr President , the consequence of this vote is that next year we will have only ten plenary part-sessions and not eleven .
( Loud applause )
May this be a signal to the European Convention .
We want to determine our own seat .
( Loud applause )
I should point out that if I interpreted the vote correctly , we have removed the session that had been proposed for the end of April and 1 May 2004 .
I should also like to recall that on 1 May , the states for which we just voted shall enter the Union .
Parliament will need , as some point , to ratify the nominated commissioners .
I shall have to take this back to the Conference of Presidents because we cannot ignore our constitutional obligations as a House .
Report ( A5-0086 / 2003 ) by Carmen Cerdeira Morterero , on behalf of the Committee on Citizens ' Freedoms and Rights , Justice and Home Affairs , on the amended proposal for a Council directive on the right to family reunification ( COM ( 2002 ) 225 - C5-0220 / 2002 - 1999 / 0258 ( CNS ) )
Before the vote :
Mr President , with regard to Amendment No 32 , I would like to clarify that the correct version is the Spanish version , not the German version - in which there seems to be a degree of confusion in the translation - and that it refers exclusively to minors , not to other relatives of the person in question .
. ( NL ) It is striking that the initiatives of the Member States ' governments are often aimed at keeping information secret , at screening off their fellow countrymen from ' dignitaries ' , and at other phenomena that we thought had finally been consigned to the past .
Particularly after the attacks in New York on 11 September 2001 , the fear of terrorism was so great that all kinds of suggestions were made which had no place in a democracy .
Fortunately , the panic has peaked , and such authoritarian initiatives are often rejected by a majority of this Parliament .
In this case , the Danish Government is suggesting limiting free access to documents and not giving Parliament the necessary say in respect of Europol 's budget .
The opportunities for control by the national parliaments are also not being reinforced .
Even the director of Europol is of the opinion that democratic control is inadequate , but the Council does not want to change that .
The Council must get out of that habit .
The rejection of the Danish initiative in the Committee on Citizens ' Freedoms and Rights , Justice and Home Affairs was therefore the first step in the right direction .
The von Boetticher report indicates agreement in principle with the initiative by Denmark . The latter contained essentially helpful amendments to the Europol Convention .
Nonetheless , the von Boetticher report eventually rejects this initiative . The reasons given are typical of the European Parliament 's approach .
It is against a protocol that would amend a convention .
I refer to intergovernmental legal instruments respecting national sovereignty .
It argues for a European constitution to be adopted first . It is hoped such a constitution would allow all these amendments to be handled by means of a qualified majority of members in the framework of the Community system .
In our view , however , issues of police cooperation must remain within the competence of the States and under their control , together with all issues relating to the movement of persons and immigration . The European cooperation required should therefore be organised in the framework of a so-called interparliamentary pillar .
This is what we suggested in our contribution to the Convention , and I would refer you to our Internet site : www.autre-europe.org . Decisions would then be taken directly by the national parliaments networked together .
We were therefore unable to endorse the von Boetticher report .
.
( PT ) The observations I made in the explanation of vote on the Turco report also apply in this case . In fact , the misguided ideological reasons underlying the issue that has been raised stand out even more clearly here .
It is quite astounding that Mr von Boetticher claims expressly in his explanatory statement , that he ' acknowledges the significance of the Danish proposal as it seems to take a step in the right direction ' - only then to conclude that he must recommend rejecting it !
Why ?
Because he believes it would be a mistake to adopt amendments to the Europol Convention ' prior to the ratification of the European Constitution ' !
This assessment is misguided .
It is both possible and necessary to move ahead within the current framework and this is where we ought to participate responsibly and , incidentally , keeping to the method of taking small steps , since this is the method that has ensured the success of European integration .
This was precisely the approach adopted in the proposals put forward by the Danish and Greek Presidencies .
The rapporteurs , however , would have needed ... a Constitution .
The line that is proposed constitutes a serious deviation from the agenda .
I have therefore rejected it , as a way of expressing my support for pursuing the Danish initiative .
The radical approach that has been adopted is extremely negative and clearly disregards the interests of the European citizens .
Parliament should pursue the initiative , suggesting responsibly whatever amendments it considers appropriate , whilst strictly respecting the current legal framework .
This is precisely what the rule of law is and we could do worse than show an example .
. ( DE ) I did not vote in favour of the report by Mr Böge and Mr Colom i Naval , which reflects the result of the negotiations between the Council and Parliament .
My concerns are not allayed by the result of the trialogue , which was intended at least to limit the damage that the Council has done to democracy in the EU .
Annex XV remains in the Accession Treaties and will thus become primary legislation .
Everything else , I regard as empty words .
Only after years have elapsed will we be able to begin to prove that the opposite is the case .
The Council , though , has already demonstrated that it is acting against Parliament .
See also my explanation of vote on the Accession Treaties .
Mr President , I abstained from voting for three important reasons .
First and foremost , Europe must try to solve its own problems before taking the decision to enlarge .
Secondly , the accession of the new Member States must be made conditional upon the results of referendums in the current Member States , and thirdly , the fact is that the new Member States are not yet ready for this enlargement .
I would furthermore like to underline the fact that this enlargement is coming at a time when Europe has never been as divided as it is now .
We still have a great deal of work to do , particularly in the area of foreign policy .
It is essential that Europe develop its own identity in that area .
Furthermore , we must put an end to the profligacy of the European agricultural policy before we can proceed with enlargement .
To conclude , let me point out that there are still far too many socio-economic differences between the European Union and the candidate Member States .
Today , Mr President , I too voted in favour of the accession of the Czech Republic .
It is self-evident that the Czechs are part of Europe , in the heart of which they live .
I would no longer have been able to look my friends and relatives in Prague in the face if I had voted against them joining us .
My ' yes ' vote , though , is intended primarily to strengthen those in Czech public life , in political parties , parliament and government , who have come to recognise that , rather than having to drag the ballast of history into the future , a people that finds the strength to face up to the whole of its own history reaps honour rather than humiliation .
Reconciliation is the fruit of truth and of any person 's willingness , for a moment , to put himself in another 's position .
I know as a German that even we , who overran almost all our neighbours in wartime , regained the esteem and respect of all by not repressing these aspects of our history or treating them as merely relative .
Let the Czechs try it too ; it is a liberating thing to do .
Mr President , I voted for the accession of all these Eastern and Central European countries and the accession of Malta and Cyprus because I hold out great hopes of having , in the future , a Parliament with a greater number of representatives of pensioners and pensioners ' parties from these Member States .
I was therefore disappointed to see that there was a great demonstration of protest during this vote from European Union employees , whose future pension payments are to be reduced .
Therefore , while I would like to express my heartfelt sympathy to them , I hope and pray that the future Parliament , including the Members from the Member States , will guarantee the citizens , starting with European Union employees , a peaceful future in which the elderly are duly respected .
Mr President , I would like to preface my remarks by saying that I am a great supporter of enlargement and , having been , among other things , chairman of the delegation to Slovenia , have been a convinced defender of this policy .
Turning to the subject of the Czech Republic , I would like to state that I had always hoped that the Czechs would , in good time , cast aside the dead weight of history and make it possible for us to vote for the Czech Republic 's accession to the European Union with joy and a clear conscience .
It is unfortunate that the failure of many Czech politicians ' courage has prevented that ; hence also my vote against , in solidarity with Mr Ferber .
I hope that the Czechs will in future get round a table and find there a way of working through the past together .
Mr President , I also voted against the Brok report despite my own , and my party 's , long-standing commitment to a wider Europe .
The terms that we have offered the applicant states are unimaginative and mean .
More than anything , the nations of Central and Eastern Europe should be able to exploit their natural advantages of low costs and cheaper exports and so price themselves into the market .
But we are forcing them to join the euro , the forty-eight hour week , the common agricultural policy and the Social Chapter , while at the same time forcing them to devalue their recently-won democracies .
It is for the peoples of these states to decide .
In the cases of Malta and Slovenia , where they have already done so , I also voted ' yes ' .
But I cannot help feeling that we ought to have offered them a more generous and flexible deal .
A further elaboration is provided in the ten-point explanation of vote submitted in writing by SOS Democracy .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , being a farmer in Lower Austria , and having myself managed for forty-three years - right up to the rending of the Iron Curtain - a farm on the border , it was with great conviction that I voted today for the accession of ten new Member States and for the Brok Report .
I know that , for agriculture , enlargement means not only competition , but also opportunity , and that Austrian farmers will take up these challenges , and do so on the basis of the measures taken in the run-up to accession .
I have therefore cast my vote in favour of a peaceful , tolerant , and social future for our children and grandchildren .
I am voting against the Brok report within the framework of the resolution by the GUE / NGL group .
Not because I am against the accession of the new members , but because the resolution does not mention material issues relating to enlargement : the promotion of an elitist policy in central and eastern European countries servile to the Americans ; the break-up of the public sector and of public property ; the enforced liberalism which creates social unhappiness ; the lack of significant Community resources to help these countries with the integration process ; the failure to organise referenda on enlargement in the Member States .
Members of SOS Democracy ( and the Democracy-Forum in the Convention ) have voted differently on enlargement but share the following critical views .
The applicant countries should have been offered more flexible conditions , including different types of association agreements with mutual influence and mutual obligations instead of the colonial style EEA-agreement .
Membership should have been offered with variable geometry , lasting derogations , long-term derogations and derogations dependent on the future economic development towards cohesion , fully taking into account the different levels of economic development .
The applicant countries should be allowed to decide on their own regarding the buying and selling of agricultural land and second houses , at least until their incomes are comparable to ours .
Waiting for agricultural reform and a fair deal , the applicant countries should be able to have the amounts provided for in the agricultural budgets as lump sums , instead of being bound to use the money in the silly , wasteful and inefficient way we have done .
Instead of paying full contributions from the first day of membership , they should at least have been offered the five years ' rebate that was offered to the UK , Denmark and Ireland , or free membership until they reach a certain income .
Many civil servants from the applicant countries will now be offered lucrative jobs in the EU institutions with salaries far above the salaries offered to their own prime ministers .
The applicant countries shall have a possibility to tax their nationals , employed by the EU and in the EU countries to avoid unfair inequalities , where their citizens are asked to pay contributions from poor budgets to fellow citizens , e.g. paid 20 times the normal salary at home .
The applicant countries should be offered more flexibility in the application of EU rules .
They should adopt the rules gradually by following our rules , such as when they export their products to our markets , but not apply all the rules to their home market , e.g. we should accept the sale of sausages in local markets , when they comply with local laws .
The fulfilment of common environmental standards should be financed by Community funds so that environmental protection is not spurned in the applicant countries or postponed for better times .
The applicant countries should also be allowed to keep their standards , especially when they are higher than ours .
The applicant countries should take full part in the Convention with full membership and have their fair share of the posts in the Praesidium and the Secretariat .
Also , the treaty resulting from the Convention should be adopted by an IGC with the eastern countries as full members .
All EU treaties and rules should have been translated into the applicant country languages and been made available for the citizens through libraries and the Internet in good time before the referendums .
The Yes-side and the No-side should have equal public funding .
The governments and the EU institutions should not be allowed to interfere with biased information before the referendums .
These critical remarks have made some of us vote against enlargement or abstain while others have voted ' yes ' to allow the voters in the applicant countries to take a free decision , even if the conditions are not fair .
Green light - On behalf of my group I would like to express my total support for an early enlargement , stressing the principle of equal treatment with regard to the Copenhagen criteria .
I hope that the signature of the Accession Treaty will represent the final unification of our continent , leaving behind the wars which desolated our peoples and drew up borders by force .
The new and strengthened Union will be a continent with a shared destiny of peace , democracy and freedom .
Solidarity - This unprecedented enlargement brings new challenges for the Union .
We will need an even greater spirit of solidarity in all our common policies , and we will have to strengthen the institutional capacities of the Union .
The current and future Members will have to make the greatest possible effort , replacing national egotism with Community solidarity in order to find , as the Treaties demand , a united European voice in world political fora .
Budgetary conflict - Although an agreement was reached at the last moment , I must strongly criticise the Council 's unilateral action of including budgetary figures in the Accession Treaty .
This is an unprecedented action which constitutes a serious attack on the budgetary competences of our House and the Interinstitutional Agreement of 1999 .
.
( FR ) The only question put to the House concerned assent to the request for the accession of 10 new countries to the European Union . Nonetheless , the House is being requested to endorse the content of the draft treaty on accession .
We are in favour of uniting the whole continent and doing away with the borders fragmenting it . We are therefore obviously in favour of the right of these countries to accede to the European Union if such is the wish of their people .
On the other hand , we are totally opposed to the spirit and the letter of the draft treaty the European institutions seek to impose on them .
Regarding the content of this treaty , it formalises the unfair divide between the richer and poorer parts of Europe .
The word integration is a euphemism for a relationship in which imperialist Europe will impose itself on the new entrants . The latter are mostly countries in Eastern Europe perceived as fair game by the financial and industrial groups in the former .
As to the form , the new Member States are being blackmailed into accepting this treaty .
The only choice open to them is one between accepting the treaty or remaining outside the Union .
This treaty provides for a two-speed Europe as far the budget and politics are concerned . It heralds a Europe where some will be more equal than others .
( Explanation of vote abbreviated in accordance with Rule 137 ( 1 ) of the Rules of Procedure )
. ( EL ) I voted against in the case of Poland because I find its overall stand on the issue of war with Iraq unacceptable .
I voted against in the case of the Czech Republic because I find its overall stand on the issue of war with Iraq and on the question of the Bene ? decrees unacceptable .
. ( DE ) Today , the European Parliament has approved the accession of ten states to the European Union .
This is an historic day for Europe .
Europe is united in freedom .
This is a development that the CSU members in Parliament welcome .
For many years , we have played a leading role in bringing about this historic event , but , despite all the rejoicing that attends this day , doubts still remain as regards the Czech Republic .
European constitutional thinking knows nothing of the idea that one injustice cancels out another .
It was the European Parliament that , alone , in the course of negotiations on accession , brought to European public attention Czech law 's failure to deal with the past , and , over a period of years , demanded that this be sorted out .
Parliament 's initiatives have been taken up neither by Commissioner Verheugen , who is responsible for these matters , nor by the German Government .
In vain do we wait for a political gesture in a spirit of reconciliation .
It is the opposite that has happened , for , on 24 April 2002 , the Czech parliament unanimously passed a resolution to the effect that the legal consequences of the Bene ? decrees were ' unquestionable , inviolable and unchangeable ' .
The Czech Republic is , of course , a country at the heart of Europe , but we have nonetheless voted against its accession with the intention of sending Czech politicians the message that the wounds inflicted in the past on the expelled Germans are still open , and that we must heal them together , in dialogue with one another .
.
( ES ) We have just written a page in the history of our continent : by voting in favour of accession , we have taken a definitive step in the process of reconciling the people of Europe ; we have repaired an historical injustice ; we have made it possible for politics to triumph as an instrument at the service of peace at a time when the horror of war is returning , reminding us that peace is not a given , but that we have to preserve it .
In order for the stage we have reached today to really represent a reunification of Europe it is essential that the Union acquires a Constitution which guarantees the effective and democratic functioning of its institutions and its political dimension .
Only in that way will we ensure that Europe continues to be the dream of freedom and well-being which the countries we have said yes to today have signed up to .
It is essential that we do not forget the profound significance of the European idea and that we confirm the continued existence of those values which have made the union of the continent possible ; the supremacy of the human being and respect for their dignity , solidarity , social justice and the quest for the common good .
. ( DE ) Today 's vote on the accession of ten Central and Eastern European states sees us laying the foundation on which the historical division of Europe into East and West will be overcome .
The historical division into masculine and feminine worlds persists , however , both in Eastern and in Western Europe .
My ' yes ' to the accession of Cyprus , Malta , Poland , Hungary , the Czech Republic , Slovakia , Slovenia , Estonia , Latvia and Lithuania is coupled with the expectation that the acquis communautaire will be adopted without reservation , and given life , as it applies to the area of equal opportunities for women and men .
I will not deny that I found it very difficult to say ' yes ' to the accession of the Republic of Poland , which , along with the United Kingdom , is a participant in war against Iraq , a war of aggression and contrary to international law .
I therefore see it as my responsibility as a German social democrat to set today 's European date of 9 April 2003 against the nationalist date of 1 September 1939 , at the same time hoping for peace and prosperity for all and for a European social model based on partnership .
. ( DE ) I did not vote in favour of the Brok Report , because at least one of its paragraphs does not make adequately clear mention of the Council 's blatant breach of the law .
See also my explanation of vote on the Accession Treaties .
. ( DE ) It is with joy and satisfaction that I note that , in the vote referred to above , the Czech Republic received the worst result and thus a ' Parliamentary shot across the bows ' .
Present-day Czech politicians must wonder why they did so badly , with 489 votes in favour , 39 votes against , and 37 abstentions .
As a member of the EU / Czech Republic Joint Parliamentary Committee , I experienced , over the past four years , the Czech 's intolerable arrogance at first hand .
Over and over again , I appealed to Prague to meet us halfway in the matter of the wretched Bene ? decrees , and in this way draw a line under the unpleasantnesses of the past .
On each occasion , the politicians in Prague refused categorically to do so .
My yes in the vote today is therefore a signal to today 's young Czechs , who will , it may be hoped , soon be calling the political tune in Germany 's neighbouring republic .
I wish the present holders of political office in the Czech Republic much joy from the arguments in their own country as to why the vote in the European Parliament in Strasbourg was such a poor result for them .
Perhaps it is only now that the open dialogue that Parliament has been striving for will begin .
The MEPs of the Communist Party of Greece voted against the accession of the ten countries from a sense of solidarity with their people , who have no reason to celebrate .
On the contrary , it was clear in the run-up to accession ( when public corporations and their wealth were sold off to big business abroad , any socialist achievements were abolished , sovereign rights and national independence were restricted and so on ) , that they have every cause for concern .
Only multinationals and their representatives in the European Parliament have any reason to celebrate .
The ' ten ' are joining a Union of small and medium-sized imperialist states which serves the interests of the major capitalist states , thereby exacerbating the exploitation of their people and anyone else they can get their hands on , in both competition and cooperation with the ' big brother ' and acknowledged ruler : the USA .
As was apparent from the crime against Iraq , the differences between certain Euro-unionist imperialists and their American buddies in the war lie not in the end but in the means .
We also voted against the accession of Cyprus because , in addition to the foregoing , it has been used to exert pressure and legitimise the outcome of the barbaric invasion and occupation , to which the ' sensitive ' European imperialists are turning a blind eye .
The workers - the people - do not need imperialist organisations to hammer out their common fight and will bar the way to the ruin they are leading them to by changing the course of mankind towards a future worthy of it , a socialist future .
- ( DA ) The basic problems concerning what is termed enlargement towards the east have not been solved .
There is therefore no doubt that , given the economic realities , the tradition , going back many years , of Western European exploitation of our Eastern European neighbours , in the light of the different situation where wages and capital etc. are concerned , will continue into the future .
The adjustments they will make in order to comply with existing Community law will cause the new countries quite a few problems , but that fact is not examined in detail in Mr Brok 's report .
The People 's Movement Against the EU cannot support Mr Brok 's paternalistic exposition and conclusions , but at the same time is refraining from voting against the report out of respect for the candidate countries ' right to decide for themselves - through fair and impartial referendums ( we hope for the best but fear the worst ) - whether they desire EU membership .
My VVD delegation was and is in favour of the enlargement of the European Union by the addition of the twelve countries with which we are currently negotiating , particularly for historic , economic and politico-strategic reasons ( such as , among other things , stability along the eastern border and democracy throughout Europe ) .
We are voting for the accession of Malta , Slovenia , Estonia , Lithuania , Latvia , Cyprus , the Czech Republic , Slovakia , Hungary and Poland .
The big bang was an unjust procedure that put unnecessary pressure on the internal cohesion of the Union as well as on the objective assessment of the candidate Member States .
We must not choose this way again in future , not even with a small bang .
Every candidate Member State must be evaluated on its own merits .
As soon as Bulgaria and Romania are ready , they must accede without having to wait for the others .
As far as we are concerned , therefore , accession before or after 2007 is indeed possible .
With regard to the accession of other countries such as Croatia or Turkey , the institutional form of the European Union will first have to be adapted ( efficiency , transparency and democratic control ) before they can be considered .
No promises can therefore be made until the Intergovernmental Conference has been brought to a satisfactory conclusion .
To participate in peacefully reuniting a once fractured Europe is a remarkable privilege .
I voted for this with great satisfaction today .
As a representative of the Scottish National Party , I was also very conscious that many small countries , which only recently re-established their independence , were among those we voted in today .
By contrast , however , Scotland , one of the most ancient small nations in Europe , remains no more than a ' region ' of a Member State as things are viewed from Brussels .
In this new enlarged Europe , Scotland must surely aspire to more than that .
The people of Scotland will pass a judgement about that on 1 May in the Scottish Parliamentary election .
Enlargement from the outside is taking place .
It may also take place from the inside .
As the European Convention proceeds towards its conclusion , it seems clear that a future constitution will place no barrier in the way of internal enlargement .
I hope this process will commence soon .
. ( DE ) Never before have I seen so many Members of the European Parliament put massive pressure by their national party leaderships .
It is for that reason that the result of the vote does not correspond to the honest convictions that many of us have .
What I say now I say also with those in mind who dared not follow their conscience . The EU must become democratic before it can be enlarged .
That is what we promised our electorates in 1999 .
Yet the EU has not done its homework , and the Treaty of Nice is a mockery .
That is why the EU can work only if the Convention and the governments decide on a real constitution , one that is democratic and transparent .
Although I am very much in favour of the EU 's enlargement , the accession of ten new members at once means that it is at present taking on too much .
The reason why I voted against the Brok Report is that it presents us with a world of illusions .
I could not even vote in favour of the accession of Poland , where too much is getting out of hand , and the Polish Government is playing an active part in the abhorrent war of aggression in Iraq .
I abstained in the votes on all the other states , my primary concern being the question of whether the West is ready for the East , the answer to which question is in the negative .

Today is an historic day for the European Union and I am delighted and proud to play a small role by voting yes on all the enlargement reports before us .
Today we begin the European twenty-first century .
The last century in Europe was marked by war in its first half and division into East and West in its second .
That Europe is put behind us as we vote today to reunite our continent in peace , democracy and prosperity .
Ten new flags appeared in our Chamber today .
I look forward to welcoming our new colleagues from these countries to our Parliament next month so that we can begin building together the Europe our 500 million citizens deserve .
. ( NL ) There are plenty of arguments as to why we should reject the ten countries whose governments wish to accede to the EU .
Some , such as Slovakia , Hungary and Romania , discriminate against the large Roma populations there .
There have been complaints against Hungary and Cyprus for discrimination against homosexuals .
Poland , just as Ireland once did , wants to retain the freedom to deny women the right to abortus provocatus for all eternity .
Estonia and Lithuania have tried to deny equal rights to their large Russian minority , whom they hold responsible for the former occupation .
Cyprus could involve the European Union in a war against Turkey .
The current Member States are furthermore complaining about corruption , labour migration and the high cost of relief funds .
I believe that it is at least as important that these countries are being subjected to a neoliberal acquis , that public services are breaking down and large sections of the population are being condemned to the long-term perpetuation of the poverty that has arisen over the past ten years .
Yet it is the inhabitants of these countries , and no one else , who must determine whether they want to belong to the European Union .
They are being given the opportunity to speak out on this in referendums everywhere except in Cyprus .
I do not want to take that right away from them in order to protect ourselves or by knowing what is good for them better than they do themselves .
By rejecting the Brok Report , I am upholding my agreement with enlargement , which I announced on 20 November 2002 .
. ( DE ) I welcome the accession , on 1 May 2004 , of the Baltic States of Estonia , Latvia , Lithuania , as well as of Poland , Hungary , Slovakia , Slovenia and the islands of Cyprus and Malta .
This will put an end to the calamitous division of Europe .
I rejoice to be able to be present at this historic moment .
However much I may rejoice in the accessions , I continue to have doubts about the Czech Republic .
Whilst I want the Czech Republic to join the EU , I cannot close my eyes to the fact that the Bene ? decrees , which legitimised the expulsion of individual ethnic groups , continue to be in force there to this day .
I cast my vote against the accession of the Czech Republic to the European Union .
I do not regard it as acceptable for the Czech Republic to continue , to this day , to fail to distance itself from the Bene ? decrees in an appropriate manner and thus to acknowledge that the expulsions were an injustice .
My vote is intended to be a signal .
I especially want to draw attention to the so-called ' Immunity Act ' , which continues to give legitimacy to the gravest offences and crimes of the post-war period .
Years ago , on the initiative of CSU / CDU MEPs , Parliament called on the Czech Republic to suspend the decrees and laws still in force , in so far as they related to the expulsion of specific ethnic groups from the former Czechoslovakia .
The Czech Republic did not comply ; quite the contrary .
In addition , in April 2002 , the Czech Parliament even unanimously declared the effects of the Bene ? decrees on law and property rights to be ' unquestionable , inviolable and unchangeable ' .
I see that as clear evidence that the Czechs are not willing to make a gesture of political reconciliation .
It is this background that makes it urgently necessary to complete this chapter of history .
The European Union is a community of laws and values , and one of its elementary obligations is that of protecting minorities .
This must be recognised by every country desirous of acceding to the European Union , and for the Czech Republic to ignore this fact is unacceptable .
I consider that the enlargement of the ? U with another 10 countries from our continent is an historic enterprise which - whichever way you look at it - was sorely needed following the collapse of the two-pole system in Europe and the world .
Its deeper meaning was and still is that we hope to welcome the people of these countries into a well-formed entity , a community that unites its members ' economies and has proclaimed its will to move towards closer and closer political cooperation and union between the states , nations and citizens of Europe .
We have no historic , moral , political or strategic right to refuse the freely and democratically formulated request of the ten nations to participate on an equal footing in the construction of this entity .
On the contrary , it is in all our interests to respond positively , with initiatives and solidarity .
We expect the same wish for convergence to be expressed , generally and specifically , by these countries and their governments , over and above the sorry and forced divergences demonstrated recently on the subject of the plan to invade Iraq , divergences that will soon prove to be pointless and bereft of practical value for those who decided on them out of either naivety or selfishness .
Enlargement as it has taken place clearly also has negative aspects and dangers both for the acceding countries and for the historic enterprise of European unification , given that it has preceded the greater institutional and political unity needed ...
( Explanation of vote pursuant to Rule 137 of the Rules of Procedure )
. ( DE ) I very much welcome today 's vote in the plenary of the European Parliament in favour of accepting the ten countries that wish to accede to the European Union .
The enlargement of the European Union represents a gain both for the European Union and for the candidates for accession and is an indispensable prerequisite for peace , stability and prosperity in a reunited Europe .
It is with reference to this , though , that I would like to reiterate the urgent necessity of establishing , as soon as possible , an EU-wide harmonised system of common safety standards for all present and future EU Member States in the field of nuclear energy use .
The following steps need to be taken without delay :
Revision of the Euratom Treaty by the Convention on the Future of Europe , which is currently in session ; the drawing up and enactment of the directives already proposed by the European Commission on the improvement of nuclear safety ; and the establishment of an independent authority at EU level to inspect controls in the area of nuclear safety in the Member States , in close collaboration with the IAEO .
Having voted as I have done today , I will redouble my efforts towards a just political solution , as soon as possible , to the problem of the Bene ? decrees and , in particular , of the Immunity Act , No. 115 of 8 May 1946 .
. ( DE ) Despite my serious misgivings , I voted to approve the reports on the applications by Cyprus , Malta , Lithuania , Latvia , Estonia , Hungary , Slovenia , the Czech Republic and Slovakia .
My misgivings have nothing to do with these countries , but with the fact that the Treaty of Nice has not made the European Union sufficiently capable of enlargement .
As we do not yet know the outcome of the Convention or of the Treaty amendment resulting from it , any decision on enlargement is basically premature .
I abstained from the vote on the Republic of Poland , as this country is currently playing an active part in a war that is contrary to international law .
. ( NL ) The European Parliament has today voted for the accession of ten new Member States to the European Union .
This does not mean our work is done of course .
There is still much to be done in the accession countries , including the development of a properly functioning administrative and legal organisation and the combating of corruption .
Monitoring too must be taken seriously .
I regret that we , who for many years have been helping to prepare and encourage enlargement , have not revised our competence and decision-making mechanisms to make ourselves efficient and effective , both within the European Union and in the area of common foreign and security policy .
I regret that in Nice we missed the opportunity to implement this treaty change .
And yet I voted in favour .
The political scope we had in 1994 to put the Council under pressure with the European Parliament and to demand deepening of the European Union prior to its enlargement no longer exists .
This enlargement , which is of a different order , is again essentially a matter of the basic principles of the European project : political stability , peace and prosperity .
The accession countries and their populations have been preparing for this day for many years , in difficult conditions and with many sacrifices .
These efforts and the prospect of accession have brought stability and peace in Europe .
We must not upset this result today .
After all , political stability , peace and security create the conditions for all other policy objectives .
The consultation regarding the review of the Treaty is under way and it is in good hands .
Our hope lies in the Convention .
Since I have confidence in it , I am also expecting much of the next IGC and I can today vote for it ten times with conviction .
( Abbreviated in accordance with Rule 137 ( 1 ) of the Rules of Procedure )
As explained in my speech to the plenary I support the enlargement process and wish to see the applicant countries as part of the EU .
But the inclusion of Annex XV in the Accession Treaty means that voting for enlargement endorses its inclusion .
That I cannot do .
I consider Annex XV to be a direct infringement of Parliament 's rights .
The worst part of Annex XV is that it enshrines in the Treaty the Agriculture ceiling from 2007 to 2013 : the outcome of a shabby deal that was cobbled together by President Chirac and Chancellor Schröder , that was endorsed by the other Member States in Copenhagen and is now to be part of the Treaty .
As chairman of the Committee on Budgets I find that to be an anathema to everything we have fought for .
As someone who wants to see real reform of the CAP I find it to be an unbearable burden and something I just cannot agree with .
This may seem to some to be a minor issue , but for me it is a point of principle that has to be made .
Hence the reason for my abstention on all the final votes .
Mr President , for me , as a German MEP , the reunification of Europe , for which we have voted today , is of comparable significance to the restoration of the unity of my own country .
It is for that reason that I approved today 's applications for accession with all my heart , including that of the Czech Republic .
I do , however , profoundly regret the Czech Republic 's failure to annul the expulsion decrees and , in particular , the Immunity Act , which is contrary to every principle of law .
I have therefore declared my approval of the accession of the Czech Republic as well in the conviction that , if the Czech Republic becomes a Member State of the European Union , we will be able to represent better and more effectively the interests of the German expellees and of the German minority in the Czech Republic , to whom I feel a sense of obligation .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I have for very many years been an advocate of the enlargement of the European Union coming about by the accession of the Central and Eastern European states - and thus of the Czech Republic .
I have , however , not voted to approve the accession of the Czech Republic , essentially for the following reasons . The first is that the Bene ? decrees , on the basis of which , in 1945 and 1946 , 3.2 million Germans were expatriated and deprived of their civil rights , are not obsolete .
The second is that the Immunity Act , which is current law in the Czech Republic , is an offence against human rights as understood both in Europe and throughout the world .
Thirdly , the European Union 's human rights policy would cease to be credible if we were to accept a current law that exempts from punishment crimes committed against the German and Hungarian civilian population in the aftermath of the War .
This is not about history , but about present-day politics .
This is about the European Union being a community of values in accordance with the Copenhagen criteria .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I am very glad that the accession of the Czech Republic has today been approved .
It is unfortunate that my parents could not live to see this event .
My mother died in January .
They were expelled from their home , and lost a very great deal .
My uncle was murdered in a Czech camp in 1946 .
Having , however , been brought up in a spirit of tolerance and forgiveness , there is one thing I can tell you , and that is that those who - to some extent justifiably - have voted today against the Czech Republic 's accession because of the Bene ? decrees , have forgotten the decisive truth that it is peoples who are accepted .
We have to look forward rather than revert to the old politics of revenge ; I see it as very , very important to stress that .
In view of how certain members of the CSU have just voted against it , that is , alas , again no doubt attributable to elections in Bavaria , where they want to have air sovereignty over certain beer gardens where expellees gather .
I cannot go along with that .
I find it very regrettable that there are those here who were not big enough to take a forward-looking view of history , but remain imprisoned in their old feelings of desire for revenge .
Mr President , I voted for the report on the accession of the Czech Republic to the European Union , although a majority would have been obtained in this vote even without my contribution .
I voted for the motion because I hope , expect and pray that , in the next Parliament , elected in 2004 , which will include representatives from the Czech Republic , there will also be representatives of the Czech Pensioners ' Party , to swell our numbers and make us more effective in protecting pensioners ' rights . More would be achieved in this area in Parliament if there were more representatives of the pensioners ' parties of Europe .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , my voting against the ten accession reports is intended to express my deep concern that the European Union has as yet failed to do as it had promised and enlarge and deepen the EU both at the same time .
My confidence in the EU Member States is shattered to its foundations , for not only has their lack of unity in matters of foreign and security policy been demonstrated to Europe 's detriment , but , for the same reasons , the Treaty of Nice failed to achieve the conditions required before enlargement can take place .
The Convention has not yet produced an outcome , let alone a commitment to the new treaty text being ratified as soon as possible .
I regard it as hypocritical to decide on enlargement while the European Union 's unresolved problems are swept under the carpet .
When this House has such an important decision to take , I would have liked to see more determination to defend its rights in relation to the Council .


Lest I be misunderstood , let me say that I am in favour of enlargement , and as soon as possible , even by 1 May 2004 , but for that we need a new treaty basis , one that guarantees common action on crucial issues even when there are over 25 Member States .
More than ever before , I find a lack of the common European will that is capable of mastering tasks in the strong Europe of tomorrow .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I am well aware of the historic significance of today 's vote , which is also , though , the most difficult decision I have had to take in my political career to date .
I did not make this decision easy for myself .
I brought myself , after mature consideration , to vote in favour of the Czech Republic 's accession , something I did despite my rigorous position on the Bene ? issue .
The Immunity Act remains part of Czech law .
It is an unjust law and a stain of dishonour .
There is no place for it - none whatsoever - in a new Europe that takes seriously its affirmation of common values .
It is with great regret that I note that the Czech Government has not , to date , been magnanimous enough to make a gesture .
Despite that , I have voted in favour of the Czech Republic 's accession , thus demonstrating a trust that may , for all I know , be misplaced .
I would , though , like to help break the vicious circle of misunderstanding and help break down entrenched positions , and I trust that this positive signal will also meet with a positive response from the Czechs .
Those who reject an outstretched hand have not understood the spirit of the enlarged Europe .
.
( DE ) The reunification of Europe is an opportunity of historic significance , but whether the Czech Republic is founded upon the European order is a matter of doubt .
Czech Prime Ministers have described the post-World War expulsions as ' just ' and ' necessary ' , and have even held them up as examples in present-day conflicts .
This must be set against the statement in the European Charter of Fundamental Rights to the effect that ' collective expulsions are prohibited . '
It was for that reason that Parliament 's resolution adopted on 20 November 2002 stated , under heading O , that ' ethnically-fixated policies leading to collective expulsions and the destruction of cultural goods are a flagrant breach of fundamental human rights and the common European legal culture ' .
This is an unambiguous verdict .
It is not aimed at exacting restitution of any kind , but makes it clear that Czech positions such as those referred to are an offence against the most fundamental principles of law , which the EU exists to maintain .
Although we note with satisfaction President Klaus ' statement that the ' events full of violence and human tragedies ' , which had also befallen the Bohemian Germans , were ' unacceptable acts from today 's point of view ' , nothing comparable has been said by the Czech Government , or by its parliament , or by groups or parties in it .
They have therefore failed to dispel the doubts as to whether the Czech Republic has its roots in the ground of European legal culture .
This means that not all the conditions for the Czech Republic 's accession to the EU have been complied with , so that we are unable to vote in favour of it doing so .
Mr President , it was with great enthusiasm that I voted for the entry into the European Union of the Republic of Cyprus .
As the only representative of the Italian Pensioners ' Party elected to this House , I hope and pray that two representatives - in this case - of the Cypriot Pensioners ' Party will be elected from the Republic of Cyprus too : one to defend the interests of what I hope will soon be the former Greek Cypriot community and the other from what I hope will soon be the former Turkish Cypriot community .
This will give us more power to defend the interests of the elderly throughout Europe .
Mr President , I would like to put on record some of the reasons why I voted for the Poos report on Cyprus .
I am delighted that Cypriots are being supported in this House .
It is vitally important that their wish to join the European Union should be respected .
I have some reservations about aspects of the European project , but I am absolutely certain that those countries that wish to join should be allowed to join .
Today is an historic day for Cyprus , as well as for the European Union .
For too long Cyprus has been the victim of power politics in Europe .
It has often suffered at the expense of decisions made by larger and more powerful nations .
I know that accession to the European Union is seen by many Cypriots as a path to security and stability and will lead to a situation where Cyprus is at the heart of decision-making in Europe , with a seat at the top table of European decision-makers .
I hope that the next few weeks will see the finalisation of the accession of Cyprus and that we will see this small island , which was once a victim in European politics , becoming an equal , respected and influential voice in shaping the future of our shared continent .
I am voting in favour of the accession of the Republic of Cyprus .
This is an important moment in the history of Cyprus .
The long-standing fight by all the Greek MEPs and many of their honourable friends has finally ended in success .
Our honourable friend and rapporteur , Mr Poos , has made an important contribution .
In my opinion , it is a good thing that an unworkable American / British plan was not ultimately imposed in a forced manner .
Today a free Republic of Cyprus and member of the European Union is being given the chance to negotiate a fair political solution to the Cyprus question with the occupying force , Turkey , and its local representative , Mr Denktash ; a solution that the overwhelming majority of Turkish Cypriots , together with the Greek Cypriots , rightly hope for .
. ( NL ) Regarding the accession of the ten current candidate countries , the Group of the European Liberal , Democrat and Reform Party feels that these should actually have completed their preparations and that there should be individual country-by-country testing .
On 8 April I received a letter from Commissioner Verheugen saying that the Cyprus border , which is soon to be an external border of the Union and consequently of the Netherlands too , is sufficiently secure .
We further trust that a solution to the conflict in Cyprus will be found through the EU .
Mr President , I voted for the entry of Latvia into the European Union .
As the only representative of the Italian Pensioners ' Party in this House , I hope and pray that , in the next European Parliament , expanded to include the Republic of Latvia too , among the representatives elected by the Latvians there will be a representative of the Pensioners ' Party who , together with the - I hope , numerous - representatives of the pensioners ' parties of all the states who will be entering the European Parliament for the first time in 2004 , will be able to help to defend the interests of the elderly .
- ( NL ) Regarding the accession of the ten current candidate countries , the Group of the European Liberal , Democrat and Reform Party feels that candidate countries should actually have completed their preparations and that there should be individual country-by-country testing .
On the question of whether all the countries met the criteria , there were doubts , which have been expressed repeatedly by the European Parliament .
On 8 April I received a letter from Commissioner Verheugen saying that even the countries in which he himself identified the most failings , among them Latvia , will meet the Copenhagen criteria sufficiently at the time of accession .
The warnings from Commissioner Verheugen intended for a number of candidate countries , the decision of the Commission to publish a Comprehensive Monitoring Report six months before accession , the peer review of new and old Member States proposed by the Liberal Group in the area of human rights , corruption , administrative capacity and independent financial control ( Malmström / Maaten amendment ) , the capability of the Commission to take measures directly for a further number of years against disruption of the internal market ( the safeguard clauses ) and also the Mulder initiative report on the reform of the approval of agricultural expenditure are therefore of overriding importance .

Now for the sixth instalment of my speech , Mr President .
I am not one of those who want to punish Poland and the other countries that prefer US solidarity to European solidarity .
Every state , every government , has the right to decide whether or not to support Mr Bush 's bellicose policy .
It has however become clear that the majority of the countries about to join the Union prefer an alliance with the United States and NATO to closer European integration .
This has delighted British Government representatives to the European Convention .
In an interview with the Times , Peter Hain clearly stated that he is building an alliance with the countries of Central and Eastern Europe against any moves towards the creation of a European superstate .
The United Kingdom and other countries will therefore not hesitate to use their veto at the intergovernmental conference to ratify the conclusions of the Convention .
This veto risks destroying any suggestion of establishing qualified majority decision-making procedures for matters such as the common foreign and security policy , fiscal and budgetary policy , and economic and social policy .
There will be a ban on using the word ' federal ' .
It will not be possible to invoke the Charter of Fundamental Rights for legal rulings in favour of an individual citizen .
Mr President , today , 9 April 2003 , I voted for the entry of Lithuania into the European Union .
Moreover , I hope that a representative of the Lithuanian Pensioners ' Party will join the European Parliament to support me in upholding the rights of all the elderly throughout Europe .
Mr President , I voted for the entry of Hungary into the European Union .
Since there will be at least 200 million pensioners in the enlarged Europe , I hope that , when the Hungarian representatives join the European Parliament , it will be possible to have a number of MEPs which is proportional and proportionate to the number of pensioners in Europe .
I therefore hope that the pensioners of Hungary will send a representative to Parliament too , to help us protect the interests of the elderly throughout Europe more vigorously and more effectively .
Mr President , today , 9 April 2003 , I voted with great enthusiasm for the accession of the Republic of Malta to the European Union , in the hope that Malta too can elect a representative of the Pensioners ' Party to the next European Parliament , so that , together with all the other representatives of the Pensioners ' Parties of all the candidate countries , we can be more effective in protecting the interests of the elderly throughout Europe .
Mr President , I hope that Poland too - and I voted for its accession - will send a representative of the Polish Pensioners ' Party to the next European Parliament , who will stand shoulder to shoulder with me in this House so that I have more power to protect all the elderly throughout Europe .
.
( EL ) There are two reasons for my symbolic vote against the accession of Poland .
One is the so-called ' ethnical declaration ' attached to the Accession Treaties , which covers and legalises the position against abortion .
The second is the participation of Polish soldiers in the war against Iraq , in a show of servile pro-Americanism and highly insolent anti-Europeanism .
I consider that I espouse the hopes and wishes of the proud Polish nation , which will become a member of the European Union as an independent country , bringing to an end the period during which this large , historic country was used as a satellite , now by the USA and previously by Russia and Germany .
. ( NL ) Regarding the accession of the ten current candidate countries , the Group of the European Liberal , Democrat and Reform Party feels that candidate countries should actually have completed their preparations and that there should be individual country-by-country testing .
On the question of whether all the countries met the criteria , there were doubts , which have been expressed repeatedly by the European Parliament .
On 8 April I received a letter from Commissioner Verheugen saying that even the countries in which he himself identified the most failings , among them Poland , will meet the Copenhagen criteria sufficiently at the time of accession .
The warnings from Commissioner Verheugen intended for a number of candidate countries , the decision of the Commission to publish a Comprehensive Monitoring Report six months before accession , the peer review of new and old Member States proposed by the Liberal Group in the area of human rights , corruption , administrative capacity and independent financial control ( Malmström / Maaten amendment ) , the capability of the Commission to take measures directly for a further number of years against disruption of the internal market ( the safeguard clauses ) and also the Mulder initiative report on the reform of the approval of agricultural expenditure are therefore of overriding importance .

Mr President , considering that a Pensioners ' Party - called DeSUS - already exists in Slovenia and is part of that country 's coalition government , I hope that it will be able to send a representative to Parliament so that the pensioners not just of Slovenia but of all the states of the new Europe which emerge from the 2004 European Parliament elections , will have a huge number of representatives from the Pensioners ' Parties of all these states , including Slovenia , upholding the rights of the elderly .
I voted for the report which approves the entry of the Slovak Republic into the European Union too , and I hope that the next European Parliament , elected in 2004 , will include at least one representative of the Pensioners ' Party of the Slovak Republic , so that there will be more of us to protect the interests of the elderly throughout Europe .
- ( NL ) As a member of the delegation for relations with Slovakia , I know the problems of that country in more detail than those of other accession countries .
I see unstable political parties emerge and disappear , a largely collapsed economy with mass unemployment in the east and the refusal of successive governments to rectify wrongs previously committed against members of national minorities .
The new division into provinces takes absolutely no account of the fact that the southern edge of Slovakia is Hungarian speaking and that most people there want to have administration and education in that language .
The villages in the east occupied by a majority of people from the Roma population group are still administered by a Slovakian elite that thinks that street lighting , waterworks and parks are only for themselves .
It may be that many people from Slovakia will choose to seek work in nearby Vienna .
With the arrival of Slovakia the EU is importing the environmental problems of the nuclear power stations and the Danube dam .
Yet accession to the EU is far less controversial in internally divided Slovakia than in the neighbouring countries of Poland and the Czech Republic , where the majority will perhaps shortly vote against in a referendum .
Various groups are expecting improvement as a result of this accession .
As far back as 5-9-2001 I expressed the expectation that they will be disappointed , but I respect their choice .
- ( DA ) We have chosen to vote in favour of the report because we believe it is necessary to guarantee fair treatment of third-country nationals resident lawfully .
We believe as a matter of principle , however , that these rights are best safeguarded by the Member States ' national legislative provisions , which are very different from one country to another but which have a democratic basis .
What is more , we are aware of the fact that the proposal concerns an area that is covered by Title IV of the Treaty establishing the EC and that does not therefore apply to Denmark , cf. the Protocol on Denmark 's Position .
- ( DA ) We have chosen to fall in with our group and vote in favour of the draft resolution in Mrs Cerdeira Morterero 's report .
We are , however , aware of the fact that the resolution concerns a state of affairs covered by Title IV of the Treaty establishing the EC and does not apply to Denmark , cf. the Protocol on Denmark 's Position .
We are all aware of the disparity between the declarations made at the Tampere Summit and the content of the proposal for a directive before us , which has reached us after more than three years of discussion in Council and two amendments to the Commission 's initial proposal .
It was stated that any integration policy should aim at granting immigrant citizens rights and obligations that are comparable with those held by EU citizens .
The text that has been presented takes the opposite direction .
The outcome of divisions within the Council , this proposal is for common standards that are harmonised down towards the lowest common denominator , with a reductive vision of the concept of family and with a number of derogations that leaves some crucial aspects unresolved .
For this very reason , we support the proposals contained in this report , which broaden the concept of the family , guarantee the principle of non-discrimination and prevent the overturning of more favourable legislation .
On our initiative , the report now includes provisions for not adding the examination of applications to the normal workload of administrations and for eliminating the subjective concept of a long-term relationship .
It also excludes illness or disability suffered after the issue of the residence permit as grounds for refusing to renew the permit .
By introducing such amendments , the report distances itself in qualitative terms from the initial proposal and therefore deserves our favourable vote .
I would like to congratulate my colleague and fellow member of the Parliament 's Anti-Racist Intergroup , Mrs Cerdeira Morterero , for her work on the important and difficult issue of family reunification .
I have voted for this report and support it in line with my past work on immigration matters - particularly my work on secondary immigration issues like the ' primary purpose ' marriage rule in the UK .
It is important for Member States to authorise the entry of close relatives - parents , spouses or partners if there are no other means of support .
The transposition of the directive should not lead to a lower level of protection than is currently provided by individual Member States .
. ( PT ) Immigration is a serious problem , which requires a realistic and responsible response from the Community Institutions .
Abstaining from taking appropriate and balanced measures in this field is precisely the cause of the damaging effects of which all European citizens are aware .
The least that these serious and now universally acknowledged problems require is that we do not make them worse .
In the words of Commissioner António Vitorino , ' ... it should be clearly stated that the reception capacity of Europe 's cities has limits ' .
The issue of immigration cannot , it is true , be addressed by sacrificing the right to family reunification .
This is quite clear to me , because I recognise the importance of this concept .
We can and must , however , only see the right to family reunification in serious terms , without the reason sustaining its existence being compromised .
This is not the approach adopted by the report and the resolution on this Directive , which unreasonably extend this right to personal situations that do not involve family relationships .
This leftist irresponsibility serves only to increase suspicions and resistance to a natural fundamental right .
It is for all of these reasons that I felt obliged to vote against the report .
The explanations of vote are now closed .
( The sitting was suspended at 2.15 p.m. and resumed at 3 p.m. )

The next item is the report ( ? 5-0111 / 03 ) by Mr Morillon on the new European security and defence architecture - priorities and deficiencies .
Mr President , President-in-Office of the Council , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the Committee on Foreign Affairs , Human Rights , Common Security and Defence Policy began work on this report six months ago . We never imagined back then that we would publish it at such a dramatic and painful time .
We have sought to update the previous report by our fellow Member Catherine Lalumière . This update was necessitated by the events of September 2001 and our desire to make our own contribution to the work undertaken by our colleagues in the Convention .
We may be attempting the impossible in assessing any kind of European security and defence architecture . At present everything leads one to believe that , for the time being at least , such an architecture has totally disintegrated .
My fellow members of the Committee on Foreign Affairs , Human Rights , Common Security and Defence Policy took a different view however . On 25 March , at the height of the crisis , they adopted the report we will vote on tomorrow in plenary .
I think there are at least three reasons for this .
The first is that we have a responsibility towards our electorate .
The second relates to our awareness that , on the eve of enlargement , the present crisis must serve as a lesson for us .
The third stems from our desire to clarify the policy on transatlantic cooperation . We feel Member States want to continue to pursue this policy .
Many of us hope that the current differences are not as serious as they might appear at first sight .
As I said , the first reason is that we have a responsibility towards our electorate .
All the indicators we are aware of have shown that over two-thirds of European citizens are in favour of a common security and defence policy .
The Committee on Foreign Affairs , Human Rights , Common Security and Defence Policy is aware of this feeling . It is no surprise that a similar proportion of committee members share the view of the citizens .
This was demonstrated by the committee 's vote following a fruitful debate on almost 200 amendments . In any case , the new regulation on the work of our committee would have allowed for just a vote in plenary .
We all agreed however that the subject was so important it merited the debate we are having today . We also felt we had to involve the Council and the Commission .
We are holding this debate to learn the lessons of the present crisis without any further delay . This is the second reason .
Europe is incapable of speaking with one voice in the United Nations Security Council , as it should do according to the provisions of the Maastricht Treaty .
President-in-Office of the Council , a great deal of upset and confusion has built up recently within the European Union . While I hope such difficulties are only temporary , do they not demonstrate that it is now time for us to reform our institutions to prevent any repetition of this in future ?
As I have said , we are fully aware that the citizens of Europe , and also maybe the whole world , expect Europe to takes its place in building a multi-polar world . People want to stop the future of the world being decided by the President of the United States alone .
I will now outline the third and most important reason .
Is the European Union ready to take on the responsibilities we are expected to assume ?
I am not sure .
The choice before the European Union is now clearer than ever .
Member States could continue to entrust their defence to the United States Armed Forces alone , as during the Cold War .
In that case , Member States could not lecture the United States on what Washington might decide to do with its troops .
On the other hand , Member States could finally agree to do what the United States has always asked them to do . When it comes to sharing the burden , the United States has continually asked Member States to make a larger contribution to joint undertakings .
The Secretary-General of NATO Lord Robertson referred to this the other day in your presence , Commissioner Patten . He criticised the gap between the ambitions of European governments and the means they are prepared to devote to achieving them .
He called this the gap of ambition .
I hope the present crisis will make them aware of this gap and that they will begin to bridge it .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the recent crisis in Iraq demonstrated fairly clearly where Europe is lagging behind , especially on foreign policy and defence issues .
However , let us not dwell on Europe 's weaknesses .
This crisis may also have a creative effect for European policies and , from this point of view , I think that the Morillon report has come along at just the right time , even if this was not apparent when it started .
Today , because the traditional twin superpower system has collapsed , we need to find new security strategies and measures .
Within this framework , the spread of weapons of mass destruction is not the only hotbed of crisis .
This is not the only danger threatening global security and stability .
Extensive poverty , organised crime , institutionalised violence and serious recessions may have the same adverse impact on global stability and security as military or terrorist action .
We certainly need to examine in parallel the extent to which we are developing the right policies for all these dangers and at what point in time .
Along with any reaction we choose , we consider support for global security , mutual trust , cooperation , consensus in international organisations , alliances and networks to be vital .
The method we use to handle threats to global security will determine our future as we build peace and safeguard a healthy economic environment and find convincing answers to global political , economic and even environmental problems .
At this point , with the occurrence of the Iraqi crisis , I should like to say how grateful I am that the extremely interesting report by General Morillon has given the presidency an opportunity to formulate the Council 's opinions on as serious an issue for European integration as the European security and defence policy .
Both the Morillon report and other related initiatives , such as the Barnier report , have contributed important ideas which may be especially useful in the debate to be held at the intergovernmental conference , and even at the present stage , when the competent bodies of the Council are processing texts relating to the integration of the ESDP mechanism and , of course , in the Convention .
I need to point out here , and I shall explain why in just a moment , that some of the ideas formulated in the Morillon report relate to initiatives which have already been set in motion and are being examined by the competent bodies of the Union .
I shall start by dealing with the current threats to security , stability and peace that have taken a very different form from the usual threats in the past .
To tell the truth , the ESDP mechanism was not designed from the start to cope with horizontal and irrational threats such as terrorism or the spread of weapons of mass destruction , which is why the mechanism needs to be carefully and gradually adapted to the present security environment .
Within this framework , the first move has been to set two specific objectives : the use of the military forces of the Union for the protection from terrorist attack of civilians on the one hand and of the military forces of the Union deployed in crisis areas on the other .
Without doubt , the further development and improvement of military capabilities are the pivotal point of the security and , subsequently , the defence of the Union .
We are paying particular attention to this issue and , within the framework of continuing the efforts made so far , there are plans to convene a conference of capabilities to evaluate and record progress made in applying the related action plan , the ? C ? P , and deciding how to proceed .
The presidency has drafted a text with guidelines on what is to be done once the competent working parties , the ECAP panels , have completed their work .
We hope that these initiatives will give new momentum to improving our operational capability in the military sector and , by extension , will help to strengthen the bases for the further development of the ESDP .
In this respect , it is also especially important to develop the rapid reaction force , which is why this issue was already included in the basic priorities in the field of the military aspect of the ESDP by the Spanish Presidency .
The operational framework which will govern the formation and operation of rapid reaction units is being examined by the competent political and military bodies and we are making every effort to complete it by the end of the Greek Presidency .
It goes without saying that strengthening the Union 's military capabilities will not be possible unless we extend and broaden our cooperation in the field of armaments .
This enterprise should , of course , have been planned earlier , but the time has come to implement it and the Union is still breaking new ground here .
The decision taken by the European Council in Brussels had two parts : first , to instruct the Council to examine the role of defence research and development within the more general framework of the Union 's related capabilities and , secondly , to examine the possible creation of a European armament agency , a European intergovernmental agency .
Both these issues are very important steps towards strengthening cooperation in the defence sector .
If we are forward looking , we can combine defence research with the Union 's competitiveness policies , in order to feed and develop numerous sectors and move towards stronger enlargement .
The development of a global space policy for the European Union is being promoted with the same intention and will also be applied in the security sector .
The Morillon report also touched on this .
It is clear from developments over the last decade that there are many common dangers and we need an equally coordinated , common response .
Within this framework , we need to cultivate and promote a common perception of security , which is why the creation of a system of common political and military training for crisis management is of especial interest to the presidency and we are already working on this .
The idea mentioned in the Morillon report of setting up a civilian peace corps is a very good idea and will help make the average European citizen aware of what is happening in the security sector and how we are dealing with and participating in this at a practical level .
We are seriously examining this idea and the presidency will most probably submit the text with the relevant guidelines .
Without doubt , the component element of European security is the relationship between the European Union and NATO .
In any case , the European option in crisis management is to appeal first to the will and action of regional and international organisations ; in other words , dialogue takes priority .
The recent cooperation agreement between the European Union and ? ? ? ? is an important step towards complementarity and mutual support between the two organisations .
I should like to take this opportunity to underline the fact that the Morillon report notes that action by the two organisations and their members must be directed and governed by the principles of the United Nations Charter .
As I said earlier , ladies and gentlemen , these are both points noted in the Morillon report and aims of the presidency and that is why we are making an effort to promote them .
However , there can be no doubt that the report proposes and covers a broad spectrum of ideas relating to very serious issues and institutional aspects of the ESDP , which will make a valuable contribution to our discussions from now on .
I do not intend to comment further on each of the ideas in the report , despite the fact that many of them are extremely interesting , because the application of these ideas needs to be preceded by the institutional reforms which are currently being debated within the framework of the Convention and which will then be debated at the intergovernmental conference .
However , I am certain that they will be useful as a valuable source of inspiration and consideration .
We have arrived at a crucial turning point .
The European Union has proceeded with a bold enlargement and must take firm steps to enlarge is policies accordingly , so that it can proceed on the basis of different factors than in the past .
The overwhelming majority of Europeans expect this , as Mr Morillon notes in his report .
These times really do call for decisiveness and action , with the ultimate objective of promoting the defence identity of the European Union .
This will allow the European Union to fortify its security and strengthen its foreign policy .
Ladies and gentlemen , the current state of affairs , despite its dark side , might mark the start of an intensive debate as to what the European Union intends to do from now on , especially now that we are in the middle of an open debate on the future of Europe .
These are outstanding issues and any lessons gathered on the causes and development of the Iraqi crisis must fortify us so that we can prevent and avert similar situations in the future and give Europe a stronger profile in the global system .
Mr President , I should first of all like to congratulate General Morillon most cordially on a very comprehensive - and certainly timely - contribution to the debate on the development of European security and defence policy .
The timeliness was rightly referred to both by my honourable friend and by the Minister in the presidency .
The number of amendments that the committee considered before adopting this resolution is , in many respects , a testament to the depth of interest , but also frankly to the differences of view , on this key area of European policy .
In responding today I must keep in mind the current responsibilities of the Commission in security and defence issues .
I shall certainly keep them in mind and if I do not Mr Van Orden will remind me of what they are .
Whatever is recommended in future by the Convention , where my colleague , Commissioner Barnier , has ably led the discussions on defence issues - and I know that he has briefed the Committee on Foreign Affairs , Human Rights , Common Security and Defence Policy in the course of the deliberations on this report - those Commission responsibilities are at the moment pretty limited when compared to the range of issues covered in the text before us .
The Commission is not involved in the purely military aspects of European security and defence policy .
That is exclusively for the Member States .
I shall not therefore comment on the specifically military proposals , including the establishment of a permanent standing military force , a collective defence clause or a joint military college .
But the Treaty does associate the Commission with ESDP - Article 27 does that in terms - and we are actively involved in all discussions on crisis management operations in the context of ESDP , in particular in those that relate to the civilian crisis management instruments , for example policing , the rule of law , civilian administration and civil protection .
In this context I am pleased to see that the resolution before us recognises the importance of civilian , as well as military , contributions to crisis management .
But it is impossible - this is a point I have made on many occasions in this Chamber - to separate purely military matters from related issues in which we in the Commission are competent , and have a real contribution to make .
Military and non-military issues cannot be placed neatly in separate boxes .
Nor should they be , because they need to be closely coordinated in the service of a single strategy .
The Commission , for example , may be bankrolling police support in post-conflict situations as in Bosnia and Herzegovina , where on 1 January the European Union took over the Police Mission from the United Nations ; or we may be arranging for the training of border services where uncontrolled mass migration is generating conflict ; or we may be helping to re-establish administrative structures in countries that are emerging from crises , as we have seen in the Balkans and as we can see in Afghanistan today .
The Commission already has an impressive range of instruments and expertise which can be used in crisis situations .
New European Union instruments may be necessary in the security field , as has been suggested by General Morillon .
But the most important requirement is that all available instruments should serve agreed European policy objectives in any given situation .
Current events , I have to say , show that this is far from being the case .
Another area where the Commission has an important role to play relates to defence equipment policy .
In my view , defence trade and production cannot and should not be treated as a chasse gardée within the Single Market .
Procurement of defence equipment , competition between defence companies , research and development , exports and imports of defence equipment , internal market aspects of defence trade and dual-use goods which have civil and military applications - all these are areas in which the benefits of the Single Market are of relevance to European industry .
There is considerable scope for improvement here .
The Commission recently adopted a communication to the Council and Parliament on the defence equipment industry in which it points to some areas where substantial progress is possible in giving European Union taxpayers more value for the money they invest in their security .
The concerns on duplication and fragmentation in arms production and procurement and the lack of interoperability - identified in the resolution before us - are some of the key issues that we sought to address in our communication .
We hope that the work we are initiating as a follow-up to the communication will help to develop the strong and competitive defence industry , transparent market conditions and healthy climate for investments in research and development necessary for the strengthening of ESDP .
Ultimately , much of the credibility of Europe 's common foreign and security policy depends on the European Union 's military capacity .
The creation of the 60 000-strong ' rapid reaction force ' being set up under ESDP will certainly help to increase the European Union 's credibility abroad .
And the launch of the first ever European Union military operation in The former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia last month shows that ESDP is not just a theoretical construct .
But I fully agree with my honourable friend General Morillon that it remains difficult for our allies to take Europe seriously unless we spend more on our security .
It is not enough to argue that Europe is picking up its share of the bill by paying most of the world 's development aid , true as this may be , or by increasing even further our humanitarian assistance .
We also need to invest more in developing our capabilities such as airlift capacity , special forces and battlefield communication equipment .
If not , our allies will remain of the opinion that Europe cashed in too easily its peace dividend after the fall of the Berlin Wall .
Delivery of aid should remain the prime task of the humanitarian organisations to ensure neutrality , independence and impartiality of such humanitarian operations .
Respect for these principles is paramount for meeting humanitarian needs whenever there is a crisis .
The Commission therefore welcomes the reference in the report to the Guidelines on the Use of Military and Civil Defence Assets to support United Nations Humanitarian Activities in Complex Emergencies which were released by the UN on 20 March 2003 .
They fix clear rules regarding the relationship between military and humanitarian actors in UN humanitarian operations .
The thrust of the Guidelines should apply equally to the use of European military and civil defence assets in any humanitarian operation .
I would like to say one final word about international humanitarian law , which governs the conduct of hostilities .
We believe that international humanitarian law is adapted to today 's conflicts , provided that warring parties and all parties to the Geneva Conventions respect their obligations .
I would at this stage express the Commission 's appreciation of the role of the International Committee of the Red Cross as promoter and guardian of the Conventions .
Finally , I would like to say once again to my honourable friend that this report is almost painfully timely .
It raises a number of issues which will go right to the heart of our credibility in Europe as we seek to make a greater contribution to international affairs in the years ahead ; but , as I have said on previous occasions in this Chamber , there comes a moment in politics where one is obliged to put one 's money where one 's mouth is .
We have long since passed that stage when we are talking about security issues .
Mr President , President-in-Office of the Council , Commissioner , two years after I had the honour of presenting a report on the same subject to Parliament , I am pleased to offer the Morillon report my whole-hearted support .
I hope the amendments presented by our group will be adopted .
Then we should be able to vote in favour of this proposal without any problem .
I will restrict myself to highlighting a number of points I feel are particularly important in the context of these turbulent times .
The events of recent months have not helped the development of the new European security and defence policy ( ESDP ) .
Ever since 11 September 2001 , the European Union has been largely excluded from political and military affairs , whether it is the situation in Afghanistan and Iraq , or the conflict between the Israelis and the Palestinians .
We do have some involvement , but our role is limited to civil and humanitarian action .
While this work is important , it is not enough .
The worst thing is that the European Union became disunited during this period .
Despite the laudable efforts of the Greek Presidency in pushing for the adoption of common platforms , we remain divided on the question of Iraq .
We are divided on the nature of transatlantic relations and on how much autonomy we have in relation to the United States . Consequently , we are also divided on important principles such as the use of force , the role of international law or that of the United Nations .
Despite this bleak picture , I would like to make it very clear that I firmly believe we must not give up under any circumstances .
A number of countries , including Belgium , Germany , France and Luxembourg , have already put forward an initiative to revive the security and defence policy .
The Greek Presidency has responded positively to this .
Prime Minister Simitis said as much recently .
Over the last few weeks , the European Convention , chaired by Mr Giscard d 'Estaing , has not arrived at a decision on the issue nor made its response known .
I hope it will now forward some proposals of its own .
Mr Dehaene and Mr Barnier have outlined some excellent ideas on the institutions implicated in the foreign policy , and the security and defence policy . These ideas include many of those expressed by Parliament .
The Morillon report contains a whole host of interesting proposals .
It includes proposals on the aims of the common foreign and security policy ( CFSP ) and the European security and defence policy ( ESDP ) in a new international environment . There are further proposals on the new role of NATO , relations between the European Union and NATO and on the military capacity , especially in terms of the latest technology , we need just to be taken seriously .
We should not of course try to establish ourselves as a rival to the United States .
That would be totally stupid , as well as impossible .
We must however take account of some fairly basic facts .
Given their geographical position and their common borders , the countries of Europe are , de facto , dependant on each other for their security .
Given their traditions , especially their cultural traditions , the countries of Europe have important common assets and principles to defend on the international stage .
Lastly , given the resources and the economic instruments they have , the countries of Europe do have the means to promote their ideas and defend their interests throughout the world when necessary . They just need to decide to do so .
In short , while not seeking global domination , the countries of Europe certainly have a role to play in the world . Their role is far from being a servile or subservient one however .
President-in-Office of the Council , Commissioner , let us forge ahead with this !
It is the wish of Parliament , and we will support you .
Mr President , I apologise to Mr Morillon for not being here when he opened the debate .
This report could hardly be more timely .
If - as seems likely - US and British Forces are now in control of Baghdad , then the debate on the aftermath of war and its lessons can now commence .
Unlike its predecessors , the current American administration shows little interest in a strong and united Europe .
Our weakness has been cruelly exposed and the onus is on the EU to develop a security strategy which may help us reshape transatlantic relations .
Liberal Democrats in this House welcome the Morillon report as an important contribution to this process .
Europe 's divisions over Iraq have been a stark reminder of our failure to speak with one voice on security policy , and yet we should not forget that Europe does have a single trade policy , a common development policy and an embryonic European diplomatic corps in the form of the Commission 's offices around the world .
These are powerful instruments and would be all the more so if combined as part of an integrated foreign policy .
Our foreign policy is incoherent because it is split between three Commissioners , the Council presidency and a Council High Representative , and because some Member States deny our essential commonality of interests in foreign policy , or forbid the Commission to play a central executive role .
Without a common defence policy , Europe will still lack the military muscle needed for a credible common foreign policy .
With combined defence spending less than half of that of the USA , it is clear the EU is not spending enough on defence , nor would our citizens be likely to welcome much higher levels of spending .
So it is not enough simply to spend more : we need to spend better , especially on key requirements such as strategic airlift , precision guided weapons and air tankers .
That is why the Liberal Group supports the establishment of an armaments and research agency to coordinate defence spending .
What we want is to achieve better value for money , and if EU countries agree that military equipment made outside the EU best meets our needs and provides best value for money , we should not choose a European option in a misguided attempt at protectionism .
That would be to repeat the mistakes of the common agricultural policy .
Better defence spending must be accompanied by stronger decision-making .
By sending to the European Convention , through General Morillon 's report , a clear and united message in favour of a strong and effective security and defence policy , Parliament can hope to influence its deliberations .
Having one external affairs representative , based in the Commission but supplemented with resources and expertise from the Member States , will go a long way towards connecting the disparate elements of foreign and security policy .
We also need greater flexibility in launching and conducting crisis management operations , if necessary by greater recourse to constructive abstention .
While there are clearly reservations about this , introducing a collective defence clause in the new Constitutional Treaty , similar to that under the Western European Union Treaty , also seems a necessary step .
It may be that progress towards these goals cannot be made at once with the 15 , let alone with 25 Member States .
That is why I welcome the Belgian Government 's initiative for a meeting later this month with France , Germany and Luxembourg , on defence policy .
Progress in European integration is often only achieved by a group of determined countries pressing ahead , with others joining later .
Nonetheless I insist that enhanced cooperation on defence must remain open to all governments who wish to join , and that the British Government in particular , given its military capability and experience , will do so .
In conclusion , a European security and defence policy can usefully complement the collective security provided by NATO as long as there is rationalisation of arms procurement , added value in the form of a doctrine based on conflict prevention and crisis management and backed by the credible threat of military action , and a more coherent and unified approach to security policy .
Let our security and defence policy be forged on the anvil of hope from the steel of our embarrassment over Iraq .
Mr President , recent international events have , once again , highlighted the need for a European Union which is able to take united action both in the area of its own security and when it is necessary to protect the right of all peoples to build a democratic , pluralist system which respects human and civil rights , for a Europe which is , at last , able to combine diplomacy - the diplomatic services - and the information systems of each individual state to achieve that cooperation which clearly requires there to be constant dialogue within the Council on issues of international politics if we are to be able to come to decisions which are as representative as possible of public opinion throughout the Union .
It is of primary importance that we reroot the whole debate on foreign and defence policy and related decisions in the framework of the Council . It is also of primary importance that we create a single European representative for these two policies .
This is an issue which has been addressed by the Convention too . Indeed , although still legitimate exercises , the meetings held by some of the states outside the Council are not European Union initiatives .
Clearly , therefore , we support a European security and defence policy which , through a military instrument , not least , as proposed by General Morillon , can preserve peace and guarantee democracy .
This European military corps will be in addition to the national armies of each Member State .
It too will further boost the development of European citizenship , citizenship which is derived , inter alia , from the pride felt by each citizen at belonging to both their country and the Union : a free , independent Union which is the author of a project of peace and mutual respect with regard to the rest of the world .
This project cannot just be based on the production of documents , on declarations of good intentions or on the establishment of trade relations : it must provide forces equal to the task of combating terrorism in order to protect our values , our vision of the world and our institutions of freedom .
Mr President , it is always the same .
When European pipe dreams are shattered by reality , the ' Euro-enthusiasts ' and dreamers amongst us come up with more , which are even more absurd . Such a relentless pursuit in spite of all the evidence would be laughable if it were not so serious .
The pipe dream contained in the Morillon report is that of European defence , which is moreover an outdated notion .
European defence has been the dream of many simple-minded individuals throughout the twentieth century but nothing has been achieved .
Aristide Briand promoted the idea with the drastic result of breaking down resistance and the spirit of defence in France .
The fanciful notion was taken up again in 1948 , at the Congress of Europe held in The Hague , and then by Winston Churchill in 1950 , following the failure of the European Defence Community , which was one of his dreams .
We must be grateful that the French Government managed to put a stop to it .
Fifty years later , here we are again .
We have not made any progress .
We have made so little progress that work on one of the key elements of a defence policy , that of creating a European defence industry , has not just stopped , but has gone into reverse . We must be aware that Member States buy around 60 % of their arms not from each other , but from the United States .
We must first tackle this issue if we are then to consider a defence policy .
Lastly , this defence policy is nothing but a pipe dream because we cannot establish a defence policy without a common foreign policy .
This was set in stone by Title V of the Maastricht Treaty in 1992 . No one has however even started to implement this in any crisis , be it that of Rwanda , Afghanistan or Kosovo .
We have got into this situation because we all tagged along behind the United States .
This common foreign and security policy has fallen to pieces once again today .
Ladies and gentlemen , we must abandon all pipe dreams .
Europe must be built on reality .
It is now clearer than ever that individual Member States are that reality . Member States must not let themselves be deprived of the very core of their being : the will to defend themselves and the means to do so .
I will go no further than to express my hope that , in the face of her growing global responsibilities , France will be able to strengthen her own means of defence .
This is the only and the best contribution France can make to what remains of Europe .
Mr President , the Morillon report treats European defence as part of a realistic , responsible strategy of solidarity and complementarity with the United States , and it therefore represents a substantial undertaking , involving planning , economic sacrifices and military investment .
It is a necessary , urgent step forwards based on not underestimating the new terrorist and political threats .
It is a coherent agenda which I had occasion to propose last year with the study ' Una spada europea ' [ A European sword ] .
The report avoids dangerous illusions which would not make the world safer and more democratic and certainly not make Europe more united . One of these illusions is the rekindling of unilateral pacifism , a return to the unilateral pacifism of the past of ' Better red than dead ' .
Another is the illusion of a Europe which is independent , powerful and authoritative because it has broken with the United States , an illusion which resurrects the short-circuiting tactics of Gaullism , both hostile towards the United States and insensitive to European supranationality , particularly in matters of foreign and defence policy .
This is an illusion which is deeply rooted in European nationalism and in ideologies which are now obsolete , an illusion which explains the strange alliance formed between right and left in the face of the war in Iraq and which , by contrast , exalts the principle of democratic intervention .
This political illusion is more dangerous than imperial unilateralism or blind pacifism : while ostensibly guiding Europe it has divided it ; it has divided the Fifteen , it has offended the countries of Eastern Europe at the very time of the reunification process , it has widened the gap between the Union and the United States and , before the right of veto could be exercised , it has helped to paralyse the Security Council , justifying military intervention outside the context of the UN .

Before abandoning itself to developing the institutional system , the Union must define its political vision more clearly , it must ensure the security of its people , territory and borders - which it has failed to do in the Balkans - it must take note of the erosion of arms control and the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction in the hands of bloody dictatorships , and it must strive resolutely to combat terrorism and to bring about security for Israel and a democratic Palestinian state .
If the Union wants to be allied with the United States rather than subordinate or hostile to it , neither resigned nor resentful , it must develop common defence and gradually assume leadership of the Atlantic Alliance , to which the United States is now only contributing 8 % of its forces .
To this end , it can take as a basis the Saint-Malo agreement between France and the United Kingdom and General Morillon 's report , which are the greatest achievements of European security policy and its development , which must be consolidated , built upon and extended to include the entire Union .
Mr President , what we ought to talk about today is how we are to guarantee European security and how we are to secure a secure future for us all .
What we have seen , particularly in recent years and on 11 September , is that security is not brought about through building up armaments .
It might be said , rather , that the opposite is the case for , if there is any country on this planet that has been well equipped militarily , it is the United States which , specifically , became the victim of a terrorist action on 11 September .
The military hardware it had built up did nothing to prevent that terrorist action .
The swing to the right throughout the United States in this area must not , for heaven 's sake , end up infecting thinking on European security policy .
There is a complete lack of proportion , both globally and in the EU , between the investments made in military hardware and our investments in genuinely sustainable security .
The problem is that Mr Morillon 's report does not seek to alter this disproportion , and that is one of the reasons why I do not want ultimately to support it , in spite of the fact that many of the ongoing analyses concerning the need for a European identity in these areas are constructive and sound .
If , however , that identity is to consist in our copying something that has already proved to be useless and powerless , then we shall have taken a wrong turning .
That is not an expression of pacifism , for I believe that a people must be entitled to defend their own rights , and I also believe there may be situations in which military power must be used in order to preserve the peace .
The threat we are facing does not , however , come from something we can fight using military hardware .
It comes first and foremost from the desperation of people in a very unjust world , and that should instead be the focus for our priorities .
Madam President I would firstly like to thank Mr Morillon for the efforts he has made on this report in order to bring together the differing points of view .
Our colleague , Mrs Frahm , has already explained that we cannot vote in favour of the report , despite its positive content , for three clear reasons .
The first reason is our dependence on NATO , which makes the European Union into a kind of dwarf next to the American giant and it is therefore essential to establish the European Union 's own personality if we are to make progress .
Until we do that there will be no future for the European Union .
The second reason is the need to act more firmly once the Iraq war has taken place , because we must make it abundantly clear that the danger at the moment in the world is the aggressive behaviour of the United States .
The strategy document of 20 September on United States security means beginning wars all over the world .
Next will be Syria , Iran , Korea , who knows ?
I will not give names in order not to suggest targets . This is a great threat to security .
Therefore my third point is that the European Union must play a fundamental role in the democratic strengthening of the United Nations and the Security Council .
Furthermore , we must work to ensure that any conflict that takes place must inevitably pass through the United Nations General Assembly and the Security Council , in accordance with international law , which is exactly what the United States are not doing .
This European Union contribution is a success .
This is what many South American countries have told us , that , in the face of the pressure - which I believe was entirely unjustified - from President Aznar to sign up two Security Council countries to the war in Iraq , they have responded with dignity and courage and have shown Europe an example , saying that peace and international law are more important than the dangerous adventures of the United States .
Madam President , important international events have occurred between the drafting of the Morillon report and now .
As a consequence , the issues surrounding the defence of Europe can no longer be tackled in a global and uniform manner .
We cannot pretend that it is still a question of defining a common defence policy to implement a common foreign and security policy in all Member States . There have been confrontations within the United Nations Security Council on fundamental issues .
Following the war in Kosovo , yet another war is being waged , this time against Iraq , in violation of the provisions of the Charter of the United Nations . These developments have brought the deep divisions on foreign policy issues between the present and future Members of the European Union into sharp relief .
We can see quite clearly that there are two concepts of Europe and the role of Europe , two kinds of foreign policy and two visions of international order .
We must act on this . It would be wrong to insist on maintaining that this is nothing but a crisis of circumstances .
It would be wrong to think that , once the crisis had passed , we could go back to our old concepts and reengage in the familiar , essentially semantic games concerning the CFSP and the EPSD .
In future , a flexible approach will have to be adopted for everything relating to foreign affairs and defence at European Union level .
Previously it was optional , now it is essential .
There is no other way forward . Furthermore , it will lead to greater efficiency and fewer empty words .
The European Convention should now put all its efforts into pursuing this path .
We need to separate the proposals contained in the Morillon report rendered obsolete by recent developments , from those which are still relevant .
I would categorise as obsolete paragraph 54 , which proposes allocating the European Union one permanent seat in the United Nations Security Council .
This proposal clearly runs counter to our current needs .
The European Union must continue to have two permanent seats . The countries of Europe support two different concepts and two different directions .
Having two seats allows both to be expressed . I would categorise as relevant the proposals on the need for cooperation on the fight against terrorism and on arms production and procurement .
The consequences of the war in Iraq have made the fight against terrorism even more important .
Present events also clearly indicate the damage caused in Europe by the ideology of the dividends of peace .
I therefore welcome the opportune re-emergence of the principle of ' Community preferences ' in the Morillon report . I only regret that this coincides with the disappearance of the principle from another area of strategic importance , namely the Common Agricultural Policy .
The CAP stands for autonomy of food supply , or , to use the American terminology , the food weapon .
' Security of supply ' , as mentioned in the Morillon report , must apply to food as well as to armaments .
We must ensure that Commissioner Lamy remembers this within the framework of the Doha round of negotiations .
Madam President , I would firstly like to acknowledge the French General , as others have done , but also the rapporteur for this report , Mr Morillon , an exemplary citizen and Member of the European Parliament .
This Parliament has today established the foundations which will allow the Council of Ministers next week to go ahead with the fifth enlargement of our political project , which is surely the most historic enlargement , since it has allowed us to overcome the division between Europeans represented by the Berlin Wall and the Iron Curtain , which was quite simply the ultimate indignity and which fortunately now belongs to ancient history .
This also comes at a time characterised by the 11 September attacks and the Iraq crisis .
The enlarged European Union today has a greater population than the United States , it has a similar gross domestic product to the United States and greater commercial and industrial power .
However , it is weaker in terms of the latest technology and control of the financial markets and , of course , in the military field where the differences are immense .
My belief , Madam President , is that we must accept the fact that these insufficiencies - whether we like it or not - are the result of our own incapacity and that at the moment there is no effective alternative in the field of security and defence to the Euro-Atlantic alliance .
Yesterday the President of the Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia visited this Parliament , and this visit coincided with the entry into force of a European Union mission to that Republic .
These are small steps , Madam President , which demonstrate the European Union 's desire to establish itself as a strong Europe and as a player on the international stage which is able to shine in the military , economic and cultural fields , amongst others .
In the field of security and defence , Mr Morillon 's report responds to this objective by trying to establish a series of procedures which improve the decision-making process , which promote compatibility between military weapons , which consolidate the formation of the Council of Defence Ministers and which provides this policy with the financial resources necessary to implement it .
I would like to stress , Madam President , that it is very odd that the people who have complained most about the insufficient role played by the European Union in relation to the Iraq crisis are the ones who are most reticent when it comes to consulting their public and asking them to provide this policy with sufficient financial resources .
Finally , Madam President , President Aznar has not put pressure on anybody and neither would the dignity of the Presidents of Mexico or Chile have tolerated any type of pressure .
Madam President , I would refer those people who have made these statements to the words of the Mexican Minister of Foreign Affairs yesterday , when he said that relations between Spain and Mexico have never been better at any point in history .
Madam President , we know that talking about a common security and defence policy at the moment is , for the followers of the realist or even hyper-realist school , a type of wishful thinking .
It is , however , precisely in the current context that this report , with the dose of proactive thinking that it provides , becomes even more relevant .
The substance of this report warrants our support , because it is based on fundamental points on which there is consensus in the European Parliament and amongst the Union 's citizens , specifically respect for the principles of the United Nations Charter and international law , a framework of common external policy guidelines encompassing security and defence policy , the need to accept joint European responsibilities in the field of security and defence policy , starting with military support for humanitarian aid missions , conflict prevention and resolution and maintaining both transatlantic relations and a multilateral approach .
I wish to sound a critical note , however , by stating that the report does , perhaps , go into too much detail , and even includes some details that are less than clear . Where item G discusses the laws of war , for example , it is not clear whether or not it is criticising the Geneva Convention .
Furthermore , at this present initial stage , I would ask : should we not be attaching greater importance to streamlining existing resources , by combining efforts , avoiding duplication and promoting interoperability between the armed forces of our various countries ?
For example , the sectoral distribution of appropriations earmarked for defence in each country could be improved .
Some countries are spending as much as 70 % or more on personnel and maintenance .
They could perhaps make a joint contribution to a priority such as scientific and technological research into sophisticated systems and which generally produces results that can benefit both industry and the economy .
Nevertheless , this is a discussion about extremely practical matters , which can only really start now .
Madam President , Commissioner , once we became aware that , even if it were the main commercial power , Europe could not play any important role in the international order unless it had a common foreign and security policy , the so-called third pillar was adopted in the Treaty of Maastricht and the objective was set of creating an operative military capacity in order to guarantee the maintenance of peace .
In an increasingly global and interdependent world , until now our policy has been to establish international law , above all through the United Nations , but also through other world organisations , and we have therefore drawn up a regulatory framework for international relations , because we are convinced that that is the best way to prevent and deal with any possible conflicts .
And we believe that , within this world order , the European Union should act with a common voice which will allow it to be seen as a commercial , economic and social power and also as a great defender of human rights , multiculturalism and the environment .
However , the reality of our current situation is disappointing .
Once again , internal division has won out over the great Community declarations made at summits of Heads of State and Government .
I am referring to the differing positions maintained by the governments of the 15 countries within the United Nations Security Council with regard to the conflict in Iraq .
The actions of Mr Aznar , Head of the Spanish Government , as well as those of certain others , would be reprehensible enough if only because they have caused this division , because , without waiting for the Council of the European Union to adopt a common position on the issue , they were quick to blindly follow the orders from the emperor who is attempting to establish a new unilateral world order .
The bad thing is that Mr Aznar and his colleagues have promoted an illegal war , a humanitarian disaster with thousands of children , women and civilians killed , mutilated and injured , or suffering terror , hunger and disease .
The worst is that Mr Aznar has done so by bypassing the Constitution , without the approval of Parliament nor the sanction of the King of Spain and , together with his minions , going against world opinion and the opinion of the weapons inspectors , and without the support of the United Nations Security Council , has dealt a fatal blow to international law and institutions and has put the world at the mercy of the strongest , giving way to force and failing to make use of reason and justice .
To sum up , it is due to them that the world has returned to the law of the jungle and that the third pillar of the European Union has been broken up .
Madam President , in relation to Iraq I have swung from anger , through despondency , to determination .
I am angry at the arrogance and the hubris of the UK and the US in launching this war .
I am despondent that the European Union has been so impotent in its efforts at seeking to stop this war and to achieve a peaceful disarmament of the Iraqis .
But I am also determined to ensure , insofar as I can in my small way , that we have a united , coherent , cohesive , common European foreign and defence policy .
I am convinced that a united European Union could have stopped this war , could have disarmed Saddam Hussein , and indeed could have played an important role in bringing peace between the Israelis and the Palestinians .
That possibility is still there and we should do everything we can to put aside our relatively petty differences , based on national egotism in many cases , to reach a common position for Europe .
We have an important role to play in the world and we should seek to play that role now of all times .
Faced with the biggest security crisis since the end of the Cold War we have failed as a Union to address that crisis in a serious and effective way .
That is quite appalling .
We would be foolish too to assume that the Iraqi war is a one-off war plan .
It is obvious that Syria , Iran , Cuba indeed , and North Korea are also on the agenda .
It is time the European Union got its act together and made it clear that we will not stand for the kind of actions that have been taken in relation to Iraq , that we will unite to put in place serious peaceful conflict-prevention mechanisms to achieve what the world needs , that is , stability and peace .
Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , as a member of the Confederal Group of the European United Left / Nordic Green Left , I do of course share many of the concerns held by the majority of my group . Like them , I am particularly concerned by one question .
How can we possibly develop a defence structure when we have not yet established a common foreign policy ?
I would like to add that I am also vehemently opposed to the very principle of a pre-emptive war like the one underway in Iraq . I deplore the disagreement between the countries of Europe on this important issue .
Clearly NATO is already dominated by the United States .
I have to say that if Europe does not wish to reinforce this monopoly , and if we in Europe want to be able to settle conflicts through effective and strong European diplomacy , we must establish a European defence architecture . We must ensure such a European defence has clear objectives and principles .
It must fulfil specific missions using appropriate capacities and arms . It must depend on a legitimate and democratic decision-making process .
In my opinion , conflicts throughout the world should be settled through diplomatic means , within the framework of the United Nations in particular .
In order to have sufficient diplomatic clout to be able to solve these problems through diplomacy , Europe needs to have the ability to take military action . I think we in Europe should not deny ourselves this capacity .
In short , if Europe no longer wishes to leave its future in the hands of the United States , it must provide itself with the necessary means so that a European defence architecture can at last be established .
Madam President , ' Argos did inspire him in his search for the Other ' , to quote Péguy on Homer . I would refer the detractors of the Morillon report to this .
The Morillon report is not a pipedream .
It is without doubt the most interesting and best-devised document on the subject I have been given to read for several years .
I would like to explain why I am so pleased with this report .
I see merit both in its ambitious objectives and in its realistic pathway .
Others have explained that the timing of this report is opportune .
Previous speakers have also highlighted its comprehensive nature .
I would like to point to its sense of perspective and its excellent account of the institutional tools that need to be taken into account .
I would also like to underline the very creative way in which it uses the notion of enhanced cooperation . It applies this to defence in a realistic and pragmatic way with the aim of establishing a genuine Community defence structure .
In some ways , this report is a step-by-step guide to building a European defence architecture capable of adjusting to meet present and future challenges , especially terrorism .
Madam President , too often we say that Generals prepare for yesterday 's wars .
I do not want the future to herald more wars but we know that there will be many more conflicts .
One particular General has urged us to prepare for current and future conflicts .
He deserves our thanks .
Madam President , I can report that , at this moment , joyful Baghdad citizens are toppling a massive statue of Saddam Hussein in the centre of Baghdad , along with unarmed American troops .
British Conservatives have consistently regarded the pursuit of an autonomous European security and defence policy as one of the most ill-advised policy ambitions of the European Union .
Others have been confused into imagining that ESDP is primarily about encouraging European countries to make a greater contribution to defence .
If this were the case , it might be a worthy ambition .
In fact , it complicates the Transatlantic Alliance , produces no additional troops and has no real purpose , except to shift defence and security decision-making responsibilities away from NATO headquarters - where European countries sit around the same table as our American allies - to the European Union , from which Americans are specifically excluded .
As the presidency has again confirmed this afternoon , ESDP is all about European integration .
The splits that occurred in NATO and elsewhere in the lead-up to the Iraq war were a deliberate consequence of this policy .
ESDP is not only a threat to NATO - which is a supremely intergovernmental organisation .
The report of my gallant friend , General Morillon , exposes very clearly the ambition to communitarise defence within the European Union .
I note Commissioner Patten 's reservations about this aspect .
British Conservatives oppose this report , which is a recipe for an EU army and a massive extension of Community power into the defence and security arena .
It proposes that the European Commission should have widespread responsibilities for military operations , including the right of initiative in crisis-management matters ; that the Community budget should cover the common costs of military operations ; that there should be a common procurement and production policy , which would be based on ' the military needs of the European Union as such ' ; the establishment of an EU joint military college ; a collective defence clause , as a protocol to the EU Treaty ; a common EU police force and coastguard corps , along with a permanent EU seat in the UN Security Council .
With the experience of the Iraq crisis behind him , I sincerely hope that the British Prime Minister will realise the folly and indeed mischief of creating defence institutions which will merely exacerbate divisions between European countries and the United States .
I hope also , in spite of the great Anglo-American solidarity over Iraq , that the United States will no longer merely take on trust Mr Blair 's promotion of ESDP .
Both should now know better and work to consolidate a new Atlantic alliance .
The European Union is putting its political pretensions before the real security interests of the citizens of its Member States .
Madam President , in my opinion , the issues addressed in this report are extremely important in strategic terms and also the most urgent of the European priorities : giving the Union the ability to act in the field of security and defence as well as in the field of combating terrorism , within the framework of a unified , coherent foreign policy .
I therefore support the Morillon report and I will uphold all the proposals that give these policies more credibility and more weight : increasing national defence budgets within this Union perspective ; allocating a proportion of the Union 's budget to supporting research and development ; an integration programme to stop duplication and fragmentation ; ad hoc cooperation or enhanced cooperation , should some Member states have legitimate grounds for not taking part in this undertaking ; the transparent , effective integration of European defence into a renewed NATO and into the consolidated Atlantic Alliance , which must be preserved .
After the very serious Iraq crisis , even those who did not support these goals before must stop burying their heads in the sand .
A roadmap which is both practical and visionary must be proposed , as in the case of Monetary Union .
The Convention , Madam President , must listen to the views of the majority of Europeans who , together with Parliament , are calling for a return to effective multilateralism and to a Europe which is capable of taking action .
Madam President , in view of the current tensions and divisions , General Morillon 's report has come at just the right time .
It tells us that , if Europe wants to be a credible leader on the world stage , it must be united and strengthen its military capabilities .
The war in Iraq is such a tragic event that we cannot be surprised if it has caused major divisions between the Member States , but the first signs of repentance already seem to be appearing and there is already a strong temptation to join the winning side - the United States - once the battle is over , so to speak .
The countries which were opposed to the war are already getting into position to gather up any crumbs that fall and to be involved in reconstruction .
However , as General Morillon - a French general but a leading player in Europe - said , one cannot expect to take part in the decision-making process if one does not share the burdens too .
I hope that the fantasy political views - which I have just heard expressed in the House - regarding the United States , which will invade Syria , Cuba and who knows what other countries after Iraq , will soon cease to be expressed .
European public opinion was not divided in the same way as the Member States : for the most part , it was opposed to US military action .
I am glad to say that there were Heads of State and Government in Europe who were capable of challenging public opinion and asserting their own vision of world peace : peace which , regrettably , in this case , could only come about through a war which was necessary in order to avoid even greater tragedies in the coming years .
I believe that when Europe has its own military capabilities - as the Morillon report calls for - and its own foreign policy , it will become a world leader , and I only hope that it will then prove capable of making the right decisions .

Madam President , I would like to congratulate my respected colleague General Morillon on his report .
As previous speakers have already said , it is being considered at an opportune time .
I am a strong supporter of the establishment of an EU defence policy because I believe it is as much a fundamental part of European integration as the single currency .
Additionally , if we are to learn any lessons from the current debacle and disarray in which the European Union finds itself , then the European Convention and the subsequent IGC have to consider the arguments advanced at the heart of this report .
I strongly support the EU-US transatlantic alliance , but not in its present form , where we are simply expected to endorse US foreign policy objectives , even when we disagree with them .
A new equilibrium must be established on the basis of a true partnership in which both parties shape the agreed policy objectives .
However , we have to accept that there is absolutely no chance of influencing the United States when we are so dependent on them .
We have , as General Morrillon suggests , to ' share the burden ' also .
We must also acknowledge that an EU defence policy must be underpinned by a coherent common foreign and security policy .
I do not believe that our current difficulties over our divided response to the Iraq crisis should give rise to pessimism and paralysis .
If anything , it should provide the political imperative to ensure that it never happens again .
If we really want to exercise influence on the world stage , then EU leaders must agree on merging the functions of the High Representative and the Commissioner for External Relations , served by a single administration , adequately resourced , and using all our instruments in the policy areas - such as trade , development , environment , justice and home affairs - to support clear political objectives at the heart of our foreign policy .
It is to be hoped that as we move towards the creation of defence structures , we will not forget the importance of conflict prevention , and also of continued investment in our policy on democratisation and human rights , because it is abuses in those areas that give rise to conflict in many parts of the world .
Madam President , I too support the excellent report by our colleague Mr Morillon , which integrates Atlanticism and Euro-Gaullism magnificently .
As someone who is far more of a Euro-Gaullist than Mr Morillon , I concede that he has managed to combine these two elements of European foreign and security policy quite outstandingly .
We cannot discuss the issue of European defence as if we were debating the need for a European directive on jam .
What is at stake here is the very raison d 'être of European integration .
I am not the only one who thinks so ; many of our citizens share this view , as the opinion polls bear out .
The real purpose of European integration is peace and security , both internally and externally .
For this reason , the time has come for us to make progress on the European foreign and security policy , and I am not as pessimistic about this as many others in this House .
Yes , it is true that our governments have presented a pathetic picture .
But if you look at public opinion in the various nations , it is apparent that on the key issues - including the Iraq war - there is far greater unanimity among the nations than among the governments .
In my view , we need mechanisms and institutions which do not only capture the nations ' common will but actively influence and shape it , for we cannot simply be led by the current mood .
We need a responsible , long-term strategy as the basis for a common foreign and security policy .
I think the Convention is the final opportunity , in the broad community of fifteen - soon to be twenty-five or thirty - Member States , to achieve a common foreign and security policy .
I hope this will be successful .
I do not want a core Europe .
I do not want a fragmented Europe .
Yet if this wider circle of Member States fails to make progress , there must be a development towards a core Europe .
However , this means a core Europe which is open to all those who are willing to participate in a common foreign and security policy .
Let me make one more thing clear : I believe that we need the Atlantic Alliance .
However , as Franz-Josef Strauss , my party 's late chairman , once said : ' The Atlantic Alliance will only have a future if it is based on two equally strong and lasting pillars : an American pillar and a European pillar ' .
The fact that this European pillar does not exist is not the Americans ' fault .
It is our fault as Europeans .
In the wake of the enlargement which we have agreed today , we will have more citizens than Russia and the USA put together .
So it is high time we did something about our foreign and security policy , and that includes spending more and creating the appropriate structures .
This does not mean structures of aggression , but structures which actively build peace .
Painfully , we failed to do this in advance of the Iraq war , but it has been the European Union 's mission since our founding fathers started it up in 1952 .
Madam President , no one has to convince us Swedish Democrats of the need for a common foreign and security policy .
If the EU wishes to have influence , the EU Member States must cooperate .
The common policy is particularly important for small countries within the EU .
Unfortunately , the common foreign and security policy has been in ruins in recent months .
Hopefully , it will be possible to unite the EU in devising the common policy now that the people in the centre of Baghdad are rejoicing at Saddam Hussein 's fall and also trying to bring his giant statue crashing to the ground .
Some hours ago , the vast majority of us voted in favour of a major enlargement of the EU .
This was probably the most important political decision most us have ever been involved in making .
Many of the new EU Member States have given high priority to NATO membership as a solution to their security requirements .
Following the period of the Cold War , NATO has been developed into a pan-European security organisation .
That is a fact of which we must take account in developing the common security policy for the EU .
The EU 's common security policy must not be opposed to NATO 's . On the contrary , cooperation needs to be deepened .
It is my hope that my own country too will choose the same security solution as , for example , our Baltic neighbours , that is to say membership of NATO .
I do not believe that the purpose of the EU 's security policy should , in the first place , be to develop strong , joint military power .
The EU 's military resources must be seen as complementing efforts to promote peace and to protect people in war-torn areas and as complementing joint efforts to combat terrorism and to respond urgently to disasters .
Cooperation with the global community must of course be central in this connection .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , the immense difficulties that we are experiencing reveal existing trends which we should not overlook .
The historic and privileged links between Great Britain and the United States are nothing new .
The Atlanticist attitude of the candidate countries is based on our own weaknesses and on the fact that they do not believe that Europe is capable of defending them .
Unfortunately they are right .
It is high time that conclusions were drawn from this crisis , which is perhaps a salutary one , like the ones which preceded it and which allowed us to move forward .
Perhaps we shall finally find an answer to the question of what we want to do together .
There are , in fact , two opposing visions of Europe .
The first is the vision of those who are in favour simply of a large area of economic freedom , while foreign and defence policies are aligned with those of the United States and NATO .
The second is the vision of a Europe which is powerful not only economically but politically as well , and which plays a full role in the world , in partnership with its allies and not under their tutelage .
For the latter Europe , which is the one that I would like to see , a common foreign and defence policy is essential .
If we have the political will to achieve it , this common defence will constitute a formidable potential for union and will finally enable us to harmonise our human and material resources in every field , and particularly in research , weapons systems and information , which will have inestimable civil , economic and social repercussions .
This is why I wholeheartedly agree with the conclusions of the work carried out by Commissioner Barnier in connection with the Convention , and also , above all , with the excellent report by General Morillon .
He has treated this highly sensitive subject with the competence for which he is famous , but also with tact and sensitivity .
We must now come together again and move forward , if possible .
I have not forgotten the Saint-Malo summit , which some people try to pretend never happened .
If those people continue to prefer to take to the high seas , I hope they will use a big sail .
One day , I am convinced of it , they will return to our shores .
We , the others , who constitute by far the greater majority , prefer a Europe which is free , solidarity-based and credible , a Europe which also makes its influence felt in matters involving peace and the destiny of the world .
This is the desire of many countries in the world , countries which expect Europe to play its role .
It is also , I know , the desire of the people of Europe , as so many of them have been demonstrating in the last few weeks .
Thank you , Mr Martin .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon .
Question No 1 by Bart Staes ( H-0133 / 03 ) :
Subject : Abduction of Arjan Erkel , a volunteer doctor working with MSF ( Médecins sans Frontières - Doctors without Borders )
Arjan Erkel is a volunteer doctor working with Médecins Sans Frontières and head of the MSF mission in Dagestan .
On 12 August 2002 , he was abducted in Makhachkala , the capital of Dagestan .
Six months on , MSF still has no news about his safety , the place where he is being held or his state of health .
The European Parliament has already adopted a resolution in which it called on the Russian Government to do its utmost to ensure the early release of Dr Erkel .
Has the Council already raised the case of Dr Erkel in its contacts with the Russian authorities ? If so , what was the outcome of any consultations with the Russian authorities ?
What steps will the Council be taking over the next few weeks and months in order to secure the release of Dr Erkel ?
I would like to remind the honourable Members of one thing : this Question Time is governed by the Rules of Procedure , by an Annex and by certain recommendations .
The recommendations , approved by Parliament in plenary session , indicate that supplementary questions must be concise and must be of an interrogative nature and suggests that they should not exceed thirty seconds .
You will have a minute , as always , but I would ask you not to exceed that minute for the supplementary question and to comply with this Resolution by Parliament .
Question No 2 by Mihail Papayannakis ( H-0135 / 03 ) :
Subject : The Western Balkans and the Copenhagen criteria
Will the Council set out its general views on the prospects for accession negotiations with the countries of the so-called Western Balkans and on related political issues linked to the practical implementation of the Copenhagen criteria and in particular how to ensure the freedom of movement and establishment of persons and the lifting of barriers to the movement of recent or more long-standing refugees from these or neighbouring countries ?
Do any forecasts exist or have any preparations been made in this connection to facilitate such policies which will become absolutely indispensable if these countries accede to the EU ?
Mr President , I do not know whether you are aware that I have received a note from the Presidency concerning a question I asked the Council and which was due to be answered today , saying that it is unacceptable , because it apparently made accusations of bad faith or a procès d 'intention with regard to words spoken by the President of the Spanish Government , Mr Aznar .
As everyone knows , at a press conference with Mr Blair , Mr Aznar threatened Chile and Mexico by saying that , if they did not vote in favour of the coalition position in the Security Council , the progress of their agreements with the European Union could be blocked by some States .
I do not think that this constitutes a threat ; it is simply Mr Aznar 's true intention .
This is why my question has not been allowed .
Despite this , I have reworded it .
Mr President , do you know whether I will be able to table the question today ?
In any event , Mr President , I wish to ask whether today 's questions have been looked at , to know whether any other accusations of bad faith have been made .
Because there have been and they are all legitimate .
I fail to understand on what grounds the President has decided to reject my question , because when I spoke about Mr Aznar , I did so objectively and clearly : this was Mr Aznar 's clear intention in threatening Chile and Mexico , countries which , furthermore , are Spanish-speaking , which makes the situation all the more unacceptable .
I wish to ask , Mr President , whether you will allow me to ask this question and whether , in any event , the other questions have been looked at to see whether they are guilty of the same sin .
I would have been grateful if you could have put this question when we reached the time for your question out of respect for the agenda , not at the time of your pleasing .

You have been informed , Mr Nogueira , that the President of Parliament in accordance with his competences and with the Rules of Procedure , and this has been communicated this morning - as you and I have discussed both inside and outside the chamber - has stated that Question No 13 which you have raised is not admissible because it contains statements or judgments , which I do not intend to go into .
Imagine , for example , that you were a Finnish Member and I a German Member , in order not to get into an issue under discussion in Spain .
I am simply talking about the Rules of Procedure .
I must say to you , since you ask my opinion , that having read the note from the President and the question , I agree with the President of Parliament .
I believe that you have also approached the office of the President to say that if you reformulate the question and present it for next month it will be dealt with .
Provided that it is in accordance with our Rules of Procedure , and I will not comment on the questions from other Members , because that is not my job , particularly as to whether they have ' sinned ' .
I only organise the debate here , I have absolutely no obligation to define sins or sinful or irregular behaviour .
I very much value your contributions but today your question has been declared inadmissible .
There is another point of order from Mr Staes , who has the floor .

If the President-in-Office of the Council believes it appropriate , he may reply to you directly and in person at the end of this Question Time , but here we have an order for questions , we obey certain rules and I would ask everybody to respect them .
This is not any other type of debate .
This is a Question Time with an order for questions , and I would ask you not to create a situation in which other Members are not able to put their questions because we are using up the time for other purposes .
Question No 3 by Alexandros Alavanos ( H-0136 / 03 ) :
Subject : Unlawful detention of Greek national at Amsterdam airport
Themistocles Koltsidopoulos , a Greek national studying at the University of Piraeus , was travelling to Scotland on a KLM flight via Amsterdam .
While waiting to change aircraft at Amsterdam 's Schiphol Airport , where he was in transit , he was unlawfully detained by the Dutch police authorities , owing to his dark skin , on a trumped up charge of forging a passport and driving licence , together with another Greek passenger - also of dark complexion - although they had numerous personal documents proving the charge to be groundless .
During his unlawful detention , he was refused permission to communicate with the Greek authorities and was not allowed to contact his family to inform them that he was being held in custody .
Furthermore , while being held in custody for over ten hours , he paid for his food and was returned to Greece at his own expense .
Finally , the police refused to hand back his personal documents ( driving licence , Greek passport , student identity card , etc . ) , which they had confiscated .
In the light of Article 18 of the Treaty and the frequent recurrence of such incidents at Amsterdam airport between the Dutch police authorities and Greek nationals , as reported to the Greek passport authorities , will the Council say what measures it will take to prevent the Dutch police from abusing their ' rights ' to the detriment of European citizens ?
What practical options are open to Mr Koltsidopoulos to mount a defence and claim compensation for the stress and any financial damage he has suffered ?
Thank you , Mr President-in-Office of the Council .
No , I am not at all satisfied with this reply .
This has nothing to do with law and order .
It has to do with freedom of movement .
The authorities at Amsterdam airport persist in exercising an oppressive policy against any Greeks who have not dyed their hair blond and used contact lenses to make their eyes blue .
They hold them in the forged passport section or wherever and they send them home .
I have here a letter from the Royal Constabulary at Schiphol airport in Amsterdam , apologising ten weeks after the event because it found two people on the same aeroplane who supposedly had forged passports .
If the President-in-Office contacts the Greek prefectures , he will see that this is systematic action on the part of the Dutch authorities and I should like to ask for an intervention , given that this has to do with the free movement of persons within the European Union .
I shall reply as the Greek Deputy Foreign Minister .
We shall examine this matter and if there is any such issue we shall indeed see what we can do .
I make this statement in my national capacity and not in my capacity as President-in-Office of the Council .
Question No 4 by Bernd Posselt ( H-0138 / 03 ) :
Subject : Accession of Croatia to the EU
What is the Council Presidency 's view of Croatia 's plans to join the EU and what will the next steps be ?
Mr President , on 21 February , during his visit to Athens , the Croatian Prime Minister submitted an application for his country to accede to the European Union .
The Greek Presidency plans to discuss the Croatian application at the General Affairs Council in April and to refer it to the Commission once it has carefully examined the legal parameters of the matter and , of course , consulted its partners .
This question is being discussed at Coreper today and , as I said , we are waiting to discuss it in the Council next week .
On the basis of the opinion of the Commission , which we hope will give its opinion relatively soon , the Council will examine how far Croatia meets the political Copenhagen criteria and it will then be able to enter the accession process .
Mr President , I would like to thank the Minister for his reply .
I would like to put an additional question : do you think it is conceivable that Croatia could be included in the next enlargement round ?
Not this one , of course , but the next round planned for 2007 .
Do you think it is conceivable that Croatia could be part of this round , and will you propose this in the Council ?
Personally , I believe that Croatia fulfils the criteria at least as well as some of the countries which we have admitted today .
Greece as a country supports Croatia 's candidacy .
It is far too early at present for me to state , as President-in-Office of the Council , if the outcome of negotiations , the starting date of which is unknown because we have to wait for the opinion of the European Commission , will be such that Croatia can become a member on 1 January 2007 .
Anything is possible , except that at the moment I do not think that it serves any purpose or that there is any point in my saying whether or not it is possible .
Of course it is possible , but no-one knows if this timetable really is feasible .
And as we all well know , enlargement negotiations with a country are usually time-consuming , they take a very long time , they require consultation and negotiation on a great many issues and they very often take far more time to complete than anyone initially thought they might need .
Mr President , the Council is carefully and constantly monitoring the issue of the Western Sahara .
The European Union wants a peaceful solution to the conflict as quickly as possible .
The Union therefore also fully supports the efforts of the United Nations and , more particularly , of the personal envoy of the Secretary-General of the United Nations , Mr James Baker , to find a viable solution which is governed by a spirit of full compliance with the international legal order .
Mr Baker submitted a proposal on 16 January 2003 for a political solution to the conflict which guarantees self-determination in accordance with Security Council Resolution No 1429 of 30 July 2002 .
He presented this proposal to the parties involved and the neighbouring countries during his visit to the region between 14 and 17 January 2003 , following which the term of office of the United Nations Mission for the Referendum in Western Sahara was extended twice , once until 31 March and the second time until 31 May , in order to give the parties involved time to examine the proposal and formulate their replies .
The presidency of the Council of the European Union , in its contacts with the parties ' delegates , including recently during the meeting of the Association Council with Morocco last February , urged them to examine Mr Baker 's proposal with a favourable predisposition .
As noted in the report by the Secretary-General of the United Nations of 16 January , the United Nations and the Security Council have been making active efforts over the last 20 years to help the parties involved find a solution to this conflict .
All possible solutions have been set out to the parties involved .
It is now solely up to them to show the necessary political wisdom and to take advantage of this new chance to give the population of the Western Sahara a better future .
The recent statements about stepping up contacts between Morocco and Algeria and the declared will of both sides to discuss all the issues , including the issue of the Western Sahara , gives cause for hope .
Given that discussions about the final settlement of the question of the Sahara are being held within the framework of the United Nations and are now at a crucial stage , the Council sees no point in taking a stand on the question of the exploitation of the natural resources of the Western Sahara .
Regardless of the political solution to the conflict , the question of human rights is a factor of fundamental importance to the Union and a source of permanent concern to it .
In an effort to divorce the humanitarian dimension of the conflict from its political dimension , insofar as that is possible , the European Union has always urged the parties involved to take measures of a humanitarian nature in order to facilitate the restoration of confidence between the people and populations affected .
The Union has made repeated demarches to the parties involved for this purpose .
These efforts again brought about results with the release of 100 Moroccan prisoners of war on 26 February by the Polisario Front .
The European Union expressed its satisfaction following this event .
However , given that approximately 1 160 prisoners of war are still being held , the Union stressed that this gesture was not enough but was a step which could also promote dialogue and trust between all sides .
The humanitarian issues linked with the conflict in the Western Sahara , including the issue of the missing persons , is also raised systematically within the framework of the political dialogue being held by the European Union within the framework of the association agreements which it has concluded with its partners in the southern Mediterranean .
During the last meeting of the Association Council with Morocco in Brussels on 24 February , the Council stressed , among other things , the need for respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms in the Western Sahara .
It also called for continuing cooperation with the International Red Cross Committee in order to get to the bottom of the issue of the missing Saharawis .
The Council has also repeatedly turned its attention to United Nations Security Council Resolution 1359 , which urgently calls on the parties involved to clear up the issue of the missing persons and to comply with the orders of international humanitarian law .
The Council has no information on the question of the ' black prison ' of El Aaiun , nor does it have enough information to reach a conclusion about the real circumstances surrounding the arrest and conviction of Saharawi prisoners .
The European Union , through the humanitarian aid agency of the European Community , is the most important donor of humanitarian aid to the Saharawi people .
The honourable Members may refer to the Commission for more information about the exact amount of aid provided by the Union .
Mr President , thank you for your reply .
The question I posed , Question No 5 , was very specific .
As you are aware , the population of Western Sahara depends almost exclusively on the European Union aid provided through ECHO for its survival .
My question was whether the Council will support the continuation of the humanitarian aid to the population of Western Sahara throughout the process you described .
I fail to see why the honourable Member believes that the Council will change its policy on the question of humanitarian aid .
We shall support humanitarian aid in accordance with the proposals we receive from the European Commission .
The point is what the European Commission 's intentions are , not what the Council 's intentions are .
In all events , the relation between cause and effect , the logical order , is different from that in which the supplementary question was put .
Mr President , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , I appreciate that many questions have been posed on this issue , but they are all different .
When we believe a subject is deadlocked within the European institutions we usually proceed as we are today to try and make progress .
In my question I acknowledge that the United Nations plan for a fair referendum for Western Sahara is still valid . You replied that you appealed for human rights to be respected when you met with the Mediterranean countries .
In particular , the latter included Morocco and the associated states .
Mr President-in-Office of the Council , I think this is insufficient .
If , as you said , the Saharawis have released 100 Moroccan prisoners but the Moroccans have imprisoned three Saharawis in terrible conditions , simply appealing for respect for human rights is not enough . We need to apply pressure .
As we have association and trade links with Morocco , we are in a position to apply such pressure . We must insist on respect for human rights and urge both the Saharawis and the Moroccans to release their respective prisoners .
We need to apply far stronger pressure .
This does not constitute a question .
Nonetheless , Mr Yiannitsis is free to respond or comment should he wish to do so .
Mr President , obviously this is not a question and obviously the European Council is interested in exerting pressure on both sides .
What I said about humanitarian assistance in these situations applies precisely to both sides .
The pressure is directed at both sides , including Morocco , to which the honourable Member referred .
Consequently , I see no cause for disagreement here .
Mr President , Mr Baker has made a number of modifications to the initial peace plan .
I feel it is important for the Council not to view this as set in stone . Rather , it should endeavour to ensure that the plan evolves in line with United Nations resolutions providing for the population to vote in a referendum on self-determination for Western Sahara .
I would like to reiterate the question I posed . I asked whether the conflict in Western Sahara is now officially on the Council 's foreign policy agenda .
If so , how high is it on the agenda ?
Is the High Representative for Common Foreign and Security Policy taking any action in this regard ?
Is the Presidency of the Council ?
Does the Council know whether the Commission is taking any such action ?
Is the Council aware that the Kingdom of Morocco prevented a delegation that was to have testified on the violation of human rights in Western Sahara from attending a meeting of the United Nations Human Rights Commission in Geneva ?
If so , what is the Council 's reaction ?
Mr President , I do not know if Morocco prevented a delegation from travelling to Geneva .
Similarly , I have reservations about commenting on initiatives which Mr Solana intends to take in order to put this issue back on the Council agenda .
Of course this issue is of interest to the Council , but exactly when it will appear on its agenda and when it will not , I am not in a position to say at the present moment .
President-in-Office of the Council , I should like to thank you for your replies , in particular the one concerning the self-determination of the Saharawi people , a question which is finally being examined now , although I had asked a question on this subject during the last session .
In my last written question , I expressed great concern over the fact that the Council had not followed up this point .
On the other hand , I am a little worried about the effect of your overall reply , because you said , amongst other things , that it was for the parties involved to show common sense .
How does that position show respect for international legitimacy ?
Surely it is up to the European Union to play an important role here , particularly with regard to its partners .
I am thinking in particular , of course , of Morocco , with which we have signed an association agreement .
In my opinion , it would be advisable for the European Union to have a frank and critical dialogue with our partner .
The association agreement which we signed with Morocco contains a very precisely worded Article 2 which is concerned with respect for human rights in Western Sahara .
I would simply like to repeat my previous two questions .
Does the European Council intend to react to the acts of harassment , in particular the measures taken to dismiss several Saharawi representatives who met an ad hoc delegation from the European Parliament over a year ago ?
Does the Council intend to protest against the ten-year prison sentences handed down to three Saharawis in March ?
Do these questions not fall within the scope of respect for human rights and Article 2 of the association agreement with Morocco ?
My reply , which I think must have been clear , is that the Council , which of course also has the association agreement with Morocco in its hands , is exhausting all the means of persuasion at its disposal to bring about respect for human rights and a solution to this major issue and to condemn incidents such as those to which the honourable Member and her honourable friends referred , with the means and tools at its disposal .
Consequently , I can only repeat these findings and statements as far as the Council 's policy is concerned .
The Council is making every possible effort and it will continue to do so along the same lines , so that it can deal with these incidents , be they in the Western Sahara or in any of the other numerous places in the world .
May I remind you that we are perhaps the only international body at worldwide level which is trying with such patience and the few resources at its disposal to found , establish and safeguard human rights and freedoms .
I am grateful for the information provided by the President-in-Office of the Council , but one issue remains to be clarified .
The approach adopted by the United States in relation to Palestine has proved ineffective .
The price paid in blood by the people of East Timor suggests that a similar crisis could occur in Western Sahara .
Is the European Union not duty bound to prevent conflicts and crises ?
At present , the Council appears to be focusing on what I would deem almost technical questions . Is it not incumbent on the Council to take the initiative politically , in association with the United Nations ?
Dealing with issues such as the issue we are discussing is one of the Council 's duties .
I really would like the honourable Member of the European Parliament to take account of the fact that it is easy to say that the limits and the tools which the Council has at its disposal should be exceeded here and there in various ways , but there have been a great many discussions , even today , in this House , which demonstrate that the European Union is not a superpower , it is not an agency which can intervene as and where it likes in order to impose its views and its values .
Consequently , what it can do is fight in the way it is fighting and organise itself so that it can strengthen its position on the international stage and raise its profile and exert more influence on the issues of interest to it .
Mr President , thank you for the reply , but let me ask you this , briefly and succinctly : are you prepared to ensure , are you prepared to intervene , so that the thirteen persons - the delegation of human rights activists whose passports were confiscated in Casablanca - are given back their passports and are able to resume their journey to the 59th session of the Commission on Human Rights in Geneva ?
One member of the delegation is a laureate , Mohammed Dadash , who spent nineteen years in prison and who was awarded a human rights prize by the Ravdo Foundation in Norway .
I shall look into the matter .
Whether or not I am prepared to intervene personally is not a personal matter for me .
I shall look into the matter and if the Council can do something along these lines , we shall see to it .
I should like to say that I am from a country which also lived through times such as these at one point and that we are very sensitive to these situations at a personal level .
However , we are not here in a personal capacity , we are here in the capacity of President-in-Office of the Council and we therefore have to respect the common view and the common position of the Council and operate within that framework .
Mr President , Mr Yiannitsis , President-in-Office of the Council , I wonder if you have noticed where the honourable Members putting questions to you are seated ?
I am aware of the conclusions arrived at by the United Nations Legal Service on this matter , of course . Nonetheless , has the Council considered measures to control the actions of European multinationals , especially oil companies , to ensure the natural resources of Western Sahara are not exploited whilst the self-determination process takes place ?
What guarantees can we give the people of Western Sahara , through the Council , that we will not allow their natural resources to be exploited by European Union multinationals during the self-determination process ?
Perhaps the honourable Member could show me how to talk into the microphone and look at someone behind me at the same time ?
Mr President , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , recently , there are more and more reports of Europeans disappearing between Algeria and Tunisia .
The current figures are four Swiss , eight Austrians , one Dutch , one Swede and fifteen Germans .
Are you aware of these incidents , and is the Council considering taking joint action to free or locate these fellow citizens ?
This is something I know nothing about and I reserve the right to see what reply the Council can give .
Mr President , President-in-Office of the Council , I am not sure whether my ironic remark annoyed you .
In any case , I apologise . I had no intention of causing offence .
I would ask you please to answer my question . What guarantees can we give the people of Western Sahara , through the Council , that we will not allow their essential natural resources to be exploited by European Union multinationals during the course of the self-determination process ?
I would like to apologise again for any offence I may have caused and add that I did not understand your reply .
The meaning can sometimes vary , depending on the language .
Mr Yiannitsis may reply if he wishes to do so .
I do not know if there was some misunderstanding .
If there was , I am very sorry .
What I understood from the translation was that the honourable Member commented on why , when I am talking into the microphone , I do not look at the person who asked the question and to whom the reply is addressed .
Because , quite simply , when the person who asked the question is over there , I cannot see him .
I am very sorry , but that is what I understood from the translation .
As far as the question of exploiting deposits and natural resources is concerned , the Council , precisely because this stage is a very delicate stage in the negotiations , does not consider it advisable for activities such as these to be furthered .
As I explained , Question No 13 was deemed inadmissible pursuant to the Rules of Procedure .
We will therefore now move on to the following question .
Question No 14 by Eurig Wyn ( H-0146 / 03 ) :
Subject : Western Sahara and the UN Convention on the Law of the Sea
Taking into account the status of non-self-governing territory of Western Sahara over which , according to the UN , the Kingdom of Morocco has no administrative power , as this status could not be conferred unilaterally by Spain in the Madrid Treaty ;
Taking into account that at the time of the signing of this treaty , Spain had not extended the jurisdiction of Saharan waters to 200 miles and given that according to the international legal order and the UN Convention on the Law of the Sea , the Kingdom of Morocco , as an ' occupying ' country , cannot extend the jurisdiction of these waters , nor include in its Exclusive Economic Zone ( EEZ ) these Western Sahara fishing grounds ;
What is the Council 's opinion on this issue and what measures will it take to respect the Convention on the Law of the Sea in its relations with the Kingdom of Morocco ?
The declaration on the competence of the European Communities with regard to matters governed by the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea of 10 December 1982 and the Agreement of 28 July 1994 relating to the implementation of Part XI of the Convention sets out the list of issues for which the Community has sole competence or joint competence with its Member States .
However , defining the limits both of territorial waters and of the economic exclusion zone is not included in the list of matters for which the Community has competence .
As regards the matters set out in the preamble to the question concerning the status of the Western Sahara under international law , the Council would remind the honourable Member that this is a matter for the United Nations Organisation as the international organisation involved in investigating and settling the conflict in the Western Sahara , in keeping with the international rules that derive from the Law of the Sea .
Consequently , the questions raised do not come within the competence of the Council , they come within the jurisdiction of the Kingdom of Spain , the Kingdom of Morocco and the United Nations Organisation .
I would like to ask whether the European Union , in the light of the information conveyed to us , can make representations to the United Nations to at least respond in a constructive manner as to the future status of the Saharan people .
Since the 60s they have been promised a referendum and there has been deliberation and an impasse which is creating a very difficult situation for a large population of people living in refugee camps .
Would it be possible for the European Union , through you , President , to make representations , even by letter , to the United Nations expressing our concern about this very important issue ?
On this issue , I must say that I need to consult the Council in order to be able to reply as to whether the Council is prepared to send such an envoy , in the capacity of observer , to the United Nations in order to help in this direction .
Question No 15 by María Izquierdo Rojo ( H-0157 / 03 ) :
Subject : Preventing sexual harassment in the armed forces
Given the current situation , would it not be worth coordinating and extending provisions on the prevention of sexual harassment in the armed forces , particularly these provisions which have proved effective in certain Member States ?
Is the Council aware that Private Dolores Quiñoa , having been raped and abused by her superior officer in 2000 , has been sent home with no posting and no compensation for the harm she has suffered ?
Is the Council aware that in Spain , where 9.3 % of soldiers are women , no ' Coordinating Advisory Committee on women in the armed forces ' has yet been set up , along the lines of the one NATO established in 1961 ?
President-in-Office of the Council , do you consider it appropriate to adopt measures to prevent sexual harassment in the Armed Forces ? Such measures would prevent the situation Dolores Quiñoa found herself in .
She was the victim of an assault but was then powerless against her attacker . President-in-Office of the Council , you must be aware that , in Spain , victims are defenceless against attackers like Lieutenant Iván Moriano .
Such individuals can act with impunity . You must take into account , Mr President , the fact that a large number of cases of harassment go unreported because victims are ashamed and afraid , or because they fear reprisals .
Lastly , please note that the number of cases actually made public is very high , and is increasing .
President-in-Office of the Council , you do have competencies on coordination and harmonisation in countries like Ireland , the United Kingdom , Sweden , Greece , the Netherlands , Denmark , Portugal , France , Italy and Belgium .
In Ireland for example , of the 60 women in the Armed Forces interviewed , 28 had been subjected to sexual harassment .
In the United Kingdom military courts dealt with 192 violent crimes in the year 2000 alone . Thirty-four of these crimes were of a sexual nature .
President-in-Office of the Council , coordination and harmonisation are needed with a view to establishing measures to prevent sexual harassment in the Armed Forces . I urge you not to evade your responsibility in this area .
I should like to point out to the honourable Member that , as I said , the jurisdiction and responsibility for such matters lies in principle with the Member States .
There is criminal law and there are all the forms of the law which of course relate to the matter and must be applied .
If they are not applied , then there are international and European bodies for filing charges against the Member States .
At European Union level , as I mentioned , certain arrangements have been promoted which can be used to deal with such situations , but the directive I referred to would not have been of any use in connection with the incident to which the honourable Member referred .
These are completely different situations .
I believe that the facility for the European Union to intervene in such matters , regardless of anyone 's and / or the Council 's personal preferences , tendencies or wishes , is laid down in the Union Treaties and we must look to them to see what is allowed and , if there is some such facility - and I am not in a position at the moment to say that there is and I do not see where it would derive from - it could be used .
This is one more reason for saying that the review now being carried out in the Convention , human rights and a whole series of similar matters must be finalised and studied at Union level .
Question No 16 by Gerard Collins ( H-0160 / 03 ) :
Subject : Meetings with Ambassadors of the Arab countries
On 10 March 2003 the High Representative for the EU 's CFSP met with the Ambassadors of the Arab Diplomatic Corps in Brussels to exchange views on the latest developments in EU-Arab relations , the Barcelona process and current international issues , including the Middle East and Iraq .
Is the Council in a position to provide more detailed information on the results of the meeting and , in particular , with regard to the events unfolding in the Middle East and Iraq ?

Mr President , the honourable Member will certainly know that Mr Solana , the Secretary-General and High Representative for the CFSP , maintains constant dialogue with many and varied agents and representatives in the region and meets the ambassadors of the Arab diplomatic corps on a regular basis .
The Council is told about these meetings as and when necessary .
The Council would also point out to the honourable Member that Mr Solana repeatedly reports to the European Parliament on recent developments in the region and will obviously continue to do so .
I suggest to the presidency that , with regard to the many genuine difficulties that exist at the present time between Arab countries and the western countries , there is perhaps a need for a study on how best relations between the European Union and these countries might be improved .
Only recently at the opening of an exhibition in Brussels by the ambassador of one of the Arab countries , he availed himself of the opportunity to tell me how difficult things were for him and his colleagues .
He acknowledged that the meetings with Mr Solana were helpful , but urged more meetings , more discussions and more debate because of the very difficult and strange times which exist at present .
Perhaps the President-in-Office might consider how best we can help to bridge the gap that needs to be bridged , particularly in relation to the Palestinian issue and the lack of progress that has been made there .
I agree with the honourable Member .
I would remind you of the efforts the Greek Presidency has made , of the trips and contacts made by the Minister for Foreign Affairs , Mr Papandreou , including in cooperation with other Ministers for Foreign Affairs from other countries , in order to arrange meetings with Arab countries and ongoing consultations , precisely on the issues of burning interest to the region .
I thank Mr Collins for asking this question at such a sensitive moment in the Iraq crisis .


I should like to ask the President-in-Office to convey the view of many of our members - including , I am sure , Mr Collins and certainly myself - that the roadmap to peace should become a reality ; and also , on our behalf , to inform Mr Solana that we should redouble our efforts to make that a reality , given the sensitivities in the region following the Iraq crisis .
The position taken by the honourable Member is not , of course , a question , but I should like to point out that the Council recently took the position that the question of the Middle East , the Palestine question , should be very high on the agenda for action .
A solution has to be found .
The road map must be publicised and made binding , and efforts must be made so that we arrive at a result within a reasonable period of time in accordance with the road map .
I am in a position to know in this respect that the High Representative , Mr Solana , and the Council wish to work to achieve this objective .
Question No 18 by Brian Crowley ( H-0164 / 03 ) :
Subject : Alternative energy research and development fund
Given the high price of oil on world markets , does the Council consider that now is the time to establish a well-resourced EU alternative energy research and development fund and , if so , will it call on the Commission to bring forward the necessary proposals for the 2004 and subsequent budgets ?
I would remind the honourable Member of Article 163 , Paragraph 3 of the Treaty , which states that , ' All Community activities under this Treaty in the area of research and technological development , including demonstration projects , shall be decided on and implemented in accordance with the provisions of this title ' , i.e. Title XVIII on research and technological development , especially the multiannual framework programmes referred to in Article 166 .
Consequently , research and development in the field of alternative energy sources is conducted and funded within the framework of the framework programme .
The current framework programme was introduced under Decision 1513 / 2002 for the sixth framework programme of the European Community for research , technological development and research activities , contributing to the creation of the European Research Area and to innovation for the period 2002-2006 .
The framework programme , under the thematic priority ' sustainable development , global change and ecosystems ' , provides funding for research and development of sustainable energy systems in the following sectors : clean energy , in particular renewable energy sources and their integration in the energy system , including storage , distribution and use ; energy savings and energy efficiency , including those to be achieved through the use of renewable raw materials ; alternative motor fuels ; fuel cells , including their applications ; new technologies for energy carriers , transport and storage on a European scale , in particular hydrogen technology ; new and advanced concepts in renewable energy technologies with a significant future energy potential and requiring long-term research efforts ; disposal of carbon dioxide associated with cleaner fossil fuel plants .
A sum of EUR 810 million has been earmarked for these research activities during the framework programme .
I would also remind you that the sixth framework programme of the European Atomic Energy Community , again for 2002 to 2006 , has earmarked a budget of EUR 750 million for research into controlled thermonuclear fusion , which could contribute to long-term energy supplies and consequently to the requirements of sustainable development for reliable centralised basic load electricity production .
Further details on research to be carried out and specific financial allocations are contained in the specific decisions establishing the programmes .
Consequently , the Council , under the codecision procedure with the European Parliament , has I think provided substantial funds for research into alternative and renewable energy sources and energy savings and energy efficiency .
I would like to thank the President-in-Office for his very detailed answer .
I would have some dispute with you with regard to thermo-nuclear fusion being an alternative energy source , because it already exists .
However , there are three reasons why I ask this question .
Firstly , in the State of the Union address that President George Bush gave in January of this year , he committed , and the Congress approved some time afterwards , USD 7.8 billion to be put aside over the next ten years for research into hydrogen cell-fuelled automobiles .
The road map that they set out is that by the year 2025 the first cars will be in mass production , and that by 2035 they will be in widespread use across the US .
My second reason is , as we have seen in the recent past with the conflict in Iraq , the instability with regard to the price of oil , and the effect that it can have on the economies here in Europe that are so dependent on fossil fuels .
Third is the question of our commitments to Kyoto and to a clean fuel technology , using wind , water , air and solar energy .
Other alternatives can be looked at and a special fund set up to keep us up to speed with what is happening in America in that regard .
Those are the reasons for my question .
I would again point out that there is no new question here .
However , I should also like to point out to the honourable Member that we should not compare spending by the American administration on alternative energy sources with spending by the European Union for the same purpose .
We need to add spending by the European Union to national spending for the same purpose by the governments of the 15 at present or the 25 in the future in order to reach a comparable figure .
Having said which , it is a known fact and everyone agrees on the need to promote alternative energy sources in order to combat the problems of environmental pollution and other pressures on the environment .
Mr President , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , on Monday this week , we debated category 3 very intensively under the heading of internal policies , and one area which is of particular concern to the Committee on Industry , External Trade , Research and Energy is of course intelligent energies .
In category 3 , more than EUR 500 million is now newly available .
Do you think that in this area , we could make the development of these intelligent energy technologies a particular priority - also in the ten new accession countries , which have today been confirmed by Parliament ?
In other words , do you think we could step up these initiatives in this area too ?
I think that this issue has to do with proposals by the European Commission as to how these initiatives can be taken into account .
Having said which , as with other issues , unless it consults the members of the Council , the presidency cannot answer yes or no to something which has not been discussed .
As the author is not present , Question No 19 lapses .
Question No 20 by Liam Hyland ( H-0167 / 03 ) :
Subject : Older farmers and the demographic debate
The Commission has indicated its concerns about the impact of ageing populations on labour markets and potential growth issues and says there must be a clear economic incentive for people to stay in the labour market .
The Heads of State or Government have set Europe the goal of becoming a dynamic area by raising potential growth rates to 3 % by 2010 .
Will the Council state where it believes the farming sector and older farmers fit into this demographic debate ?
Taking account of the impact of the ageing of the population on the job markets and its possible impact on the development and sustainability of social protection systems , the Member States agreed in Stockholm to increase the employment rate of elderly workers by 50 % by 2010 .
The European Council in Barcelona called for a further gradual increase of approximately 5 years in the actual average age of retirement from the job market by 2010 .
According to the joint employment report for 2002 , all the Member States consider elderly workers to be the most important source of manpower and have started to try either to discourage early retirement or to provide incentives for people to stay in work longer and , at the same time , to create a framework which facilitates gradual retirement from active employment , thereby combining both approaches .
In its contribution to the spring Council on 21 March 2003 , the Council included increasing the job supply and the participation of all groups and promoting a longer working life as one of its nine priorities , in order to achieve the three primary targets of the European employment strategy .
The Council is waiting for the Commission to include this priority in the employment guidelines and the Commission expects to submit the employment guidelines in April 2003 .
Finally , the Council recognises the importance of maintaining farming activities in order to achieve balanced agricultural development in the European Union and prevent a reduction in the population in rural areas .
I thank the President-in-Office for his comprehensive reply .
I am sure he is aware of the declining age profile of European farmers .
In fact one of the great threats to the continuity of agriculture is the fact that our farmers are getting older and older .
On the other hand , we have an early farm retirement scheme , which is an excellent scheme but which requires farmers who qualify to totally remove themselves from their involvement in agriculture .
In the context of the proposed revision or review of the early farm retirement scheme , I put it to the President-in-Office that perhaps he should consider making it possible for retiring farmers not to have to opt out totally , but to remain in partial employment , because even from a psychological point of view that is extremely important .
It makes no sense to require a farmer retiring under the farm retirement scheme to opt out totally of a career in which he has spent his whole life .
I think the honourable Member has expressed a thought which could be studied .
We all know , I think , how complicated situations are in which you have to try and reduce protection in the agricultural sector without causing an exodus from farming , on the one hand , and decide how to manage the question of the retirement age on the other , because the population is ageing on our continent and this is undermining the foundations of the pension system .
There are various problems in relation to the employment rate , which we are also trying to increase .
I referred in the form of an example to certain situations which are difficult to reconcile .
You have to find the optimum balance , to put it one way .
The proposal made in this respect , as I understand it , takes this approach and I am certain that the Commission could assess it and evaluate it in its proposals for the employment guidelines .
These proposals will also be a major reform of the employment guidelines decided five years ago in Luxembourg .
Question No 21 by Seán Ó Neachtain ( H-0169 / 03 ) :
Subject : Digital literacy in schools and universities
Having regard to the importance of ensuring digital literacy for all , starting from a very young age , thereby ensuring that everyone has the ability to use the Internet , will the Council state if it has assessed the Commission 's proposal for a programme to combat digital illiteracy and promote virtual campuses and virtual twinning of schools , and what does it consider needs to be done by the Member States to ensure that schools and universities throughout the EU can play their full part in making this programme a success , and what does the Council consider the next steps should be ?
The Council wishes to state that it is not in a position at this stage to comment on the content of its position on this programme , given that the proposal on eLearning is being discussed at this stage within both the Council and the European Parliament .
I want to thank the President-in-Office for his reply .
However , I am disappointed that there is no further evidence of any development in regard to digital literacy .
Things are happening in this important field .
At this stage I would like the Council to offer some hope in a very important area where there is obviously not enough work being done to promote this important aspect of education .
This whole revolutionary area - as I , being a former teacher , know - has the potential to combat digital illiteracy .
The Council should be very much involved and should come forward in the very near future with plans and with some hope of a definite outcome in this important area .
I understand the honourable Member 's concern about education and digital literacy and the need to promote digital literacy in education institutes .
I too am concerned because I still hold my professorship at the University of Athens , even though my ministerial duties prevent me from exercising it .
I could say that the European Union and the Council , within the framework of the overall Lisbon strategy , have a clear interest in increasing knowledge - it is one of the basic objectives of the Lisbon strategy - and , of course , knowledge today is taking the form to which the honourable Member referred .
The Council cannot comment on this specific proposal and programme because , as I said , it is being discussed within the two institutions .
However , what I can say is that , at general policy level , it is , I believe , known and visible from numerous initiatives , that we are interested in promoting the competitiveness of the Union and hence the key factors that strengthen competitiveness , which nowadays without doubt include the factors referred to in the question .
Question No 22 by Esko Olavi Seppänen ( H-0172 / 03 ) :
Subject : UN mandate for the Macedonia operation
On 27 January I tabled a question to the Council for Question Time to ask whether the EU 's projected operation in Macedonia had a UN mandate and , if not , whether one would be sought in order to ensure the success of the operation .
Since Question Time at the February part-session was cancelled and the President , on account of point 2 of the Guidelines for the conduct of Question Time , did not place it on the March agenda , I shall repeat the question .
Contrary to the assertions of the President 's representative , this question , which I have not had an opportunity to put , was not answered at the March part-session under Item 31 .
The Council is pleased to inform the honourable Member that the Concordia operation under the leadership of the European Union will be carried out following a request to that effect by the Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia .
Regardless of the circumstances , the United Nations Security Council , in application of the Ohrid framework agreement signed in August 2001 , approved Resolution 1371 on 26 September 2001 .
This resolution states , and I quote , that the Council ' endorsed the efforts of member States and relevant international organisations to support the implementation of the Agreement .
In that regard , it strongly supported the establishment of a multinational security presence in the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia to contribute to the security of observers , as requested by that country 's government ' .
Minister , you spoke of this and that and in my country we would say that you were talking nothing but wood and hay .
You completely failed to answer the question I put .
I wish that when you come here to Parliament you would read the question and answer what is asked .
I asked whether you considered that the EU peacekeeping operation commencing in the former Yugoslavian Republic of Macedonia had a mandate from the United Nations .
Please answer the question .
.
( EL ) I stand by what I said .
I think that my reply to the question put by the honourable Member was very , very clear and very specific .
As to whether or not I satisfied him , there is nothing I can do about that .
As the time allocated for questions to the Council has now elapsed , Question Nos 23 to 31 will receive written replies
The next item is the debate on the report ( A5-0103 / 2003 ) by Mr Liese , on behalf of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy , on the proposal for a European Parliament and Council directive on setting standards of quality and safety for the donation , procurement , testing , processing , storage , and distribution of human tissues and cells ( COM ( 2002 ) 319 - C5-0302 / 2002 - 2002 / 0128 ( COD ) ) .
Mr President , I am pleased to be here to discuss the Commission 's proposal for a directive establishing quality and safety requirements for human tissues and cells , submitted to the Council and the European Parliament in June last year .
Let me first express my gratitude to the rapporteur , Mr Liese , and to the members of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy for all their hard work on this important and ambitious directive : important , as it covers a very promising field of medicine ; and ambitious , since it forms a crucial element in our overall health strategy .
May I also pay tribute to the successful and valuable work of the Council of Europe in the area of tissues and cells .
Our proposal for a directive builds on these achievements .
This proposal ensures that the increasing number of patients who are treated with human tissues and cells can trust that these substances are safe .
It is a logical follow-up to the directive on the quality and safety of blood .
Human tissues and cells have become an important part of health care .
Their therapeutic use continues to increase not only in the number of applications , but in the extent to which they can be utilised .
With advances in technology , this is an area that is developing rapidly .
However , the fact that the use of these tissues and cells can result in the transmission of diseases has focused attention on the need for increased safety measures .
The Commission 's proposal sets out requirements for the donation , procurement , and testing of all donations of tissues and cells intended to be applied to the human body .
Quality and safety standards are introduced , whether the tissues and cells are used as source material for transplantation , or for the preparation of medicinal products and medical devices .
When specifically used for transplantation into the human body , the directive introduces requirements for all human cells and tissues at the additional stages of processing , preservation , storage and distribution .
Now let me turn to some of your key concerns .
One of them is how best to deal with embryonic stem cells .
This question has already been addressed in the framework of research .
In the decision on the Sixth Framework Programme for Research , Parliament , Council , and Commission have agreed that Member States are free to regulate or ban the use of such cells , and that such decisions are respected at Community level .
Specific decisions to this effect are expected by the end of this year , and this will be the appropriate context to address this issue .
It does not , therefore , seem appropriate to use this public health directive to prejudge and pre-empt this agreement .
Further concerns have been expressed on organs .
They are excluded from this proposal .
This has been criticised by some of you , yet I remain convinced that it is not appropriate to include organs in the scope of this directive .
The problems to solve in the area of organ transplants are quite different .
We should not forget that the severe shortages , which result in many patients dying , remain a key problem .
However , their transplantation requires a different policy approach due to their specific nature .
As organ transplantation is a highly specialised subject in its own right , the Commission is currently conducting a scientific evaluation of the available options .
At this moment we have not yet completed our assessment .
Following the example of the blood directive and this proposal on tissues and cells , we would like to get the science right first , before tabling a legal instrument in this sensitive area .
Let me assure you that it is a matter to which I attach the utmost importance and am following closely .
Further issues of concern are imports and exports .
It must be acknowledged that the import of tissues and cells from third countries is on the increase .
In order to protect the health of patients in the European Union , we need to ensure that high standards of quality and safety are also applied to these imports .
The proposal provides for a mechanism to establish an EU procedure that will allow a coherent approach to the authorisation of imports and exports .
It is equally important to ensure that no ' sub-standard ' tissues and cells are exported to third countries .
A certain flexibility to comply with third country legislation might be acceptable , but only if at least the same level of safety is ensured .
The ethical issues relating to the use of tissues and cells are indeed sensitive .
But it is because of their very sensitivity that we must rigorously respect the limits of the Treaty .
However well intentioned our motives , we must act within the Community 's proper competences .
Here , I would like to underline a key point .
Article 152 aims to regulate public health issues .
It does not foresee an in-depth regulation of ethical issues .
The Commission considers that a well-balanced compromise has been presented in its proposal , which goes to the very limit of what is legally acceptable given the restrictions of the Treaty .
The relevant Council of Europe documents and the European Group on Ethics have stressed the principle of not-for-profit procurement .
We therefore consider it necessary that the directive does not contradict this principle .
This not-for-profit principle is relevant only for the act of procurement , not for further processing , manipulation , testing , or the manufacturing of products .
For example , it is unacceptable to take a heart valve from a deceased donor and sell it .
However , heart valves are usually treated to ensure the absence of infectious agents and to preserve them so that they can be stored for a longer period .
These and other processes that serve to improve the quality of the heart valve can of course be carried out on a commercial basis .
The Commission 's proposal provides , therefore , the opportunity for private companies to be accredited as a tissue bank , just like public organisations .
And apart from procurement , it does not restrict services or further processing to be carried out on the tissues by a private company .
Finally , another major ethical issue is the question of donor consent .
The International Convention on Human Rights and Biomedicine requires that the consent of donors must be ensured and that they receive appropriate information .
While this proposal fully respects these established principles , it does not set specific ethical rules .
It is for the Member States to set detailed ethical rules , in line with the requirements of subsidiarity .
I look forward to addressing the Commission 's position on the amendments proposed in the report at the conclusion of this debate .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to begin by thanking everyone involved in the intensive debates which contributed to the production of this report . They include our fellow Members in this House - in the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy , but also in the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market , with its rapporteur , Mr Bartolozzi - and everyone who helped us , here in Parliament and in the Commission , to pull in one direction .
We can look back on an intensive process of debate , culminating in a public hearing on 29 January , which involved more than three hundred experts from the EU and the United States .
The Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy supports the Commission 's proposal , but also shares the view of many experts , such as the Standing Committee of European Doctors , that the proposal merely points in the right direction .
In other words , the Commission 's proposal is good , but it does not go far enough .
We have therefore introduced a number of detailed changes .
This applies , for example , to the issue of voluntary unpaid donations .
We want the Member States not only to encourage this principle - as the Commission proposes - but also to safeguard it .
Compensation for donors should , however , be expressly permitted .
Trade in unmodified cells and tissue should be prohibited , as required by the Charter of Fundamental Rights .
However , we want to make it clear that the work with cells and tissue is a task which must involve both the public sector and industry - as the Commissioner has already explained .
We believe that our phrasing is rather more precise and clear .
We cannot keep industry out of this sector , for if industry upholds the standards , its involvement will promote innovation .
We want to make the wording on informed consent more precise , for only then will it offer the protection that is very important , and protecting people who cannot legally give consent themselves is an issue which is very close to our hearts .
As regards the sensitive areas of research with , and cloning of , human embryos , these are also the subject of proposals by members of the committee .
I have not addressed this issue in my draft report , but I think that what the committee finally adopted is a good European compromise .
For example , the phrasing in Amendment No 30 is exactly the same as that already agreed by the Commission , the Council and Parliament in the Sixth Research Framework Programme .
The committee has not adopted any more far-reaching amendments .
After all , the question of what happens to the numerous embryos is still unresolved in the context of the Sixth Research Framework Programme , and requires further debate .
As many of you know , I personally take a very rigorous position on this issue .
I believe that embryonic stem cell research is the wrong route to take , but nonetheless , I think we cannot go further than envisaged by the committee , and that we must leave scope for the Member States to decide whether they want to ban or permit embryonic stem cell research on principle or not .
Amendment No 19 on the Directive 's scope of application prompted a great deal of debate .
The issue is whether the Directive should cover , not only clinical trials , but also in vitro research .
The committee is in favour of the Directive covering in vitro research as well , but only as regards the donation and procurement of cells and tissue .
The reason for this initiative by the committee is that we believe that the protection of donors must be viewed independently of the question whether the tissue is to be used for transplants or for research purposes .
The donor must be protected in every case , and his or her rights must be respected .
How can we justify it to the public if we say that the donor has the right to informed consent , and trade in his / her cells and tissue is not permitted if it is intended for transplants , but all these rights can be disregarded if the purpose is research ?
We really cannot present that kind of proposal to the public .
Amendment No 19 is therefore a good compromise .
There are individual speakers who say that Article 152 is not an adequate legal basis for the committee 's more far-reaching proposals .
I have spoken to many legal experts and my view on this issue is that the legal basis is entirely viable for the more far-reaching proposals that we have put forward , because everything we have proposed concerns not purely ethical issues but ethical issues relating to the health of donors and recipients .
In contrast to the issue of anonymity or reconstruction of the cadaver - issues that the Commission has indeed addressed in its proposal - the relevance to public health can be presented in much clearer terms on the issues that we have addressed .
I therefore request the Commission to reconsider its restrained position on this issue .
We should send out a clear signal to the other institutions and adopt the committee 's report .
Mr President , Commissioner , this proposal for a directive seeks to introduce safety and quality standards to regulate therapeutic activities based on the use of human-derived tissues and cells , which are carried out in Europe every year and now concern hundreds of thousands of patients .
The sector is also certain to expand , not only in the traditional field of transplants - for example , corneal and skin grafts and heart valves - but also , as a result of advances in biotechnology , in those of reconstructive surgery , reproductive medicine and the treatment of disorders such as cancer , diabetes and Parkinson 's disease .
It is therefore undoubtedly of interest to research centres and European firms and must be allowed to develop .
Nevertheless , respect for ethical imperatives is vital in the use of tissues and cells of human origin .
The proposal for a directive in question therefore lays down high safety and quality standards relating to substances of human origin , in order to protect health .
However , these ethical imperatives need to be still better defined .
The first issue concerns the need to ensure complete safety from the point of view of health , in order to prevent or reduce the risk of disease transmission in the case of human tissues and cells from third countries too .
Secondly , respect for the human body must be assured with regard to removal from both living and deceased donors .
In this connection , the requirement for informed consent on the part of the donor , supplied in a specific form either by the donor or by next of kin is particularly important , as is the prohibition of the removal of cells or tissues from foetuses originating from the voluntary interruption of pregnancy or from cloned human cells .
The third issue concerns respect for privacy and protection of the confidentiality of the information collected when tissues are removed .
Donation must be anonymous as regards both the donor and the recipient ( except for the requirements regarding traceability ) .
Personal and family data may not be disclosed to third parties ( for example , employers or insurance companies ) ; this is also to avoid the risk of unjustified discrimination .
The fourth principle concerns the fact that donation is unpaid .
This represents a voluntary act of human solidarity which may , however , be appropriately encouraged by specific measures and by proper information on the part of the Member States .
This requirement must be retained , not least with regard to imports from third countries .
On the basis of these considerations , I believe that , over all , the directive can be said to represent a step forwards in the harmonisation of Member States ' legislation , allowing Member States to provide greater protection for the health of the European citizens .
Mr President , first of all , let me join the rapporteur in welcoming this report from the Commission .
It is an important measure to regulate the quality , safety and procedures for cells and tissues used for transplants .
The key is the protection of human health .
I echo the Commissioner 's words in congratulating the rapporteur , Mr Liese , who has ably steered a path , strengthening the protection of human health , ensuring informed consent and avoiding most of the pitfalls of previous debates in this area of human endeavour .

When I see amendments put down and signed in the names of both Mr Liese and Mr Nisticò , I know that this is a measure where there has been enormous effort to bring about a meeting of minds and views .
That will stand this measure in good stead .
The Commission proposal was a good one but perhaps could be improved .
The report to Parliament introduces improvements in some areas but perhaps left some issues needing clarification .
Some of the changes may be unhelpful .
The new amendments , such as the one excluding industry to which the Commissioner referred when he talked about industry 's fears that trading activities might be affected or constrained , are also to be welcomed .
I acknowledge that there is an issue over the Amendment 7 , which included research in the scope of the directive .
One could express mild surprise that it was deemed to be in order .
It certainly exercised health charities and researchers .
We need to consider whether it has a place in this measure or not .
On the other hand there are issues that need to be clarified in the way that this measure does .
We should not include organs in this measure on cells and tissues .
Organs are for another day .
Equally , this is not the time to permit cloned human embryos or hybrid human animal embryos to have their cells and tissues used for transplants .
The demise of Matilda , the Australian sheep which disintegrated , serves as an awful warning that this is a very young area of science and experiment and , leaving aside the ethical issues , one that should not be permitted now , simply on the grounds of the potential severe and uncertain impact on human health .
Another issue is the question of remunerated donation .
It is a problem that arose in Mr Nisticò 's report on blood .
It was recognised then that we have different traditions and needs .
Voluntary donation is preferable but not always possible .
We will have to look again at this to see if we can find a form of words that will cover our many traditions and needs .
I suspect that we will end up not a million miles from the excellent formula that Mr Nisticò incorporated in his blood and blood products directive .
Mr President , on behalf of the PSE Group I welcome this proposal and many of the amendments tabled by colleagues , and those tabled by the rapporteur who has already worked very hard to find a sensible way forward on this .
The proposal is indeed needed to set EU-wide minimum standards on the use of human tissues and cells .
There is a growing and cross-border trade in human tissues and cells across Europe for research in laboratories and clinics and for the production of medical and pharmaceutical products .
We now need to bring forward a European-wide framework in which to control this .
It is currently controlled only by a patchwork of national laws .
But with this increasing trade we need basic standards to guarantee human health , and safety standards on the issues of donation , procurement , compensation and consent .
We need to establish a clear European-wide framework in which the industry can operate and in which people can be confident and public safety ensured .
We can guard against profit-driven markets that might exploit the vulnerable individual and the possible transmission of disease or infection .
We need to operate on a not-for-profit principle and apply that to all donations in all Member States across the whole of the European Union .
There is a danger that some people , driven by financial necessity , might perhaps be persuaded to donate cells , either here within the European Union or perhaps in the developing world , for financial gain .
We must find a way to stop that .
We must get the balance right .
We want to rule out the sale of human tissues for cash , but leave the door open for limited financial compensation for the donor .
It is quite clear to me that if you need two weeks off work for a bone marrow transplant it is not unreasonable for some form of payment to be made to your employer .
These new rules will set the necessary minimum safety criteria for the use of tissues and cells across Europe .
Minimum standards on donation and compensation based on a not-for-profit system are essential .
We should also have clear rules on the issue of stem cell research , including embryonic stem cells but excluding cloning for human reproduction .
If we can establish these minimum standards of donor consent , we will protect the vulnerable individuals who could be persuaded into donating cells under pressure .
However , I cannot entirely support all the amendments tabled by some of my colleagues .
Those amendments seeking , for example , to ban or restrict the use of embryonic stem cells totally are doing the European public no favours .
They are not protecting human health , nor are they protecting the vulnerable .
I wish that MEPs and pressure groups that argue the need so strongly to defend ethical principles were equally vocal in their defence of the sick and the vulnerable , like my young constituent Zain Hashmi , who this week was able with his parents to get permission to utilise these new technologies to protect his life and safeguard his future .
Without these kinds of new technologies , the future for young men like that is extremely bleak .
I sincerely hope that we can take this proposal forward with sensible steps , bearing in mind the key issues of protecting human health and safety and protecting the public and vulnerable individuals from exploitation .
I commend the report to the House , but not all of the amendments .
Mr President , first of all , following the example of previous speakers , I should like to congratulate our rapporteur , Mr Liese , for the high level of contact which he has maintained , right from the beginning , with all the parties concerned and , of course , with the various nominal rapporteurs , in order to produce this report , which represents an overall balance .
This compromise was difficult to achieve , between the advocates of subsidiarity , the supporters of ethics at any price and all those , including myself , who want to respond to the expectations and hopes placed in us by millions of patients in Europe , without , however , hindering the development of the European biotechnology sector .
Indeed , thanks to the grafting of corneas , heart valves , bones , tendons and skin , the lives of patients are actually prolonged and improved .
Just to give one example , repairing the damage caused by major burns involves nearly twenty thousand European citizens every year , while 60 000 diabetics had to have amputations in 2002 because of the lack of any effective procedure for reconstructing skin .
We must be clear about this : all these people awaiting treatment will either not be treated or will be badly treated if tomorrow the European Parliament adopts a moralistic stance and prohibits , directly or indirectly , research into stem cells , embryos and germ gene therapy .
That is the reason why the majority of the Liberal group is firmly opposed to a good thirty of the amendments , in particular Amendments Nos 30 , 31 , 36 , 37 , 46 and 50 , but I do not propose to list all of them here .
One fundamental reminder is necessary : we are concerned here with a public-health issue , based on Article 152 of the Treaty .
It is therefore a matter of quality criteria , approval standards , qualifications , staff training , traceability tests , and the setting up of a European network bringing together the registers of national tissue banks .
This is what lies at the heart of the proposal , and I have heard very little about it , since ethical issues have overtaken it .
Nevertheless , at the committee stage we did reach a compromise on organ donations , on the highly sensitive question of voluntary and non-remunerated donation , on umbilical cord blood donations and on fair access to the various treatments for all patients .
We are determined not to let all these advances be reduced to nothing here because some people are confused between the European Parliament and the Council of Europe . It is not Europe 's objective or ambition to harmonise ethics , and having a conscience in matters of science has never treated anyone .
For all these reasons , the Liberal group , in self-defence , reserves the right to vote against this report and to go back to the Commission 's balanced proposal .
Mr President , Commissioner , Mr Liese , ladies and gentlemen , we are familiar with the development of treatments based on the use of tissues and cells of human origin .
There are hundreds of thousands of such treatments every year .
It was therefore a matter of urgency that the Commission should propose a draft directive seeking to draw up new quality and safety standards in order to increase public confidence in the use of such tissues and cells in and on the human body .
I therefore approve the Commission 's action without reservation , and I support it .
Unfortunately , as someone has already said this evening , there are too many amendments , leading in every direction , and this threatens to change the nature of the initial draft , thereby depriving us of regulations which are , however , urgently needed .
This is why this evening , in this debate , on behalf of the GUE / NGL , I should like to remind the House of the three fundamental principles which lead me to oppose many of these amendments .
The first principle is that we must not take advantage of a draft directive , the need for which nobody would deny , in order to broaden its scope so as to include sectors which will have to have special regulations , or which have such regulations already .
Above all , we must not use this draft as a means of opening debates about stem cells , embryonic cells and supernumerary cells , about research into these subjects , or even about voluntary termination of pregnancy .
Many amendments contain these objectives , camouflaged , to a greater or lesser extent , by good intentions , and for that reason we shall not be voting in favour of them .
The second principle is that research and science should be enclosed by ethical rules in order to avoid irresponsible actions which are dangerous to the human species , but they must not be prevented by religious prohibitions , from whatever quarter .
This is a basic rule of secularity .
It is a necessary condition in order to guarantee progress .
Here again , there is no shortage of amendments which should be rejected in the name of this principle .
The third principle is that the human body should not be available for sale , for purchase or for theft .
On this point at least we must all be agreed , and we must also be agreed on the fact that this principle implies , firstly , a real and explicit willingness on the part of the donor and , secondly , explicit protection of the anonymity of the donor and of the recipient .
Any exception would be a source of all kinds of abuses and excesses .
However , that does not prevent traceability , which guarantees that the quality of transplants can be controlled .
Thirdly , the fact that donations should be given without remuneration should not even be a matter for discussion : human bodies are not commercial goods .
In conclusion , I repeat that the development of these therapeutic treatments is such that a European directive is essential .
However , this development also makes it essential , at the same time , for the European Parliament , in other words for us , to show rigour and respect for the great principles which very many of us have in common and which we cannot allow to be called into question , even insidiously .
Mr President , we welcome many of the points contained in Mr Liese 's report .
In particular we support the amendments which seek to exclude from the scope of this directive tissues and cells originating from human embryos or genetic engineering , insofar as there is no European legislation defining the use of gene therapy .
One compromise , however , is causing us problems , and that is the one concerning voluntary and non-remunerated donations of human tissues and cells .
What we want is a guarantee that such donations will be unpaid .
In order to achieve such a guarantee , it is necessary to define specifically , in this directive , the legitimate and acceptable level of compensation , which in our opinion is the reimbursement of travelling costs and income lost during the period required for the journey , the donation , and any rest period which is necessary , plus refreshments and that sort of allowance , but nothing more .
Otherwise we shall be leaving the door open to compensation - or even remuneration - for such donations , with all the foreseeable abuses in terms of quality and safety , and the risks that would result for both donors and recipients .
As the previous speaker said , bodies are not commercial goods .
Our cells and tissues are not for sale .
Another fundamental principle of this directive is that of anonymity , which must be compatible with the traceability of the tissues and cells .
The proposal by the European Commission , enhanced by the amendments of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy , has succeeded in taking both of these principles into account .
The plenary session of this Parliament should not call into question this fragile equilibrium by adopting amendments seeking to remove anonymity from donors of gametes and therefore of sperm donations , or to make tissue and cell distribution records available to the public , and I am referring here to one amendment in particular .
The transparency argument is ill-advised in this case .
The need to trace tissues and cells destined for transplantation from the donor to the recipient should not work to the detriment of anonymity .
That would be to leave the door open to abuses of an ethical , eugenic or even racial nature .
Finally , we would ask the Commission , which did not want to include organs within the scope of this directive , to propose as a matter of urgency a specific text for establishing quality and safety standards in respect of organs .
I believe that this report is a balanced one .
We should continue to work in this direction , including during subsequent readings .
Mr President , I commend the rapporteur , Mr Liese , for his conscientious work on this very sensitive and technical subject .
I know that he has consulted widely with the political groups in order to make his report as reflective as possible of the various concerns and opinions .
I commend the Commission for taking this initiative under Article 152 .
This is a relatively new area for EU legislation .
It is important , as with the blood directive , to get things right .
It is also important that actions taken in the medical sphere be properly positioned within the ethical framework .
This framework must naturally take due account of national practices .
The Commission is certainly aware of the speed and efficiency with which this proposal was dealt with in Parliament .
I sincerely hope that the very helpful set of amendments proposed by the rapporteur on behalf of the committee will be taken on board .
There are a number of areas in which Parliament has clearly improved on the original proposal .
As far as ethical principles are concerned , I welcome the more specific language to reinforce the principle of voluntary , unpaid donations of cells and tissues .
There are clear public health risks involved in attracting the wrong type of donors through turning tissue procurement into a commercial activity .
I strongly support the reinforcement of the consent principle so as to give the maximum protection to donors .
In this respect it is important that the use of aborted foetal tissue be excluded .
Similarly I am opposed to the notion of creating human life for the sole purpose of harvesting tissues , after which this human life is to be disposed of .
This would be in total violation of the concepts of human dignity and the right to life as enshrined in the Charter of Fundamental Rights .
I also endorse those amendments that exclude from the scope of this directive any cells or tissues that are derived from cloned material .
This Parliament has repeatedly voiced its opposition to human cloning .
I want to ask the Commission when we can expect to see a proposal for a directive on organ transplants .
I call on the Commission to give Parliament a commitment in that regard before we cast our vote on this proposal .
Mr President , I recognise the objections of Commissioner Byrne to having organs covered by this directive as well , but there are also arguments in favour of it .
A tissue is a group of cells with the same structure or function .
Organs in their turn consist of different tissues .
Cells , tissues and organs can all be donated , so the quality and safety standards must apply to all three - to organs too .
The transition between organs and tissues is a fluid one .
Because of the scarcity problem that exists with organs , which in fact is also the case with different tissues , a separate directive is perhaps required , but that does not alter the fact that the same quality requirements with regard to donating , etc . , must apply to organs .
In short , will the structure of a directive on organs not correspond closely to the present directive on tissues and cells ?
Do I understand the Commissioner correctly that what is requested in Amendments Nos 6 and 62 , that is a proposal for a directive on organs before the summer of 2003 , is not feasible ?
May we hear something more about the timetable for a directive on organs ?
In the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy , the Commission 's representative supported my Amendment No 99 on cells .
The rapporteur has objections .
Therefore Commissioner , I would like to hear from you what you think .
Otherwise we warmly support this directive , certainly because it refers to fundamental ethical principles that trade must meet .
All praise too for the substantial expert work of the rapporteur , Mr Liese .
On the basis of what I have just said , I am prepared to withdraw my Amendments Nos 96 to 98 and 100 to 102 on organs and I have also secured the cooperation of Mrs Oomen-Ruijten on this , who at the time tabled these amendments with me .
Mr President , Commissioner , I should like , in my turn , to thank the rapporteur , Mr Liese , for his excellent work on information and analysis , in cooperation with all his colleagues , but also with experts at a very high level .
Cell therapy and tissue grafting are areas which offer the hope of treating incurable diseases which leave so many people in pain and anxiety .
However , mastery of this technique alone is not enough to respond to the expectations of sick people .
That is why we need this proposed directive , the objective of which is to ensure that there is a framework of safety and quality standards for human tissues and cells .
As far as voluntary non-remunerative donation and donor anonymity are concerned , the directive cannot impose obligations on Member States by virtue of the European Treaty , but can only make recommendations .
Donation must be non-remunerative .
How could anyone ever imagine trading in human products ?
The saving of a life is a disinterested action , taken with no reward in mind .
Donation should also be voluntary , and therefore requires obligatory informed and written consent by the living donor .
This is why it is essential to inform society about the advisability of these treatments and about the responsibilities of each of us , in a spirit of solidarity , because the health of thousands of human beings can be improved in this way .
The people of our countries are not sufficiently aware of the benefits of human tissue and cell donations .
How many lives have been saved , how many patients treated , by bone-marrow grafts ?
The directive should be accompanied by much more detailed information .
This information should be more reliable and should be based on authentic scientific research .
For example , how many times have we been told that embryonic stem cells would treat incurable diseases , whereas so far nothing has been published to prove this ?
It would be wrong to say that prohibiting the use of embryonic cells would prevent lives from being saved .
There are other alternatives , in particular techniques involving adult stem cells .
Moreover , this observation makes us wonder just which cells are covered by the proposed directive .
I shall be supporting the position of the French Government on three points .
Under Article 152 ( 4 ) of the Treaty , it is not our task to regulate the use of cells of any particular type , such as germ cells or embryonic cells , by means of this directive .
That falls within the jurisdiction of national governments , as do ethical issues involving embryos .
Finally , gametes are not included within the scope of the directive .
I shall be voting in favour of this report , but I shall continue to pay great attention to the issue of respect for the dignity of both the donor and the recipient .
Mr President , Commissioner , I hope with all my heart that this report , into which Mr Liese has poured so much energy , will have a natural birth without the need for forceps like the report on blood , which had long been the subject of controversy but for which we succeeded in finding a solution after many years thanks to active , intelligent , enthusiastic cooperation between Parliament , the Commission and the Council .
I shall mention just a few points this evening - four , in particular .
Firstly , I feel that it is right - as Mr Liese said - that the donation of cells and tissues should be on a voluntary basis and unpaid , a principle already endorsed when the report on blood was adopted .
However , where industry has helped to improve the quality and conservation of cells and tissues , for example by using genetic engineering techniques to make tissues histocompatible , it is right to allow for appropriate payment .
Secondly , I hope that Amendment No 83 , proposed by myself and Mr Liese , will be adopted . It calls upon the Commission to draw up new legislation on the use of retrodifferentiation to create stem cells from adult cells as soon as possible .
The retrodifferentiation of adult cells , achieved by transferring their nucleus , rather than to an egg cell without a nucleus , to a medium rich in nutritive elements and other growth factors , could make it possible to overcome the current ethical problems connected with the therapeutic use of stem cells from human embryos .
Thirdly , as regards the use of stem cells for research purposes , I hope that the rules laid down in the Sixth Framework Programme will always remain in force and that we do not let anything in by the back door today that should not be there .
Fourthly and lastly , I support the Commission 's proposal that the directive should cover the use of cells and tissues for research purposes where this is carried out on human beings but not where experimental research is carried out in vitro or on animal models .
I would therefore call upon the rapporteur , Mr Liese , should Amendments Nos 7 and 19 be adopted , to introduce more flexibility at second reading to avoid unwieldy administrative procedures slowing down research in Europe in key fields such as pharmacogenetics and pharmacogenomics , for example , whose objective is to develop new drugs which are much more effective and have no toxic action .
Mr President , Commissioner , today , biotechnology offers new health policy perspectives which are very welcome .
This also applies to the use of human tissue and cells .
We should capitalise on the positive opportunities afforded by these new developments as far as possible , even if it is clear that from today 's perspective , the prospects are not always as promising as is suggested in some quarters .
However , we should certainly utilise the opportunities .
The use of these new technologies must , however , be measured against the fundamental principles and rules which define the community of values that constitutes the European Union .
A fundamental pillar of this community of values is the Charter of Fundamental Rights of the European Union .
Its basic values include , in particular , respect for human dignity , the principle of non-commercialisation of the human body , and the guarantee that cell and tissue donations may take place only on a voluntary basis , without pressure , and with an understanding of all the implications .
Since the Commission 's proposal touches only on these issues , the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market , which is designated as being responsible for ethical issues in this House , has adopted a number of relevant amendments .
In our view , it is absolutely essential to make it clear that , as in the legislation on donations of blood and blood components , the provision of human tissue and cells should be permitted only on a donation basis , in order to counter any trend towards the commercialisation and objectivisation of the human body .
Let me make it clear : donations of human tissue or cells may only take place voluntarily and without any financial remuneration .
They must also be anonymous , and persons who cannot legally give consent themselves require special protection , for their bodies may not be disrespected , and it must be clear that donations may only be used in the interests of their own health , not for research purposes .
I am thinking specifically of disabled people here .
Let me underline one point in particular : respect for the traditions and cultural differences within the European Union requires that in this law too , Member States must be granted the right to ban the donation and use of cells from specific origins .
This applies particularly to the renunciation of the use of embryonic stem cells in favour of adult stem cells , which have been shown to be just as useful and , indeed , more promising in many cases .
There is , however , a number of proposed amendments which I cannot support under any circumstances , and where I am absolutely of the same opinion as Mr Caudron , who unfortunately has already left .
These are the amendments which try , through the back door , to circumvent abortion , and I think this is something which we cannot accept under any circumstances .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , first of all , I would like to thank Mr Liese very much for his outstanding work on this report .
I would also like to pay tribute , in particular , to his efforts to include social groups in the work on the report as well .
That is very commendable , for the real task here is genuinely to bring together all the social groups - patients ' organisations , but also scientists and others - round the table , and he has been at pains to draw the different positions together .
For us Greens too , it is very important - indeed , I would go as far as to say that it is the priority - to send out a very clear signal to the Member States that embryos may not be used for research purposes .
We do not want to create any incentive for embryos to be produced solely for research purposes .
We also do not want women to be degraded into egg cell or embryo donors .
This is something we must reject , loud and clear .
We must also make it clear that no tissue or cells from embryos in general may be used .
On the issue of embryonic stem cells , too , my position is quite clear : what we are saying is that adult stem cells are just as , if not more suitable .
We cannot awaken any false hopes here .
I would like to mention the damaging reports on gene therapy , which have recently been circulating , in this context .
In this area , far too many false hopes have been awakened for many years , instead of genuinely looking at alternatives .
Science and research without a conscience would be humanity 's ruin .
For this reason , the task must be to send out very clear signals here .
It is also important to emphasise in the report , yet again , that the cloning of humans or embryos is not permitted .
In my view , it cannot be stressed often enough , here in Parliament and indeed elsewhere , that we need a very clear limit .
A great deal has already been said about donations without remuneration , and it is clear , as has already been discussed , that the human body is not a commodity .
For this reason , Commissioner , I would urge you once again to respond positively to the demand which we Greens have tabled .
We are calling on the Commission to put forward a legislative proposal before July 2003 , for the situation on organ donations in particular is making it increasingly clear that the human body or parts thereof are indeed becoming commodities .
In my view , we need very clear European legislation in this area .
Mr President , I would like to start by congratulating the Commission on its proposal and on the speech of the Commissioner presenting it to the House as well .
Mr Liese has certainly striven and is continuing to strive to achieve an acceptable compromise in the House , but I believe that the greatest threat to the quest for such a compromise and to the thorough work of the Commission and many of the Members of the House is the attempt - made by some of the Members - to include issues in the report which have nothing to do with the directive .
In particular , I feel that Mr Bartolozzi 's opinion and the position of many of the Members who have attempted and are still attempting to surreptitiously introduce the issue of the interruption of pregnancy and embryonic stem cells into the directive are severely jeopardising the good work which many of the Members are striving to carry out .
For our part , as Radical members of the Emma Bonino List , we can only vote against all the amendments which seek to introduce such issues in this way .
This does not mean - and I am addressing Mrs Montfort and the other Members who have raised the point - that we are claiming that embryonic stem cells are the magic answer to all genetically-related problems and disorders ; we merely feel that these research possibilities should not be eliminated and that they should certainly not be eliminated through a directive which is concerned with other matters , which seeks to regulate pragmatically a promising market and an activity which is necessary for the life and health of many European citizens .
We must not become a Parliament which persists in making every vote a vote on a moral principle , as if we were trying to establish a ' single European moral code ' .
Let us rather find political , pragmatic , practical solutions to the issues raised by the directive , which , through the directive , the Commission is attempting to resolve .
Mr President , Commissioner , representatives of the Council , ladies and gentlemen , according to its title , this report claims to deal with safety and quality standards for human tissues and cells .
However , we are well aware that such a text could not fail to mention ethical principles , and that is why a large part of the debate has centred on those issues .
Keen as we are on the concept of voluntary , anonymous and non-remunerated donation , we would have liked to see a firmer stand taken on this subject , and we had already expressed this desire when we had the vote on the report on blood , and had occasion to reaffirm it when we examined the report on organs .
We therefore regret that the objectives of voluntary , anonymous and non-remunerated donation are the subject of mere recommendations , rather than clear commitments , since the absence of any timetable for achieving these objectives means that Member States are not obliged to take all necessary steps to implement projects and policies towards achieving those objectives .
We deplore this and we therefore ask the Commission to carry out a regular evaluation of the progress made in this area at Member State level .
We must not ignore the fact that the safety and traceability of donations will be better guaranteed if those donations originate from a country within the European Union which is subject to our legislation .
Another of our objectives should be self-sufficiency at EU level .
Moreover , trafficking linked to trade in cells and tissues in certain third countries should make us extremely vigilant when we import such products , because if we are not vigilant we might be regarded as passive accomplices in such activities .
In addition , the European Union 's Charter of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms states that it is prohibited to make the human body , and parts thereof , a source of profit .
This is why we should vote in favour of Amendment No 77 and Amendment No 1 .
With regard to donor anonymity in the case of gametes , and the proposal which has been made , to the effect that such anonymity should be removed , I wonder whether , if this happened , there might be a risk that donors of sperm and oocytes , of which even now there are not enough to satisfy demand , would be put off from entering into such a commitment .
Finally , it seems to me important that the Member States and the Commission should establish a centralised data bank which would receive all available information on approved establishments , on the products handled , and on bio-monitoring .
Mr President , regrettably this directive was not referred to the Committee on Industry , External Trade , Research and Energy .
The proposed directive ' on setting standards of quality and safety for the donation , procurement , testing , storage and distribution of human tissues and cells ' is a very important piece of legislation and much to be welcomed .
I rehearsed the full title of this directive because it is important to recognise what it does encompass and what it does not encompass .
Specifically , recital 6 states : ' this Directive does not cover research using human tissues and cells ' .
It is a public health measure under Article 152 of the Treaty .
Unfortunately , and quite unacceptably , the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy 's Amendment 7 proposes to change recital 6 to : ' this directive also covers research using human tissues and cells ' .
In similar vein , its Amendment 19 to Article 2 ( 1 ) , proposes to delete the limiting phrase ' for application to the human body ' , thus opening the directive 's full provisions to in vitro research in laboratories , or even school rooms , where no application to the human body is involved .
I do not have time to go into all the other problems with this report .
There are technical difficulties concerned with consent by donors , and anonymity of donors .
There are highly questionable forays into areas of ethics which are irrelevant for the purpose and legal basis of this directive .
Even the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market has seen fit to insert the legally undefinable term ' fundamental ethical principles ' into what purports to be a legal legislative text .
Very importantly , there are attempts to impose European prohibitions on ethical aspects of research and therapy which are clearly the subject of the subsidiarity principle and which it must remain the right of Member States to decide .
I have the greatest regard for my colleague , Mr Liese , and I accept his assurances that he tried to maintain a balanced approach to this subject .
Unfortunately , the result contains many unacceptable points .
Only if these are eliminated between now and the final vote will it be possible for me to support his report .
Mr President , I attach great value and give my full support to Doctor Liese 's work in this report , which establishes guidelines for the processing of human tissue in the European Union , which we also call a community of values .
This is a vast subject , so I will just focus on one detail : the processing of stem cells .
It is part of a direct continuum with the work we tried to do in Parliament 's Temporary Committee on Human Genetics the year before last .
We got the message : the business aspect was the hottest area .
Investors were in expectant mood .
Expectations were not so much connected with new medical breakthroughs , but mainly the possibility of making lots of money .
The following business hype applies to the field of genetic engineering : you expect to get at least as much for your money out of it as you would out of IT .
In the end what is actually discovered in the research studies does not matter that much .
While we waited for the hype , the fact that there was also an alternative to the cloning of embryonic stem cells - treatment with adult stem cells - was entirely overlooked .
Of course , embryonic stem cells have a greater capacity for differentiating into any sort of tissue .
Recently , however , studies have also opened up promising possibilities in the use of adult stem cells .
The first cells in the human embryo are ' totipotent ' , which means they can differentiate into any cell type .
Pluripotent stem cells , on the other hand , can differentiate into any cell type but they can no longer be used to create a new human being .
Multipotent stem cells can only produce the cells of a certain tissue type , such as nerve , liver or blood cells .
These are also found in adult cells , and it is those that are more interesting from the point of view of therapeutic cloning .
The latest research points to the fact that some stem cells thought to be multipotent might well be pluripotent .
This would mean that there would be no need to make stem cell chains from human embryos after all .
Mr Liese 's report recognises the situation for what it is absolutely correctly , at the same time recognising the ethical problems that are encountered in the processing of embryos .
It is important to say here that a medically sound approach and one that shows ethical wisdom are not necessarily mutually exclusive .
We Christian Democrats say an emphatic ' yes ' to research , at the same time wishing to preserve the sanctity of human dignity right from its frail beginnings .
Mr President , I congratulate the Commissioner , and I congratulate Mr Peter Liese .
After the committee adopted Amendment No 30 , I felt a real need to add here that the Member States should , at the least , uphold the ban on research involving the destruction of human embryos .
You see , I would now like to exercise one of the great achievements of our European continent .
I would like to exercise the achievements of freedom of thought and freedom of conscience .
Please do not try to make matters easy for yourselves by claiming that we are not here to preach morality !
What else is at stake , then , when embryos are destroyed ?
We do not need to harmonise at all , for we all share a common set of ethics which states , at least : you shall not kill !
I respect your opinion , but please respect the opinion of others who say : I will not kill !
Someone once told me that at the very moment when the egg and sperm cells join , a unique person is created - not just anyone , but a person with a specific hair colour and individual qualities - in other words , a human being .
I know there are the famous fourteen days , Mr Purvis .
I am afraid that we do not entirely agree on this issue .
Has individuation occurred or not ?
Am I not already killing ?
Please recognise that people are afraid of having to kill .
Yet perhaps we are discussing all this quite unnecessarily .
Let me tell you that a few days ago , Professor Huber of Vienna University presented his most recent research achievements and findings .
In many years of work on blood obtained from umbilical cord , he has achieved massive successes which give him the justified hope that in a few years , he will be able to generate organs from it .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I spoke at the start in my capacity as rapporteur , and now I have a further three minutes of speaking time on behalf of my group , which gives me the opportunity to address some of the points raised by my fellow Members .
Let me come first to Mrs Ries .
Unfortunately , she was unable to stay for the rest of the debate , but as I have already told her in person , it would be a great shame if , due to the 10 % on which we disagree , the Liberal Group were to vote against the entire report .
I think that many of Mrs Ries 's amendments which have been included in the report are worth adopting by this House in the end .
I therefore appeal to the Liberal Group to reconsider whether they really are prepared , ultimately , to vote against the entire report .
On Mr Bowe 's points regarding a case from his own constituency , where stem cells offer hope for a boy suffering from a serious disease : after he spoke , I went to him and tried to clarify this issue , as it is very important , in my view , to make it clear that these are not embryonic stem cells but adult stem cells from bone marrow .
The experiment nonetheless raises a number of serious ethical questions .
However , it does not involve embryonic stem cells .
This point is very important , to my mind , because at the hearing too , it was made clear that embryonic stem cells have not been transplanted into any patients anywhere in the world .
Apart from the ethical issues , the associated medical risks are simply too great .
In response to Mr Caudron , I would like to say that I am aware of this and I also appreciate the fact that he is so consistent in defending his position that research on human embryos and embryonic stem cells should not be ruled out .
In fact , the committee 's report does not do so anyway .
Amendment No 30 is the compromise which Mr Caudron negotiated with the Commission and the Council on the Sixth Research Framework Programme , and Amendments No 86 and No 92 go beyond that .
In my heart , I am with Mrs Flemming , and I endorse her arguments .
However , my head tells me that the compromise identified by the committee is possibly better and forms a better basis for the European Union and the European Parliament .
We should therefore certainly support Amendment No 30 , and on Amendment No 86 , I recommend as rapporteur that we respect freedom of conscience so that everyone can vote as his or her conscience dictates .
Finally , let me make one comment about the legal basis .
I have difficulties explaining to the citizens of Europe that the Commission considers it feasible for us to ban tobacco advertising in regional newspapers but does not ban the trade in cells and tissue running into thousands of euros .
That is not a very coherent position .
Commissioner , I gave you my full support on the ban on tobacco advertising , although on one or two points , I felt that it went too far .
Nonetheless , I was in favour in principle and therefore supported you against a great deal of opposition in Germany .
I therefore ask you to reconsider this issue .
Perhaps you are not yet able to make concessions to us today , but you may be able to do so in the coming weeks and months .
I would like to be able to defend the Commission in Germany and the other Member States , and I do not want to have this lack of coherence which I can no longer defend .
Mr President , firstly I should like to thank the rapporteur , Ms Evans , and the Conciliation delegation , for their invaluable work paving the way for final agreement on this sensitive dossier .
I recognise the major efforts made by both Parliament and the Council towards finding a satisfactory compromise .
The result is a balanced text taking into account the differing positions and interests of each party towards the goal of progressive harmonisation of the veterinary matters raised by the issue of pet movements .
The final obstacles preventing agreement were removed by the Conciliation Committee on 18 February .
However , as regards the amendments concerning comitology , the Commission takes the view that these do not conform to Decision 1999 / 468 / EC , as Article 8 of that Decision should only cover implementation measures aimed at public health objectives .
The Commission therefore wishes to make the following declaration .
' The Commission considers that the wording of Article 24 , paragraphs 2 ( 1 ) and paragraph 3 ( 1 ) of this regulation , is not in conformity with Decision 1999 / 468 / EC , as Article 8 of that decision should only cover implementation measures aimed at public health objectives .
As a consequence , the Commission reserves the right to take appropriate action ' .
Coming back to the favourable outcome of the conciliation procedure , I repeat that this regulation is excellent news for pet owners .
The agreement reached by the three institutions on this regulation represents a milestone in the establishment of the internal market and probably the most sensitive one in the animal health area , due to concerns in some Member States in relation to rabies .
Progress has been facilitated by the spectacular success over the past decade of our efforts to eradicate rabies within the European Union .
Indeed we are now nearing total eradication .
To conclude , this regulation will have a huge impact on millions of European citizens who will now be able to travel with their pets , thus bolstering their perception of a united Europe by responding directly to their wishes .
Mr President , the agreement reached on this report in the Conciliation Committee at the end of February is indeed very good news for all pet owners , who will soon be able to travel more easily with their animals throughout the European Union .
What has been commonly labelled the pet passport scheme will make it simpler to cross borders and at the same time ensure high safety standards and the protection of public health .
It is worth mentioning again that the Commission brought forward this proposal as a result of the remarkable success of measures taken to control rabies in recent years .
Due to vaccination campaigns the number of cases of rabies in cats and dogs dropped from nearly 500 in 1991 to a mere 5 in 1998 and , as the Commissioner says , it has almost been eradicated .
This success has enabled the Member States to adopt a set of common rules on pet animal movements which is very welcome .
Whilst there are exceptions for the so-called sensitive Member States - the UK , Sweden and Ireland for five years - in the other 12 EU countries proof of a valid rabies vaccination in the form of a passport document will be the only requirement for taking cats , dogs and ferrets between Member States as long as they also have an electronic microchip for identification , although some Member States may continue to use tattoos for an eight-year transition period .
After that time , only microchips will be allowed as it is a more humane and also a more effective method .
In addition to that , microchips enable details of the pet owner to be recorded so it will be easier to trace lost animals and help combat illegal trade in pets .
It is very important to be able to distinguish between commercial and non-commercial movement of animals .
The UK , Sweden and Ireland can still use quarantine for animals coming in from countries outside the EU where rabies is endemic , but for EU countries and countries where the disease is under control they will require vaccination and a follow-up immunity test before travel .
I would like to highlight briefly a couple of the key points that were raised during the discussion of this report .
One is the OIE International Animal Health Code which Parliament wished to use in its entirety when drawing up the list of third countries deemed to be free of rabies .
This is the position that Parliament has stated in earlier discussions .
However , many countries are now moving away from use of this code and away from the strict rabies-free status ; so adopting the code could actually unnecessarily exclude some countries from this pet travel scheme .
But , more importantly , it could actually be less effective in stopping the spread of rabies .
We must adopt the wording used in the common position .
Similarly , although Parliament expressed concern about the inclusion of animals younger than three months in the scheme , as they could not have been vaccinated , we have been assured that this will not present a danger to public health and can therefore agree to that for 12 of the 15 countries .
There has also been a great deal of debate on the role of Parliament in agreeing any extension to the five-year transitional period for the UK , Sweden and Ireland .
I am pleased that agreement was reached on this point , as it is of paramount importance that decisions relating to a report which has been adopted under the codecision procedure should themselves be subject to codecision when being amended or reviewed .
The Commission will have sufficient time to consult Parliament and the Council following the scientific assessment of this scheme which will be carried out in 2008 .
Similarly , comitology is now limited to implementation measures which Parliament could accept , and the delegation noted the Commission 's statement on this .
A controversial issue earlier on was the inclusion of ferrets in the scheme .
The original Commission proposal included ferrets as a category of pets which would not require any specific animal health requirements , and the common position then changed this by putting ferrets in a separate category , so they will require vaccination and identification .
While many Members have expressed surprise that ferrets can be classed as pets , I can assure them that in Wales , which I represent , there are many ferret owners who will be delighted with this agreement .
This regulation has changed considerably since the Commission first published its proposal , including several aspects relating to animal health and affecting the legal basis used , but we have the basis of a good and effective scheme and one which everyone will welcome .
Finally , I would like to thank my colleagues in the other groups for their cooperation : the animal welfare intergroup for their support ; several other organisations which have provided information and advice ; and also the Commission and the Council for what turned out in the end to be a straightforward conciliation .
We now have to ensure that people are aware of what the scheme means , and of how they can prepare in advance to take their pets with them when they travel .
I look forward , on my travels back and forth , to seeing many pet owners taking advantage of these new rules which will benefit everyone .
Mr President , Commissioner , Mrs Evans has just said everything I wanted to say , and given the late hour , we should perhaps depart from the noble principle that everything has already been said , but not by everyone , so I will refrain from repeating everything all over again .
Let me just make two brief comments in addition to what the rapporteur has said .
Firstly , many thanks to the Commission and the Commissioner .
The conciliation procedure was a real pleasure .
We were very pleased to note , in our group , how much effort was made to make concessions to Parliament here , and since we have often said unflattering things about the Council and the Commission yesterday and today , I would like to take this opportunity to express my warm thanks for this truly outstanding conciliation procedure .
Secondly , I would like to say something in the interests of the dogs themselves .
I have a dog myself , and he has told me that he does not want a microchip or a tattoo .
It is no fun at all for dogs to be dragged about the place .
You see these poor dogs on aeroplanes , barking , whining and whimpering , stuck in those awful cages and having to endure a long flight , and I really do think that anyone who gets a dog or cat should realise that they have acquired a living creature , and if they are not prepared to take proper account of its needs , they should not get an animal in the first place .
Mr President , politicians are often told of the old actor 's advice that you should never go on stage with children or animals .
I fear , Commissioner , that you and I one way or another are on a stage with animals the whole time !
This , however , has been a variant on the kind of health concerns and maladies with which we are only too familiar , and on behalf of my group I want to thank Ms Evans very warmly for the skilful way in which she has negotiated the process of codecision .
She very modestly says that this was straightforward .
No codecision that gets to that stage is ever entirely straightforward .
You need to know when to advance , when to yield a little , and when to see that there may be further room for compromise .
I cannot say that I was entirely happy about the way every part of this procedure went .
I was not entirely happy about the secure position of the ferrets .
I have been very insecure in the presence of ferrets .
I was not entirely happy about the provisions with regard to animals under three months old .
One has some misgivings there about the rationale for what we have done ; but equally the Commission was probably uneasy to some degree about the fact that we have extended into the codecision procedure any further consideration of the exemptions for the UK , Sweden and Ireland , which will follow after five years .
In other words , a standard piece of give and take , the kind of thing that until a few years ago , until we had the present Commission and the present Parliament , was not possible .
It still only works when you have skilled rapporteurs who can go through these shoals .
It has added modestly to the sum total of human happiness as well .
There are many people , lonely people in particular , who are very dependent on the animals with which they share their lives .
If we dare to believe that animals are sentient beings , it is also the case that we have added to the sum of animal happiness as well .
That certainly is the view of my dog , which is the proud owner of two human beings !
Mr President , it is not better animal welfare that is on the agenda at present .
On the contrary , it is the convenience of animal owners , which is being promoted at animals ' expense .
In the EU , there is otherwise a lot about the need to improve animal welfare .
Having a larger number of pet animals being moved around is not in the interests of animal welfare .
On the contrary , it may give rise to unnecessary stress .
Fido and Kit are best off at home .
At worst , transportation may result in illnesses such as rabies being spread to countries that , until now , have been free from rabies , possibly including new EU countries .
The proposal would harmonise EU regulations .
Sweden , the UK and Ireland at present have stricter requirements governing the import of pet animals .
They will now , after five years , be forced to withdraw their sensible requirements .
It makes sense to impose veterinary requirements in connection with the transport of animals .
The EU should adopt a set of minimum regulations and call upon all the EU countries to follow Sweden 's , the UK 's and Ireland 's example .
This would take the form of a proposal that puts health and animal welfare above animal owners ' freedom of movement .
It is wrong in principal to demand that EU countries with high standards in this area should relax their requirements in order to promote freedom of movement .
On the surface of it , it may seem to be a minor matter , but it is an important matter in terms of principle .
By voting in favour , Parliament would be adopting the principle of harmonising down to a level corresponding to the lowest common denominator , at the same time as abolishing Sweden 's , the UK 's and Ireland 's right to be pioneers .
I have therefore requested a roll-call vote on this matter .
I would call for the proposal on freedom of movement for pet animals to be voted against .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon .
The next item is the report ( A5-0078 / 2003 ) by Mrs Auroi , on behalf of the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development , on the proposal for a Council directive amending Directives 66 / 401 / EEC on the marketing of fodder plant seed , 66 / 402 / EEC on the marketing of cereal seed , 68 / 193 / EEC on the marketing of material for the vegetative propagation of the vine , 92 / 33 / EEC on the marketing of vegetable propagating and planting material , other than seed , 92 / 34 / EEC on the marketing of propagating and planting material of fruit plants , 98 / 56 / EC on the marketing of propagating material of ornamental plants , 2002 / 54 / EC on the marketing of beet seed , 2002 / 55 / EC on the marketing of vegetable seed , 2002 / 56 / EC on the marketing of seed potatoes and 2002 / 57 / EC on the marketing of seed of oil and fibre plants as regards Community comparative tests and trials ( COM ( 2002 ) 523 - C5-0476 / 2002 - 2002 / 0232 ( CNS ) ) .
May I begin by thanking the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development , and in particular its rapporteur , Mrs Auroi , for the positive approach adopted towards the Commission proposal .
This proposal consists of only one amendment added to the last item of the relevant Article of ten Directives on the marketing of seeds and propagating material .
The aim of the proposal is simple - to create a clear legal basis for financing Community comparative trials .
This initiative is in line with the European Parliament proposal to increase the transparency of the Commission budget .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the Commission 's positive intention is to tidy up ten directives , the first of which dates from 1966 , concerning Community comparative tests and trials for various conventional seeds and propagating material .
As the Commission has confirmed over the past twenty-five years , agricultural crops such as cereals , fodder crops , and oilseed and fibre crops have been subject to Community comparative tests on the basis of the applicable legislation .
Over the last few years , this exercise has grown in importance following new legislation on the marketing of propagating material of fruit , vegetables and ornamental plants , which lays down detailed rules for implementing the Community comparative tests .
This post-control system for seed and propagating material marketed in the Community is recognised as being an extremely important tool for the harmonisation of marketing by Member States .
The planned tidying-up exercise , however , would be neither complete nor relevant if the comparative tests funded by the European Union were limited to currently certified seed and plants included in the Union 's common catalogue .
The Commission 's proposal must take into account the recently adopted legislative provisions in the area of processed products , as regards the adventitious or technically unavoidable presence of genetically modified seed in conventional varieties of seed .
Moreover , it seems to me that in order to update these directives properly three objectives have to be achieved .
First of all the proposal must cover all existing seed , so as to have a complete range which takes into account , in addition to traditional seed , the special requirements of biodiversity , and the effects of introducing biotechnology via GMOs .
Secondly , it must include within its scope the so-called ' amateur ' varieties , covered by Directive 98 / 95 , which is still not taken into account by all Member States .
Thirdly , for the sake of democracy , it must enable Parliament to be involved in the decision-making process right the way through from beginning to end .
In this sense , the sensitive issue of the risk of contamination of traditional seed by GMOs must be included in the series of directives concerning the marketing of seed with which we are dealing here today .
This issue cannot be dealt with by the committee procedure , because that would exclude Members of the European Parliament from the debate and prevent them from making proposals on this subject .
If I may return briefly to my first point , the comparative tests funded by the European Union should not be limited to the species included in the common catalogue .
Conservation varieties and seed originating in organic farming should benefit from these tests .
They have to be tested in conditions which correspond to these farming systems and they therefore require more funding .
It should be pointed out such seed is not allowed to be coated and must be absolutely free from any trace of GMOs .
Tests of the same type are necessary for plants at risk of GMO contamination .
In effect , this proposal for a directive provides an opportunity to settle issues regarding the proven presence of genetically modified seed in conventional seed .
The Commission has been working for some considerable time on a directive which would legislate on additional conditions and requirements regarding the presence of genetically modified seed in batches of seed , planting sites , and details of the marking of such seed .
Unfortunately , the draft of the latest directive does not sufficiently take into account Directive 2001 / 18 on the deliberate release into the environment of genetically modified organisms , which has come into force in the meantime .
To come back to my second point , it is important that the conservation species and varieties referred to in Directive 98 / 95 should be defined and tested for marketing in accordance with special criteria , and that will require an implementing regulation , something which we are still waiting for .
In the same way , farm-saved seed or seed of local origin ought to be able to benefit from special flexibility and should be the subject of special contracts linked to Directive 98 / 95 .
When it comes to my third point , this is where the democratic debate plays an important role .
In the modified articles it is important to decline , as I have tried to do , to make any reference to precise traceability .
It is therefore important to say , for each type of seed individually , that if accidental or technically unavoidable traces of GMOs are present in that seed , it is possible to set a threshold level , below which the seed can nonetheless be placed on the market .
The level of that threshold should be established in accordance with Article 21 and set at the lowest possible level allowed in accordance with state-of-the-art scientific knowledge .
Moreover , appropriate measures must be taken during the transport and storage of traditional seed , so that the accidental or technically unavoidable nature of any GMO pollution can be proved .
In fact , although the directive already lays down that genetically modified seed must be labelled , it does not provide a solution to the problem of the risk of traces in traditional seeds , the rule being that such seed must not , in principle , contain any GMOs .
This rule is extremely important to farming , because the spread of contaminated seed may have unforeseeable economic consequences , both for farmers and for food producers .
Finally , the directive already lays down that the Community may make a financial contribution to the carrying out of the tests laid down in Paragraphs 1 and 2 .
The same treatment should be possible for the special comparative tests needed for seed and plants produced and cultivated for organic farming and for the utilisation and conservation of genetic diversity in plants .
For the sake of transparency , therefore , it will be necessary in future to establish a clear legal basis for a financial contribution , of whatever kind , and it is therefore necessary to make provision for Community financial measures which will be applicable to these comparative tests and which will include the necessary obligatory Community budget expenditure .
Mr President , I would like to thank the Commission for being present in this debate .
As Commissioner Byrne has said , this is about the marketing of seeds and I am rather disappointed that Mrs Auroi has decided to bring in GMOs .
This report is about the marketing of traditional , conventional seeds and to bring in GMOs is really not part of the topic that we are debating today .
I say that to Mrs Auroi as a seed producer and a seed grower .
We spend much time and effort making sure that the product that we produce is completely free from any contamination and this is the way that conventional and traditional seeds are grown .
To bring the issue of GMOs into this piece of legislation is wrong .
It is also wrong because in fact the next piece of legislation to come from the Commission will be one on GMO seeds , after the two reports that are to go through Parliament , one of which is Mr Trakatellis 's report which is currently before the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy , and of which Commissioner Byrne is well aware .
Therefore I see little point at the moment in bringing that up and that is why I hope this Parliament will endorse my amendments while agreeing with the principle stated by Mrs Auroi that we must be aware of the situation with contamination of GMOs .
I have tried to bring a little bit more of what I call a more pragmatic approach into this legislation and I hope this House will support my amendments on Mrs Auroi 's report which , while supporting in principle what she said , will in practice enable the Commission to bring in the proposal that is due to be submitted after the two reports in Parliament .
Therefore it is quite important that we look at these .
I say to Mrs Auroi that , yes , we are all aware of the risk of GMO contamination but it has not happened yet and there is no certainty that it will happen in the future ; everyone involved in seed production is concerned about it , but please wait until this legislation comes from the Commission , when we will be able to take a decision on it .
Mr President , quality assurance in food production poses major challenges to all those involved in the production chain .
One of the tasks is to utilise those resources which safeguard transparency and traceability for all market participants , and , of course , for consumers .
Seed production is a broad-based business ; marketing is regulated in the various countries by official supervisory authorities , and the factors such as varietal purity and certification of origin are confirmed .
This report is intended to close the gaps .
To this end , financial support in the sum of EUR 1 million is available , but as I have already said , this is a broad-based business .
The provision of EUR 1 million illustrates , to my mind , how long it will take to be able to carry out comparative tests in this area .
Labelling has always been required for the genetically modified varieties , and it is a matter for the countries themselves to deal with the thresholds .
The problem of multiplication of sowing seed on individual farms , which is addressed here , will and should be regulated flexibly through special replicate licences , a solution which I can only endorse .
Here , there have been - and continue to be - substantial gaps .
The EU should deal comprehensively with the entire complex issue of GMOs within the framework of the Life Sciences and Biotechnology Action Plan , also as regards seed .
I wish to call , at this point , for competition law and competitive freedom of choice to be maintained , not restricted , in agricultural production .
This report does not do so , but I would like to highlight this issue once again .
Mr President , it is correct that the Commission did not wish , by way of this amendment of the Directive , to address the issue of genetically modified organisms .
However , when a new proposal for a directive is presented , we have every right to bring in our own ideas - for , after all , we in the European Parliament have no right of initiative .
The burning issue at present is not comparative tests , but coexistence between seed containing genetically modified organisms and seed for organic farming , which cannot contain GMOs by law .
It is this coexistence that is the problem .
It was not so difficult as long as there was no contamination , no transfer of genetically modified organisms .
Indeed , the scientists had told us that this was not possible - until one of their genes escaped .
The problem facing us now is that we cannot protect organic seed .
This is the problem that we are seeking to address .
In advance of this process , the Commission is putting forward proposals which we do not find satisfactory .
However , we want to put this problem at the heart of the debate , and we have used the report for this purpose .
Mr President , not only am I Right-wing in orientation , but I also sit on the right .
Mr President , Commissioner , I would like to start by thanking the rapporteur , my fellow Member Mrs Auroi , for this report .
I welcome the Commission 's proposal to simplify matters by drawing together and streamlining ten directives on the Community comparative tests .
For twenty-five years , comparative tests on arable crops have been carried out in the Community on the basis of relevant legal provisions .
The scope of these tests has further increased substantially in recent years .
This system of follow-up controls is seen as a very important instrument to harmonise the marketing conditions in the Member States and is therefore also endorsed in the internal market .
These comparative tests must not , however , be restricted to those seed and plant varieties that have so far been certified and listed in the Union 's common catalogue .
There must also , in my view , be a quite specific way of dealing with seed designated for use in organic farming .
With this Directive , however , we should not only be looking at organic agriculture .
I believe we should also be taking a look at conventional farming , and so I personally wish to support Mr Sturdy 's amendments .
A clear threshold for GMO traces in seed must be laid down in accordance with the latest scientific knowledge and research , not ideological criteria .
If the traces lie below this threshold , it should still be permissible to place the seed on the market .
The presence of genetically modified organisms in seed , at least in the lower batches , is generally adventitious and often technically unavoidable .
What is required here is genuinely feasible detectability in order to draw conclusions as to whether the seed should be placed on the market .
With this Directive , we must therefore create a clear legal framework for agriculture as a whole - both for organic and conventional farming - and for food producers .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the open market , the free internal market , is one of our European Union 's greatest achievements .
However , it is also one of the most difficult chapters , as open market access must not distort competition .
We need harmonisation of the marketing conditions in the Member States .
This sounds quite simple at first , but it is actually extremely complicated , not only because there is a large number of products to regulate , but also because we must focus on upholding the same conditions as regards cultivation , care , and not least , quality definition .
For twenty-five years , comparative tests have been carried out in the Community on the basis of relevant legal provisions .
I myself was a rapporteur on the amendment of Directive 68 / 193 / EEC on the marketing of material for the vegetative propagation of the vine .
The report was adopted by Parliament on 24 October 2000 , and today , two and a half years later , the Commission is still only at the stage of discussing the contents of Annexes I to IV .
With the tighter provisions envisaged here , I see a risk that the report 's intention , namely to simplify , will be pursued ad absurdum .
The virus tests which are called for , for example , would result in very high costs , which could lead to a reduction of clones and thus a depletion of genetic resources .
This clearly conflicts with the Directive , whose content aims , in the long term , to abolish standard material while maintaining genetic diversity .
I therefore ask the Commission this : firstly , why is the work here progressing so slowly ?
Secondly , can the Standing Committee on Seeds really amend a Commission proposal - one that Parliament supports - so radically ?
The resultant question for all of us is how effective our cooperation is .
Today , however , we are discussing the financial contributions made by the Community for the comparative tests .
I support the Commission 's proposal to create a clear financial basis for this support .
Mr President , I wish to start by twice expressing my thanks : first to our rapporteur , Danielle Auroi , for her work on this report , which reveals her considerable efforts to try to synthesise and extend the scope of these directives . Secondly , I wish to thank the Commission , because I greatly welcome the fact that it has presented these proposals to provide a clear and transparent legal basis for funding comparative tests and trials for seeds and plants .
I therefore think that we are all on the right track and that this is precisely what is needed .
The fact is , however , that there are some differences of opinion on how far this work should go .
On this I agree with various fellow Members who have spoken and with the rapporteur herself on the need to take a broader view of the entire issue of testing seeds and plants .
We must therefore address this issue in a way that better reflects the reality of the situation .
Of course , we can then disagree on the issue of whether or not to regulate the issue of mixing pure seeds with seeds containing GMOs .
My views on this matter are not based on ideology and like Mrs Keppelhoff-Wiechert , I also believe that we must accept what science has to say and that we must adopt a limit that entails no risk of excessive contamination .
I also agree , however , with the need to ensure that we have pure seeds that are , as far as possible , uncontaminated by GMOs .
For this reason , it would perhaps be worthwhile providing for special funding only for seeds not containing GMOs , covering organic farming , of course , but also traditional farming , which uses traditional regional and local seeds and varieties that are not sold on any large scale but which ought to be safeguarded from the point of view of genetics .
The Commission appreciates the broad acceptance of its proposal , and has examined in detail all the amendments proposed .
I should make clear from the start that many amendments go beyond the scope of the original Commission proposal .
The request to ensure the inclusion in the Community comparative trials of organically produced seed , and seed falling in the area of plant genetic resources deserves consideration .
However , the proposal to take specific measures in these areas has to be carefully considered to avoid any risk of overlapping with measures already in place .
For this reason , Amendments 2 , 4 , 5 , 6 , and the relevant parts of Amendments 12 to 17 , 19 to 21 and 24 to 29 are acceptable - subject to re-wording .
The compulsory indication of Community financial allocations laid down by parts of Amendments 12 to 17 , 19 to 21 and 24 to 29 can be accepted only as a general recommendation to the Commission , again subject to rewording .
Concerning Amendment 22 , the Council has already adopted the legal base for the implementation of measures for the marketing of seeds and plants for the conservation and diversity of genetic resources in Europe ( for example , Article 21 of Council Directive 2002 / 54 / EC on the marketing of beet seed ) .
Hence the principle is acceptable , but not the amendment as such .
I should add that this is an area to which the Commission is paying particular attention .
Amendments 7 to 11 cannot be accepted .
The reference to financial and to other commitments of the Member States should take into account the specific competencies of the Member States .
Allow me now to turn to the important issue of the adventitious and technically unavoidable presence of GMOs in seeds of conventional plant varieties .
This is a totally different matter to the issue of comparative trials that we are discussing here today .
It is therefore being addressed in another proposal , in the context of the directives on the marketing of seeds .
A proposal for a Commission directive is being prepared , which will aim to set thresholds in this regard .
As a consequence , Amendments 1 , 3 , 23 , and the relevant parts of Amendments 12 , 13 , 18 , 19 to 21 and 24 to 29 cannot be accepted .
In relation to Amendments 24 to 29 , they are not accepted on the basis that they repeat exactly the Commission proposal .
I have explained on a number of occasions how the Commission intends to proceed with this file .
As the seeds thresholds for GMOs are based on the food labelling threshold , and as the labelling threshold will be discussed again in the next few months in Parliament during the second reading of the proposed GM food and feed regulation , the Commission will wait for the outcome of these discussions before proceeding with the question of GMO thresholds in seeds .
As Parliament is aware , there is draft legislation in preparation at the moment in relation to that issue .
On this issue I should refer to the points made by Mr Graefe zu Baringdorf in relation to coexistence .
This issue has been dealt with by my colleague Commissioner Fischler , who is bringing forward a communication to the Commission within the next number of weeks on that issue which I expect will deal with that situation .
A full listing of the Commission 's position on each of the amendments is being made available to Parliament .
I trust that this will be included in the minutes of this session .
Finally , I would I reiterate my commitment , prior the adoption by the Commission of any Commission Directive on the subject , to listen to the views of all concerned , in particular the European Parliament .
Thank you , Commissioner Byrne .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon .
The next item is the report ( A5-0049 / 2003 ) by Mrs Ferreira , on behalf of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy , on the proposal for a Directive of the European Parliament and of the Council amending Directive 94 / 35 / EC on sweeteners for use in foodstuffs ( COM ( 2002 ) 375 - C5-0341 / 2002 - 2002 / 0152 ( COD ) ) .
In July 2002 the Commission adopted a proposal for a European Parliament and Council directive amending Directive 94 / 35 / EC on sweeteners for use in foodstuffs .
The main objective of this proposal is to authorise two new sweeteners that have received a favourable opinion by the Scientific Committee on Food : Sucralose and the salt of aspartame and acesulfame .
Furthermore , the Commission proposes to reduce the intake of cyclamate , as an already authorised sweetener , for which the Scientific Committee on Food has considerably lowered the acceptable daily intake .
To this end , the Commission proposed to reduce the amount of cyclamates permitted in soft drinks and to prohibit their use in a series of other foodstuffs , such as confectionery , chewing gum and ice cream .
The Commission also proposed to decide in comitology whether a substance fulfils the definition of a sweetener as laid down in the directive .
Such a decision is of technical nature and can already be taken by comitology for all other food additives according to existing legislation .
It is necessary to have a formal tool to bring certain substances under the scope of the food additive legislation .
This is in the interest of consumer protection .
Mr President , Commissioner , representatives of the Council , ladies and gentlemen , first of all I should like to thank my colleagues and the secretariat of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy , and also the staff of the appropriate Directorate-General , for their excellent cooperation .
As the Commissioner has just explained , the European Parliament is being asked to vote on the second amendment to the ' sweeteners ' directive since its adoption in 1994 .
The Directorate-General responsible is therefore proposing that two new sweeteners , namely sucralose and salt of aspartame-acesulfame , should be added to the positive list of sweeteners already approved in the European Union .
This proposal follows the favourable opinion on these two sweeteners issued in the year 2000 by the Scientific Committee for Food .
As part of this second revision of the sweeteners directive , the European Commission has also proposed that the use of a third sweetener be revised , namely cyclamic acid .
Following a re-evaluation of this sweetener by the Scientific Committee , the Commission proposes that the cyclamate thresholds contained in certain foods and drinks should be reduced .
Studies , in particular those carried out in Denmark , have shown that a child weighing fifteen kilos or less might very rapidly reach the threshold of the acceptable daily intake ( ADI ) , which could involve a risk to that child 's health .
New studies being carried out in several Member States would seem to confirm this opinion .
Finally , the last amendment proposed for this directive by DG Health and Consumer Protection is concerned with the committee procedure .
The Commission , as you have just reminded us , wants to be given the power to decide whether a substance falls within the ' sweeteners ' category , without going through the process of approval by the European Parliament .
On this point , the vote in the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy showed a very clear refusal to transfer that power to the Commission alone .
Even though Members of the European Parliament are aware of the technical nature of this type of decision , your rapporteur believes that the European Parliament 's prerogative should be retained , since scientific expertise may be subject to controversy .
Moreover , this amendment will be proposed again when the framework directive covering sweeteners is revised .
Your rapporteur would prefer to wait for this more general revision .
In any case , the absence of amendments on this point would seem to indicate that Members of the European Parliament would also prefer to put it off until the forthcoming general legislative revision .
The Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy voted in favour of the request for the authorisation of the placing on the market of the two new sweeteners , but it also voted in favour of the adoption of an amendment requiring a re-evaluation of these two substances three years after the entry into force of the revised directive .
Your rapporteur is aware of the provisions of the directive , particularly as regards the monitoring system , but I would prefer to remind the European Commission and the Member States of their obligations regarding the monitoring of sweeteners and the collection of data .
The collection of information on real consumption in the European Union and on the possible effects of the consumption of sweeteners on human health must be organised as soon as the products containing those sweeteners are placed on the market , so as to enable a re-evaluation of existing information to be carried out within the time limits laid down .
It has to be admitted , however , that Member States are not doing enough to collect this information , and the European Commission does not always have the means to ensure that Member States observe the provisions contained in the directive , particularly with regard to reporting to the Commission .
Your rapporteur is well aware of the gap which exists between the adoption of legislation and its implementation , and I believe that the work of Parliament also includes reminding those responsible of the need to apply the law .
As far as cyclamates are concerned , the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy voted in favour of adopting a stronger position than the one recommended by DG Health and Consumer Protection .
In effect , the committee is proposing to reduce cyclamate levels to 250 mg and to extend this provision to cover all drinks .
This extension is necessary because drinks containing cyclamates may easily be served to small children , owing to the very nature of those drinks .
Moreover , this greater reduction is also necessary because it takes more account of the switch from a temporary ADI to a lower permanent ADI adopted by the Scientific Committee .
On this basis , your rapporteur supports Amendment No 9 , tabled by Mrs Schörling .
Before I finish , I should like to mention the issue of fine bakery products .
Two amendments have been proposed .
I shall not attempt to conceal my preference for the one that I and my political group have proposed , because it is the result of collective work and because I believe that consumers ought to know what ingredients or products the foods that are sold to them contain .
However , I am also prepared to accept Amendment No 12 , with an oral amendment which will be proposed tomorrow .
It enables us to find a solution as far as this category of foods is concerned , and I believe that these two amendments propose an acceptable solution .
I hope , therefore , that Members will vote in such a way as to enable us to propose a solution on this point to the Council .
Having spoken about the technical aspects of my report , I shall now conclude my presentation of that report by referring , in broader terms , to the question of consumer protection , which in this case is linked to public-health issues .
I am well aware , of course , that sweeteners can bring some comfort to people whose state of health requires them to follow a special diet .
However , the existence of products containing such sweeteners must not be allowed to hide the very serious public-health problem of obesity .
This public-health issue is of course linked to that of eating habits , and of nutritional and health education .
It is also linked , therefore , to new kinds of consumption and to the presence on the market of increasingly sweetened products , consumed in excessive quantities by children , which are often the subject of false advertising .
This is why I am anxious to draw the Commission 's attention to this problem once again , although I know that Mr Byrne has already confirmed that he is very much aware of it .
Before other speakers take the floor , I just want to say that I very much hope that we shall reach an agreement with the Council at second reading , and I hope that tomorrow 's vote will enable us to do this .
Mr President , you are obviously in a generous mood tonight .
I hope your generosity will extend to the daunting task that I have of replacing Mrs Oomen-Ruijten - because of her sad illness - as the shadow rapporteur on this measure .
I start by thanking the rapporteur for her remarks and for her work in committee .
I have to say that many have questioned the need for some aspects of this measure .
Where we need this measure , it is important that our directive is based on science .
It is not for us to second-guess the scientific advisers to the Commission .
They say these products are safe and the Commission is right to accept that advice .
Sucralose presents no problems : it is made from sugar , it is non-calorific , it does not lead to tooth decay or - and here let me declare an interest - to risks for those of us who live with diabetes .
Indeed , if it could do something for my brainpower as well , I would sit here munching it all night .
It has already been approved in some 45 countries .
In the past cyclamates have rightly been treated with caution .
However , now science shows that a reduction of the permitted level from 400 mg / l to 350 mg / l is all that is needed .
To go further has no basis in science , except for a tiny sample of 43 children in Denmark , which was itself rejected by the Danish Food and Veterinary Administration .
The acceptable daily intake - the ADI - is not only the favoured measurement of the FAO and WHO Expert Committee on Food Additives , but it also sets an intake level - not a maximum for a single day , but an average over a lifetime .
The proposed ADI is 7 mg / kg of body weight .
Thus all seemed plain sailing , until we had the rapporteur 's proposal to reduce the figure to 250 mg , whereupon we had the Commission 's brainstorm .
A normally sensible , wise and objective official , widely respected and , indeed , loved by the world of food and food safety allowed herself to be bounced into a statement that the Commission could accept 250 .
She then had to admit that this was not based on one iota of scientific evidence .
That is a very dangerous precedent .
If the Commission ignores the advice of its own scientists , who can we trust ?
Mrs Oomen-Ruijten and I are both of the view that the requests for a new report on the re-evaluation of the approval of aspartame are also completely misplaced .
In December 2002 , the Scientific Committee on Food , in cooperation with the French and British food authorities , concluded that there is no reason to adjust the approval of aspartame in any way .
In addition , the FDA and JEFCFA - the scientific advisory body of WHO - have approved the substance .
Therefore , it is absolutely unnecessary to question the validity of the conclusion of the European Union 's independent scientific committee - the SCF - that aspartame is a substance safe for human consumption .
It has to be taken into consideration that in the approval of a substance like aspartame the SCF sets the allowed daily intake in which the vulnerable life phases are included at a level such that even the heaviest users of the substance will not exceed 30-40 % of that maximum intake .
A new report on the evaluation of aspartame would lead simply to negative publicity .
It would bring about rumours and feelings of uncertainty among consumers , as a substance that has been approved safe by an independent scientific committee is being questioned again for absolutely no good reason .
I would just add that my good friend Mrs Oomen-Ruijten , who , jointly with Mrs Ayuso González , tabled Amendment 12 , to which Mrs Ferreira referred , asked me to point out that she thinks there is a translation problem - at least in the English version - and that the category ' fine bakery products , energy-reduced or with no added sugar ' - is supposed to be an addition to the previous text and not a replacement for it .
I put that before you and leave it in your good hands , Mr President , and exhort the services , if possible , to look at this before we come to vote on the matter tomorrow .
Mr President , it is always daunting to follow the measured tread of Mr Bowis as he spreads reassurance through the Chamber .
I , however , tend to take the view of the rapporteur and of those of my political Group in the Committee of which we are all members .
I wake up every morning , like Mr Bowis , and say to myself ' I am not a scientist ' .
I have no right to second-guess scientists .
However , I do have a right to the long view and to second opinions , and where there are concerns , even if these have been allayed to some degree in the period when a new product is coming into use , as is certainly the case with salt of aspartame , nevertheless it is right to think after these products have gone into use - and they are now being used in many hundreds of different confectionery and other products - that over time a periodic review of a new substance is necessary .
I do not think that any of us know , because we are part of this vast experiment , how far the human metabolism has been changed by this whole range of new artificial products many of which bring great benefits , as salt of aspartame obviously does to Mr Bowis , but which could also cause concern .
He has probably received , as I have , a number of letters from the Additives Survivors ' Network , who relate pretty grim stories of the adverse consequences of salt of aspartame for some of them .
We are not advocating second-guessing the scientific committee and our own Foods Standards Agency in the United Kingdom .
We are simply saying , over time you need to have the right to review this , to take another view once it is general use and is part of that great experiment among the population .
My second and last point relates to the reduction of cyclamate levels .
Mr Bowis says this was all the result of some brainstorm in the Commission .
Some feckless person in the Commission foolishly said yes , a 250 mg limit would be acceptable .
It is also actually as Mr Bowis probably knows , the view of the UK Government - in the advice that it circulates to us and is more frequently sometimes copied on that side of the House than on this - that a reduction to 250 mg measurement may be necessary .
Why is that ?
It is because lifetime use has to be considered in the light of the intensity of the intake .
We do have to take into account the extensive use , for very young children in particular , of products which have been flavoured and sweetened in this way .
I believe that we should reduce to 250 mg and I am glad to see that I am in good company , though not alas that of Mr Bowis .
Mr President , I hope that you will not be any more strict with me than with other Members .
Nevertheless , I shall try to keep within my allotted speaking time .
What are the main concerns highlighted by this report ?
I think that Mrs Ferreira , who has done some very serious work on this subject , has stated them quite correctly .
I should therefore like to give you my opinion on what seem to me to be the main points , starting with the addition to the list of sweeteners of a new sweetener called sucralose , and I should like to draw your attention to the fact that sucralose is no ordinary substance .
It is an organochlorine substance obtained by the conversion of sugar with the addition of three atoms of chlorine .
I would point out to you that organochlorines are substances which generally give rise to problems regarding the environment and even health .
I am astonished , therefore , at a proposal which seems to treat as something quite commonplace the inclusion of this new sweetener in the list of approved sweeteners .
In addition to that remark , I would also point out that the ADI , or acceptable daily intake , which is being proposed for this sweetener , is three times higher than the one proposed by the US Food and Drug Administration .
Consequently it seems to me that there are enough unknown factors regarding this new sweetener to justify our not agreeing to allow it to be added to the list of approved substances .
My second point refers to aspartame .
Despite the considerations put forward by Mr Bowis , I share the rapporteur 's view that Amendment No 4 is entirely justified .
A re-evaluation of aspartame does not seem to be in the least embarrassing .
It would not call into question the honesty of what was done previously .
It would simply show that knowledge can develop and that that development sometimes leads us to question the authorisations that were given previously .
Personally , therefore , I believe that this proposal is correct .
My third point concerns cyclamates .
On this subject , the European Commission is proposing to amend the maximum level for use in water-based drinks .
It would be reduced from 400 mg / l to 350 mg / l. mg / l .
Mrs Ferreira 's proposal is more ambitious , and I believe that she is right .
However , it seems to me that , given the role played by cyclamates , and given that they are prohibited , or at least not approved , in the United States , we should ask ourselves about the possible risks posed by these sweeteners .
I would draw Members ' attention to the fact that sweeteners , and therefore cyclamates , are often present in drinks or other products widely consumed by young children , so that the acceptable daily intake for this type of sweetener is easily exceeded .
Consequently it seems to me desirable that we should be even more ambitious and I hope that we shall support Mrs Schörling 's amendment , which proposes that the maximum level should be fixed at 100 mg / l .
I believe that this is a realistic proposal .
Mr President , Mr Whitehead spoke of the Additives Survivors ' Network .
Sitting here on an evening like this , I think we all belong to Parliament 's survivors ' network .
The trouble with sweeteners in the additives category is that they excite fundamentalist reactions of exactly the same type as genetically modified organisms .
Basically , that reaction leads to the position of Mr Lannoye , which really is that he does not want any sweeteners authorised at all at any level and would like them all taken off the market .
It is as well to bear that in mind as a background to what he has just said .
I would like to comment on two amendments and would like to hear the Commission 's view on them .
Amendment 4 has been mentioned as requiring a new investigation into aspartame .
That illustrates the point about fundamentalism , because this would take place less than a year after the publication of the Scientific Committee for Food 's opinion on aspartame .
Can the rapporteur tell us - because she did not say this in her speech - why we should doubt the FDA assessment ?
Does the rapporteur have evidence of the FDA 's inadequacy and the inadequacy of its own assessment ?
If so , she should share the evidence with us , because there is no point in tabling an amendment like this without giving us that information .
Another point on Amendment 4 : why is the rapporteur against a sweetener which is known apparently as stevia ?
There is no mention of this in the justification .
The amendment seems to be against stevia and wants another investigation of that .
What does the rapporteur know that we do not ?
Can Mr Byrne help us ?
Secondly , in relation to Amendment 8 - which has been mentioned by more than one Member - it worries me more for the process by which it was agreed than for the substance that it contains .
When it was moved in the committee by the rapporteur , the Commission indicated willingness to accept a change from the level of 350 mg / l to 250 mg / l .
The Commission gave no substantive reason for this .
It almost seemed to us , as Mr Bowis has said , that it was picking a figure out of a hat .
As Mr Coleman of DG SANCO stated in a letter he wrote shortly after that : ' A clear majority of experts from the Member States have expressed the position in both the Commission and the Council working parties that the reduction to 350 mg / l is not sufficient , and wish to go further . '
That information was not given to the committee .
No information was given to the committee !
We were certainly not told that Member States ' experts thought that 350 mg / l was too high or why they did .
Can the Commissioner now take this opportunity to say why the Commission changed its mind - on the basis of which scientific studies ?
And , indeed , when did it do so , given the fact that it presumably consulted the self-same national experts who were happy with 350 mg / l when it drew up the directive not very long ago ?
Mr President , I would like to respond briefly to Mrs Jackson 's comments .
I think Amendment No 4 is entirely justified , for what we want is a re-evaluation of aspartame , especially as regards its effects on risk groups , particularly pregnant women .
We know far too little , for example , about the effects of heavy consumption of sweeteners during pregnancy or on the health of infants and children .
The same applies to sucralose and cyclamic acid , about which Mr Lannoye has already spoken .
Let me say a few brief words about cyclamic acid .
Although Mrs Jackson , with reference to aspartame , has just mentioned the FDA in the USA , she does not want to heed the FDA 's warnings about cyclamic acid .
As Mr Lannoye has quite rightly pointed out , a far lower maximum usable dose of that is permitted .
I think we must all take note of this .
We really should adopt the proposal put forward by my colleague , namely to cut it as low as 100 mg / l .
We must try to reduce the high levels of sugar use .
We are finding that our children , for example , can no longer taste the sweetness in fruit , that sugar is no longer perceived as a seasoning , and that foods are oversweetened to such an extent that at some point , we get used to these sweeteners , with the result that more and more sweeteners are being used in order to reduce the massive consumption of sugar .
We are in a vicious circle .
For this reason , I fully support the proposal put forward by the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy .
I think we must follow this debate very closely , for there is one thing that we must not permit , and that is the use of carcinogenic substances such as sweeteners .
The precautionary principle applies here , and as long as potential threats cannot be ruled out , we cannot run any risks .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I should like to thank the rapporteur . Personally , I find sweeteners a difficult subject .
In my opinion , the Commission 's proposal does have the scientific rigour required when dealing with such issues .
I shall comment first on the most controversial aspect of the report , namely cyclamates .
The Commission 's initial proposal was to set the maximum dose at 350 mg / l , in line with the ruling by the Scientific Committee on Food .
The Commission did however change its view regarding the maximum dose . It revised its initial proposal of 350 mg / l and supported the proposal of 250 mg / l .
Commissioner , we are all wondering why that was so .
We were told that a compromise had been reached in the Council , resulting in agreement on the figure of 250 mg / l . That suggests both political and scientific arguments were invoked .
We cannot endorse this figure for political reasons .
We must be rigorous and support the Commission 's original figure .
I therefore call for Amendments Nos 8 and 9 to be rejected . I believe they lack sound scientific basis .
Parliament cannot and must not take political opinions or compromises into account when dealing with as technical a subject as additives .
If the Commission really believes that a maximum permitted dose of cyclamates of 250 mg / l is more appropriate it should withdraw its initial proposal . It should then present us with a new one , giving a scientific explanation of why it is now proposing a lower dose .
The reasons for reducing the dose still further are inconsistent . Reference is made to a study carried out in Denmark in 2001 .
This study was based on a particularly small sample of children who consumed sweeteners .
Crucially , it had not been designed as a study of the intake of sweeteners . It had been intended as an assessment of the use of sweeteners in soft drinks in Denmark .
Simply extrapolating from the results of such a study cannot be a sound basis for reducing the maximum permitted level of cyclamates in soft drinks in the European Union .
Furthermore , the Danish Veterinary and Food Administration stated in a press release on the publication of this study that the RDA study was based on safe lifetime intake . It went on to state that consequently there would be no harmful effects on the health of children aged between one and three who might temporarily exceed the RDA .
Mr President , first of all I would like to thank the European Parliament for its collaboration on this proposal .
In particular I would like to pay tribute to the rapporteur , Mrs Anne Ferreira , for her work on this dossier .
She has given broad support to the proposal of the Commission .
She has agreed to the proposed authorisation of two new sweeteners and to the reduction of the use of a further , already authorised sweetener .
In the latter case , the rapporteur even wished to go further than the Commission 's proposal - by seeking to reduce the level of cyclamates in both soft drinks and juice or milk-based drinks to 250 milligrams per litre ( Amendments 1 and 8 ) .
The Commission can accept these amendments .
I have been asked to give more details in relation to that and I am happy to do so .
I agree with Mr Bowis in saying that scientific advice must not be second-guessed .
However , in accepting their advice on an acceptable daily intake , it is the job of the risk managers - the Commission , the Council and Parliament - to set the maximum permitted doses in particular foodstuffs .
This is always a difficult task .
However , the Commission , in proposing to accept a lower limit of 250 milligrams per litre in soft drinks , did not act on a whim of any individual official .
This was done after careful consideration of the science and intake studies and after hearing the views of Member States and Parliament .
Let me clarify the following .
A clear distinction must be made between the acceptable daily intake of a food additive which is purely based on science and the maximum permitted use level of a food additive in a given foodstuff which is determined taking into account a series of criteria laid down in the legislation .
There is no scientific mechanism to translate an acceptable daily intake into a maximum use level .
In the present case the acceptable daily intake for cyclamates has been lowered from 11 to 7 milligrams per kilogram of body weight by the Scientific Committee on Food .
Soft drinks contribute to a large extent to the intake of sweeteners and are also consumed by children .
Furthermore , Member States indicated that the acceptable daily intake for cyclamates might be exceeded in their country .
For these reasons the Commission can support the further reduction of the levels of cyclamates .
However , the Parliament has introduced several additional amendments to the Commission proposal .
Amendment 4 calls for the re-evaluation of the authorisation of two sweeteners - aspartame and stevioside .
Furthermore , the amendment would require the Commission to present a report on the process of authorisation of aspartame by the US Food and Drugs Administration .
The Commission cannot accept this amendment for the following reasons .
At the request of the Commission , aspartame has been re-evaluated by the Scientific Committee on Food in collaboration with the British and French Food Safety Authorities .
To this end , the scientists have reviewed all the scientific literature published since the last opinion on aspartame - amounting to around 150 articles .
The resulting opinion , adopted as recently as December of last year , fully reconfirmed the safety of aspartame and that the intake of this sweetener remains well below the acceptable daily intake .
Therefore , the Commission does not consider it justifiable to proceed with a further re-evaluation of this sweetener , nor to restrict its conditions of use .
The leaves of Stevia and the sweetener extracted from this plant , stevioside , have also been thoroughly examined by the Scientific Committee on Food .
The Committee has serious doubts about the safety of stevioside and did not consider it as acceptable for use in food .
Therefore , the Commission has never proposed this sweetener for authorisation .
To date , no new scientific data justifying a re-evaluation of stevioside have been presented to the Commission .
Turning to the request to examine how aspartame was approved in the United States , it is not the competence of the Commission to enquire how an authorisation has been granted in a third country .
As regards the protection of the consumer , I would like to reassure honourable Members that proposals for authorisation of food additives under EU legislation are done on the basis of a risk assessment undertaken by the Scientific Committee on Food and , in the future , by the European Food Safety Authority .
If the result of this risk assessment is favourable , the Commission proposes the use of an additive after verifying that all the criteria for authorisation of a food additive are met .
The proposed conditions of use are based on the technological need and on intake data gathered by the Member States .
This process of risk analysis is fully independent from what is done in other countries .
The Commission is satisfied that this process is carried out in a transparent and independent manner in the EU .
Amendment 5 addresses the review of the conditions of use for the two newly proposed sweeteners .
This amendment duplicates requirements that already exist in food additives legislation .
In fact , the review of authorised food additives is required in the overall framework directive and in the three specific directives on the various classes of additives .
This is done from time to time .
The framework directive requires food additives to be re-evaluated whenever necessary .
Article 8 of the Sweeteners Directive obliges Member States to monitor regularly the consumption of sweeteners .
This monitoring has to provide data on intake both by adults and by children .
Therefore , the Commission is in a position to identify whether the intake of specific additives would exceed safe levels both in adults and children .
Whenever necessary , the Commission will propose restrictions to currently authorised use patterns , in particular to ensure that intake by children is safe .
Furthermore , it is not realistic to set a three-year deadline for this exercise .
On the contrary , to gather data on the two sweeteners before they are fully established on the market runs the risk that their intake would be underestimated .
Therefore , because this amendment duplicates existing requirements and because the deadline is not realistic , the Commission cannot accept Amendment 5 .
Two further amendments ( Amendments 2 and 3 ) would refuse comitology for the decision as to whether or not a substance should be considered as a sweetener according to Directive 94 / 35 / EC .
This is a purely technical decision necessary to bring certain substances under the scope of the directive that would otherwise escape from the strict rules set out for sweeteners and instead simply be considered as food ingredients .
Therefore , the Commission cannot accept Amendments 2 and 3 .
A series of amendments has been tabled concerning the Commission proposal to clarify the meaning of the wording of the food category ' fine bakery wares ' for special nutritional uses .
The intention behind the Commission proposal was to render more homogeneous the interpretation of this food category by Member States .
However , so far , the Council has not been able to agree on the wording proposed by the Commission , nor on any alternative wording .
Therefore , the Commission can agree to the deletion of the proposal on fine bakery wares ( Amendment 7 ) .
However , the alternative wordings proposed in Amendments 12 and 13 are not clear and would render the implementation of the directive difficult .
Therefore , the Commission cannot accept Amendments 12 and 13 , although I note Mr Bowis ' point on Amendment 12 which may change the view of the Commission .
I will have to give reconsideration to that issue .
Finally , two amendments have been tabled that aim to ban cyclamates and sucralose .
Both substances have been evaluated by the Scientific Committee on Food and have been assigned an acceptable daily intake .
That means that these substances are safe if their consumption stays below the acceptable daily intake .
To ensure this , the Commission has estimated the consumption of sucralose and introduced measures to reduce the consumption of cyclamate .
Parliament proposes to reinforce these measures and the Commission can support that .
But as the Commission considers these sweeteners to be fundamentally safe , there are no reasons to deprive consumers and the food industry of their use .
The Commission cannot therefore accept Amendments 9 , 10 and 11 .
In summary , the Commission can accept Amendments 1 , 6 , 7 and 8 , but cannot accept Amendments 2 , 3 , 4 , 5 , 9 , 10 , 11 , 12 and 13 .
Thank you , Commissioner Byrne .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon .
( The sitting was closed at 11.45 p.m. )
Detergents
The next item is the report ( A5-0105 / 2003 ) by Mr Nobilia , on behalf of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy , on the proposal for a European Parliament and Council regulation on detergents [ COM ( 2002 ) 485 - C5-0404 / 2002 - 2002 / 0216 ( COD ) ] .
Madam President , Commissioner , I do not want to use my speaking time to give a technical account of the work carried out and its significance because I believe you are all familiar with that ; this is certainly not presumption on my part but an acknowledgement of the clearly prodigious efforts of the members of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy , manifested , first and foremost , in the tabling of a large number of amendments .
I can only thank them for this , for there is no doubt that , over and above the general intention of introducing one 's own ideas into a report , the ultimate goal is to improve the report itself and its effectiveness in the common , general interest .
Likewise , I cannot fail to thank the shadow rapporteurs from all the political groups for their sensitivity and for their goodwill in drafting at least eight compromise amendments to take account of concepts , objectives and proposals .
My personal opinion , therefore , is that the product of the work of the Committee on the Environment , which is now before the House , has much broader backing than might have been expected when the Commission first submitted its proposal to Parliament .
As I said before , I am not saying this out of pride but in order to give credit to all the members of the committee who have worked on the report .
Of course , we cannot claim that the report covers all aspects of the issue of detergents .
We still have to analyse and express a position on a number of points .
We have to decide what line to take on phosphates , for example , what line to take on the anaerobic biodegradability of surfactants , and again , what level to set with regard to the biodegradability of other components of detergents .
Incidentally , it therefore appeared necessary to all concerned to set a deadline within which to ask the Commission to express its opinion on the rest of the matter .
It can be said , however , that our primary objective in amending the proposal in question was to make the text and related instruments more usable , more functional and more cohesive .
This , in any case , was the line we followed in our work . I must stress that , as well as seeking to make the rules proposed more usable , functional and cohesive , we took care to pursue two further objectives .
The first was to employ practical sensitivity with regard to small and medium-sized enterprises , a particularly good example of this being the establishment of the derogation , without - we trust - giving any less consideration to the need to provide ever-increasing protection of the environment , public health and animal welfare .
The second , in the context of the - at last binding - labelling system , concerns the goal of increasing the awareness of consumers when they make choices , without in any way detracting from the valuable work of consumer protection organisations but , on the contrary , enhancing it .
That said , I would like to focus briefly on the fact that the regulation in question certainly does not cover all the questions related to detergents , and I am not criticising the Commission 's work here but pointing out two further characteristic aspects of both this and previous provisions on detergents .
The first - as I suggested at the start of my speech - is the underlying approach to the issue : the Commission took the approach of phasing in the legislation .
The second , which almost justifies the first , is the need for recourse to a third body , in this case to a scientific committee , to implement the legislation .
When amending the regulation in question , we have attempted to assess the tasks entrusted to the committee and bring those considered to be political rather than technical before the House for it to study and vote on .
The rapporteur and the shadow rapporteurs worked together to achieve this undertaking too .
Since , however , there are both technical and political aspects - and there are - and since it is true that the work carried out in the Committee on the Environment has been productive and enjoyed remarkably broad support , then I find it difficult to understand why some of my colleagues , without wishing to undermine everyone 's individual right to do so , have tabled further amendments in plenary .
In any case , in this regard , I have to say that I support Amendments Nos 47 , 52 , 53 and 60 , which indisputably make additional important contributions which complement the current provisions .
I also have to say that my feelings are essentially neutral as regards Amendments Nos 56 and 61 , which merely change the position of points within the regulation itself , whereas I have to express firm rejection of the remaining amendments , certainly not - to conclude - because I disapprove of their content in principle , nor even because they partially belie the consensus expressed in committee , but because , should they be accepted , they would not achieve what is undeniably the desired objective of the text to be issued , namely providing better protection , but would compromise the cohesiveness , functionality and usability which I mentioned earlier , which is consistent with that phasing-in of the legislation that is based on the scientific approach .
Madam President , Commissioner , I am glad that we have the opportunity today to speak on the subject of this directive - not so much out of any personal attachment to detergent issues , but quite simply because this report also shows that the European Union is moving towards abandoning the end-of-life policy and instead , to an increasing extent , seeking to develop modern and environmentally friendly products that are economically and socially sustainable .
That means that we want to motivate industry to move progressively to other products and , at the end of the line , no longer to rely on the catalytic converter or on the waste treatment plant or on big exhaust systems .
Instead , right at the start of the process , we want to move on to new products that are sustainable .
This directive is a forward step in terms of the internal market , because its consequence will be that many national regulations current in Europe will be harmonised , the objective being to have equal and comparable criteria for approval , and especially to ensure the removal of distortions to competition in this area too .
So , Commissioner , I am very glad that you were present at the European People 's Party group 's hearing , and that collaboration between environmentalists and your department has developed extraordinarily well in the last few years .
This policy will benefit not only consumers , but also the environment , water policy and , above all , the internal market as well , and to that I am especially committed .
There is , for example , no doubt that biodegradability must be progressively revalued .
Mr Nobilia has come up with a very good proposal , and I cannot do other than endorse it .
If I may , very much on the spur of the moment , consider the amendments tabled by the Greens , I do not think that all of them are wrong , but , yet again , their tendency is to enable the big players to perform these services , so that the small ones inevitably go to the wall .
That is a classic example of a policy militating against small businesses , because only really big firms will be able to surmount these obstacles .
As Mr Purvis has already pointed out , there is the danger that legislation like this will do precisely what we must not do by driving into a corner those whom we are actually trying to encourage to make use of niches .
It is these whom we have to protect , and so a degree of tolerance must be built up .
Of course , detergents will not be the end of the story , and we have already declared war on phosphates .
Every manufacturer should know that the end is drawing progressively closer , but within a fair timescale rather than overnight , enabling businesses to adjust .
That is the vitally important and utterly fundamental strategy that we must pursue .
The lesson I have had to learn is that those of us who sit in this House should not get above ourselves .
As a legislator , or co-legislator , I am quite incapable of prescribing from what point the labels on detergents should indicate the presence of scents .
Some suggest 50 milligrams , while others propose 500 milligrams .
Mr Nobilia has taken the only wise decision in saying that this would be handed over to experts .
If they can come to a decision , the European directive will be aiming in the right direction .
I am shocked to learn from studies that the greatest hazards involving detergents have basically to do with our evident inability to use the right amount of them .
The people concerned - and I number myself among them - seem to think that they should always put the same amount of detergent into the washing machine , with the result that , if the size of the wash varies - if , for example , it is less by weight - the amount of detergent used is excessive .
There is work for us all to do here .
I must admit that I have not all that often filled up a washing machine .
I am keen to learn how to do it and want to motivate my wife to show me the ropes .
So this involves all of us ; not just the legislator , not just industry , but the public too .
We will be on the right track if we grasp that fact .
Madam President , I would like , once again , to express my full support for the Commission 's proposal , which combines in this regulation the five existing directives on the biodegradability of surfactants , and to express my appreciation of the work of the rapporteur , who has helped to make the proposal more cohesive , preserving a very constructive relationship with the other groups , which means that the final product we are submitting for the vote in plenary has broad backing .

The key aspects of this regulation are health , consumer safety and the protection of and respect for the environment .
The amendments retabled on behalf of my group are intended precisely to provide greater guarantees of the achievement of these objectives and of the objectives based on the three principles which are the basis for the work of the Committee on the Environment : the precautionary principle , the ' polluter pays ' principle and the substitution principle .
The fact that the scope of the regulation has been confined to the biodegradability of the surfactants contained in detergents does not limit the application of these principles .
Indeed , I believe that anaerobic biodegradation , the biodegradation of principal organic ingredients other than surfactants and the biodegradation of phosphates should be regulated specifically , for this would complement the regulation of detergents .
Moreover , I agree with the principle that the possibility of introducing legislation on individual products should be provided for , with a view to imposing more stringent requirements in the field of safety , use and environmental protection than those already laid down by horizontal legislation .
That is why we are all calling upon the Commission together to present a new legislative proposal seeking to phase out these substances or to limit specific applications within three years of the entry into force of this regulation .
Lastly , I believe that it would be appropriate to provide for a single labelling system for these kinds of products in daily use , for that would allow the consumer to recognise and the producer to promote products which are less harmful to the environment .
Madam President , I would like to express a word of thanks to the Commissioner .
It is very good to simplify the legislation , from five pieces of legislation to just one .
But the Commissioner has also said that this is good for the Internal Market .
This is unfortunately not so , because the Internal Market has to contend with very different things .
Germany , Italy and a number of other countries have banned phosphates in detergents .
In some other countries , such as my own , there is a voluntary ban .
In other countries again , in particular the Scandinavian countries , the phosphates are eventually removed in the waste water purification system .
In Southern Europe , and unfortunately in Eastern Europe as well , phosphates are permitted .
You cannot therefore say that this is good for the Internal Market .
All the groups have however reached a compromise on eight points and this is one of them .
I am very happy about it .
We say to the Commission that they must take another good look at the scientific evidence which shows that phosphates do indeed cause a problem , not just in the classical detergents .
There are after all sufficient alternatives to them .
This was the big problem of 30 years ago , that all those detergents contained far too many phosphates so that soap found its way into the rivers everywhere , causing foam and green algae .
That problem has been overcome .
Now however we have tablets for the dishwasher , which did not exist 30 years ago and which still contain very many phosphates , even in those countries that have now banned phosphates .
This is why I have associated myself with the compromise .
Take another good look and give the industry three years to come up with alternatives .
It really can be done .
It proved possible for the ordinary detergents , so it must also be possible for these dishwasher tablets .
Then there is another problem .
It is utterly ridiculous that dangerous substances , carcinogenic substances , are permitted in detergents !
I am glad that the majority of this Parliament will very probably shortly be declaring itself in favour of them no longer being allowed in ordinary , everyday consumer products that everyone uses .
Of course we are running ahead of the legislation on chemistry that is still to come , but it is not our fault that the Commission has waited so long to table this legislation .
Indeed , we still do not have it and we are hoping across the whole Parliament , in all the political parties , that the Commission really will table this new legislation before the summer .
Finally , on the subject of odours .
Substances that cause allergies , not in everyone , but in certain people who cannot resist them , simply have no place in detergents .
Okay , that is not what we have decided .
What we have decided is that the detergent manufacturers must state very clearly that these substances are present .
This gives people the choice of using them or not and will probably in any event lead to the big detergent manufacturers not putting them in any more .
Madam President , the rapporteur , Mr Nobilia , has once again proven that complicated technical issues can attach to an everyday subject such as detergents .
In short I approve of the line that the rapporteur has set out .
If we wish to assess detergents with a view to trade and use , we must look in particular at their environmental and health effects .
An exemption for the restrictions to trade and use can be granted if we are considering necessary applications for which no safer alternatives exist .
With this provision we must however ensure that the volume of sale and use across the territory of the entire European Union remains at such a low level that there is no threat to the environment and health .
Another important point concerns phosphates .
In some Member States they have already been banned .
An EU ban is rather premature at the moment as far as I am concerned , but does require serious consideration .
If there are other aspects for which Member States have laid down stricter legislation , these Member States should not be forced to amend their legislation .
Finally , I want to express my approval to the rapporteur regarding labelling .
For lay people it is indeed often incomprehensible and confusing .
Simple texts on products that have been approved following rigorous evaluation must be sufficient .
If the curious consumer wishes to know more , they must consult the manufacturer by way of the latter 's web site and by telephone .
Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , we are now looking at a Commission proposal for a regulation , seeking the revision and updating of legislation on detergents , in line with a trend that has been in place since 1973 . The proposal is also intended to contribute to the free movement of detergent products on the internal market .
I congratulate Mr Nobilia on the report he has presented to us , which I fully support .
Like Mr Purvis , the draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on Industry , External Trade , Research and Energy , whom I wish to take this opportunity to congratulate , I believe that this regulation represents progress for both producers and consumers of detergents .
I wish , however , to make a few comments on two issues that I consider to be extremely important and on which I tabled proposals for amendments in the Committee on Industry .
First of all , I welcome the fact that the preamble to the regulation expressly acknowledges the need to undertake an evaluation of issues concerning phosphate content and the biodegradability of detergents and establishes the Commission 's duty to inform Parliament and the Council , within three years , of the results of this evaluation .
We will consequently be in a position to assess the future need for regulation in this field .
The second issue , which was unfortunately not adopted in committee , concerns the obligation on manufacturers to provide any health care professional with a datasheet listing all the ingredients of a detergent .
In this area , I think it is crucial to allow Member States , on the one hand , to appoint the body or bodies responsible for receiving this information and , on the other , to take the necessary measures to ensure that the bodies and health care professionals charged with receiving this information provide the necessary guarantees of confidentiality .
This information can only be used when there is a medical need to take preventive and curative action , in particular , in cases of emergency , with the Member States being responsible for ensuring that this information is not used for other purposes .
Information on preparations is extremely sensitive and can only be passed on to bodies or health care professionals bound by the duty of confidentiality .
Furthermore , such information must be used exclusively for the purpose of treating sick people .
Madam President , I too think that this is a good proposal .
It is important for us to guarantee free movement for detergents , but I think it is still more important that the detergents we put on the market should damage neither the environment nor people 's health and that , as consumers , we should always know the nature of the everyday items we buy in the shops .
I am able to support the proposals concerning bans on the use of carcinogenic and other poisonous substances in detergents , and I am also able to support the supplementary proposal to the effect that the ban should include those chemicals that are difficult to break down , together with hormone-disturbing chemicals .
I agree with the rapporteur that those Member States that have implemented restrictive rules governing the use of phosphates in detergents must be able to uphold these rules , and I think it is important for us now , at EU level too , to address the issue of phosphates .
Where labelling is concerned , it is naturally important for us , as consumers , to be provided with information about the characteristics of substances included in detergents , including substances that cause allergies .
With regard to the system of EC environmental labelling , I would point out that these substances are covered by this system , but apparently not all manufacturers think it worthwhile participating in it .
To a large extent , they use their own labels , and I am therefore able to support Amendment No 48 , based on the idea that , if other environmental labels are used , it must be stated in what way they differ from the EC 's official environmental label .
Finally , I would say , on the subject of animal experiments , that I am fully able to support the amendments designed to restrict animal experiments .
To the extent that there are any alternative methods at all , we must naturally try to use these and , ultimately , I also think we should put pressure on industry and manufacturers to develop alternative methods in those cases in which these still do not exist , so preventing as many animal experiments as is humanly possible .
Madam President , I , too , find the proposal disappointing .
It is actually high time that carcinogenic substances were done away with .
The removal of phosphates is in fact a necessity , and it is a tragedy that we have not succeeded in bringing it about .
Moreover , when it comes to phasing out , the Regulation lags far behind other provisions , such as , for example , the water framework directives .
Labelling is only an initial step .
Although the highest priority must of course be given to freedom of choice , my criticism is that too little attention has been paid in this debate to examining the causal links between allergies , sensitivity to chemicals , and exposure to chemical substances .
This Regulation does too much about the effects on water and far too little - hardly anything at all , in fact - about any exposure assessment covering consumers and those who work in the production process .
Let me conclude , Commissioner , by putting a request to you .
We were too late in submitting an amendment , but I ask you to consider it all the same .
We know that a number of companies are already adding bitter constituents to washing-up liquid in order to prevent children accidentally drinking them .
There are still far too many deaths as a result of children drinking washing-up liquids or cleaning fluids .
I ask you to give consideration to this , even without an amendment on the subject , and to look into the possibility of asking firms to add bitter constituents in order thereby to reduce the number of child deaths .
Madam President , cleaning products are necessary , but they are also a source of pollution .
Things can be cleaner and we must show the political will for this today .
I should first like to extend my sincere thanks to Mr Nobilia and the shadow rapporteurs .
They have done good work in improving the Commission 's proposal .
As far as phosphates are concerned however there is still much to be done .
There are four points I should like to make .
Firstly , we must provide for valid and adequate research to close the knowledge gap .
Toxicity tests are desirable and cannot be skipped .
Amendments to this effect are in keeping with the policy to eliminate the lack of knowledge about chemical substances .
Secondly , the criteria must be clear .
A degradability of 60 % in itself is not enough .
It is of course a matter of what the remainder contains .
This remainder must not in any event contain any highly persistent or hormone disrupting substances .
Amendment No 49 from the Group of the Party of European Socialists is very clear in this regard .
Thirdly , it must be clear that exceptions are only permitted under very strict conditions .
It must of course be a question of industrial use and total sales must not constitute a threat to the environment or public health .
The environmental benefit must also be demonstrated .
Exceptions can only be made if the environment and of course public health are served .
It must also be clear that under no circumstances may economic criteria come into play .
Amendment No 47 is therefore far clearer than the other texts .
Finally , there must be clear , honest and transparent information available .
No misleading green labels , but honest information .
The manufacturers must as far as possible associate themselves with the European environment mark .
The European environment mark must in any event be a benchmark .
That is the only way to create clarity for consumers .
Madam President , when we came in this morning there was a distinct smell of cigars in this Chamber .
For a moment I thought that this was some new ingredient that was being demonstrated in the detergents which had been used to clean the Chamber overnight .
I suspect it is more to do with compliance with the parliamentary clean air directive , as opposed to the parliamentary hot air directive which very often informs our debates .
However , it is detergents we are discussing this morning and we should remember , as Mr Florenz reminded us , what that industry is made up of : in particular , in the specialist area - the non-domestic area - some two-thirds of that area is produced by small firms employing some 20 000 people throughout the European Union .
That is why everyone is right to congratulate Mr Nobilia , our rapporteur , on the skilful way in which he has struck a balance between environmental concerns , consumer choice and information and the industry 's interests , so as to come up with a proposal that we can unite behind here today .
I congratulate him on the skill with which he has negotiated the eight compromise amendments that were passed in committee .
These address a number of areas , including the complementary risk-assessments for surfactants that fail the ultimate biodegradability tests , so that a tiered approach can take into account exposure and risk .
He was also right to tighten the Commission 's wording regarding access to detailed ingredient lists for medical staff , ensuring not only access for medical professionals , but also confidentiality of data .
He was right to bolster consumer access to information , ensuring that full lists of substances added to detergents are readily accessible to consumers .
Then we had the compromise on phosphates .
I am incorporating a number of our amendments , including my own .
I am sure he was right that we should ask the Commission to examine the arguments and come back with a proposal within three years .
The arguments deserve careful attention , but we must also be aware of the benefits of phosphates .
We know from our Scandinavian colleagues that , provided there is good water and sewage treatment , phosphates can result in lower volumes of detergents being used and also lower water temperatures being necessary .
I do not know , Madam President , whether you are one of the many who now use the tablet form in washing machines , but there has been a movement towards tablets containing phosphate , which can improve the efficiency of use .
One should recall the research from both Sweden and the Netherlands .
The Stockholm water authority found that with phosphate substitutes there were on average ten times more suspended solids in their effluent , leading to a substantial increase in sludge ; whereas phosphate products were found to be less damaging in terms of eco-toxicity towards micro-organisms .
Research by the Dutch Institute of Environmental Sciences showed that use of phosphate-free detergents resulted in no improvement in surface water quality and led to eutrification worse , in many cases , than that experienced when phosphate-based detergents are used .
The reason for that is that the alternatives were found to be so toxic that they killed the vital zooplankton that feed on algae and phytoplankton in naturally balanced fresh water .
We have here a sensible proposal .
I do not accept the amendments tabled by the Green Group , which go too far , not least on the somewhat absurd eco-labelling proposals .
This is a measure we could have taken through in one reading .
I wish it well and again congratulate our rapporteur .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I believe that the regulation currently under debate is an extremely important regulation which is urgently needed .

I also believe that Mr Nobilia - whom I congratulate - has done an efficient job , as Mr Bowis , who spoke before me , has said , displaying great sensitivity , and that the result is positive for all the parties concerned .
I believe that it is extremely important that we realise - and of this I am absolutely convinced - that much more still remains to be done on environmental issues .
I know that the European Union is the driving force in this matter , although phosphates , for example , have already been banned in a number of countries for some time .
Italy is one of these countries , and while I was a member of the Italian parliament , when I was actually on the committee responsible , I helped to draw up legislative texts to that effect .
I believe that the other countries , who have not yet adopted legislation to this effect , should align themselves as fast as possible , not just in order to employ and display greater sensitivity but so as to ensure that there is greater focus on environmental requirements and , moreover , to provide the consumer with more information .
I do not agree with some of the objections raised in the House , including those raised by a Member from the Green Group , which , as usual , whenever it is not the instigator of proposals , sees only the negative points - a half-empty glass , so to speak - and not the positive points .
I , however , feel that this regulation contains ever so many positive points , indeed where all parties are concerned , and , in my opinion , the question of toxicity tests is already addressed in the directive on hazardous substances , and so it is not necessary for those provisions to be duplicated in the regulation .
I would now like to turn to a question that has recently been raised by a number of experts and scientists : the increase of hormonal substances in our waters and the significant effects on the aquatic fauna , with fish changing sex and finding it difficult to reproduce .
I believe this is a matter which warrants more attention in the future .
Lastly , I feel that knowledge in a range of areas is necessary in order to be qualified to give an opinion on these matters .
Just knowing how to use the washing machine is not enough .
They affect all consumers , and , even though this regulation is somewhat technical in nature , it ultimately concerns all consumers , in other words all the people of Europe .
Mr President , I have listened with great interest to the debate and taken note of the different concerns expressed .
Perhaps I could group the questions around six groups of amendments on which I can comment one by one .
Firstly , a number of the amendments seek to improve the wording of the Commission 's text and can be accepted .
I will enumerate them later .
Secondly , a number of amendments have a link to other legislation .
As regards animal testing , the aims of the Commission and the Parliament are the same .
It is on how such aims are to be reflected in the legislation that we differ .
The Commission cannot accept amendments that introduce policy statements that go beyond the scope of this proposal .
Many substances and preparations are already adequately regulated by the horizontal chemicals legislation .
It is unnecessary and undesirable to refer to them again in the detergents legislation .
Thirdly , there seems to be a desire to bring forward measures on phosphates , anaerobic biodegradability and organic ingredients other than surfactants .
The Commission is of the opinion that these are matters where the urgency for action is not so great as to preclude the establishment of a firm scientific base for legislation .
The extension of biodegradability testing to all substances and preparations at this stage would be a disproportionate and unjustifiable measure .
I will come back to phosphates later .
Fourthly , on labelling - detergents legislation is supplementary to the horizontal chemicals legislation and must therefore be compatible with it .
Cosmetics and detergents need to be , and are , separately legislated for .
The comparison between a washing-up liquid , which is a detergent , and a chemically similar shampoo , a cosmetic , is a tempting one to make , but it is an exceptional case .
No surfactant in an industrial detergent would ever be used in a cosmetic and no cosmetic surfactant would be of any use in a laundry detergent , let alone in an industrial detergent .
The purpose of the ingredients data sheet is to provide information to those who need it , e.g. doctors who treat patients suffering from allergies .
Manufacturers have a legitimate interest in ensuring that confidentiality is maintained .
Member States also have the right to request ingredient information from manufacturers for use by their poison centres .
Fifthly , on derogations .
The introduction of a lifetime limit for manufacturers for submitting the additional data requested by the Member States is a good idea .
According to our legal experts the criteria for refusing derogations must be explicitly stated in the text , otherwise a decision to refuse a derogation may not be enforceable in court .
A minimum data set is necessary to evaluate the request for derogation ; this is what we have specified in annex IV ; if , in addition , further data is required by a Member State for an evaluation , it can request as much or as little as is needed .
In this way we provide for a tiered approach .
Finally on phosphates .
The Commission has promised in Recital 31 to take action on phosphates if there is a solid scientific basis for doing so .
The Commission 's priority in this matter is to establish a sound scientific basis for action at Community level .
There is no urgent need at EU level on this matter .
Those Member States that feel particularly vulnerable to the environmental effects of phosphates have already taken national measures .
In some cases this was done many years ago and the situation in those countries has stabilised .
Any action at EU level needs to demonstrate clearly the added value of the present situation .
We hope to have a definitive opinion from the Scientific Committee on Toxicology , Eco-Toxicology and Environment on phosphates in detergents before the end of this year .
Finally , I would like to say that the Commission can accept in whole or in part amendments 2 , 4 , 8 , 17 to 19 , 22 ( partly ) , 27 ( partly ) , 34 to 37 - but only a part of amendment 37 - and 53 .
The Commission can accept in principle amendments 3 , 21 , 31 , 45 , 46 and 52 .
The other amendments are not acceptable to the Commission .
Thank you , Mr Liikanen .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place at 12 noon .
The next item is the recommendation for second reading ( A5-0099 / 2003 ) , on behalf of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy , on the Council common position for adopting a European Parliament and Council Directive amending , for the twenty-fifth time , Council Directive 76 / 769 / EEC on the approximation of the laws , regulations and administrative provisions of the Member States relating to restrictions on the marketing and use of certain dangerous substances and preparations ( substances classified as carcinogens , mutagens or substances toxic to reproduction - c / m / r ) [ 15703 / 2 / 2002 - C5-0013 / 2003 et 15703 / 2 / 2002.REV 2 COR 1 - C5-0013 / 2003 / COR - 2002 / 0040 ( COD ) ] ( rapporteur : Mrs Schörling ) .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , this draft Directive seeks to amend for the twenty-fifth time Council Directive 76 / 769 / EEC relating to restrictions on the marketing and use of certain dangerous substances and preparations .
Existing chemicals legislation states that , as soon as a substance or preparation has been classified as carcinogenic , mutagenic or toxic to reproduction , it must be included in this annex and not released onto the market .
This proposal applies to 44 new substances which must be added to this list .
I believe we are all agreed that that is a very good thing that this be done and that we must of course adopt the proposal to add these substances .
When Parliament debated this matter for the first time , we considered that there were two deficiencies in existing legislation that we very much wanted to remedy .
We believed that we did not need to wait for the new chemicals legislation and wanted , for the sake of public health , to make amendments more promptly .
The first deficiency was that the use in consumer articles of CMR substances - carcinogens , mutagens or substances toxic to reproduction - was not prohibited .
Articles of this kind include flooring , toys and textiles such as we come into contact with every day as consumers and which cause us genuinely to become exposed to these chemical compounds .
We therefore wanted a ban .
The second deficiency led to our naturally wanting a ban on the use of CMR products in cosmetics .
The Council has since rejected Parliament 's amendments .
Where cosmetic products are concerned , our proposal has however been accepted .
At a conciliation , it was agreed to ban category 1 and category 2 CMR substances in the cosmetics directive when the seventh amendment was made .
It can therefore be stated that Parliament 's proposal concerning cosmetic products has been accepted .
When it came to consumer articles , there were three main reasons why the Council wanted to reject Parliament 's amendments .
Firstly , it believed that there were no relevant scientific evaluations or risk assessments .
In fact , risk assessments have actually been carried out .
There has also been a proposal from the Commission to the effect that , since the use of chemicals by consumers cannot be controlled , safety can only be ensured by prohibiting the general use of substances and preparations that are carcinogenic , mutagenic or toxic to reproduction .
In the committee 's and my own view , there is no reason not to make the same assessment in connection with the use of consumer articles .
The argument does not , then , hang together in this respect .
Secondly , the Council referred to the fact that we are concerned here with a very large and unspecified number of products .
As I see it , that is a completely baffling argument .
It should be exactly the other way around .
If there are now so many products containing , for example , carcinogenic substances , there is surely genuine reason to take action instead of merely saying that , because there are such a lot of products , nothing can be done .
Thirdly , the Council stated that this issue will be addressed in the context of developing the new chemicals policy .
That is very commendable , and I am really pleased about it .
I believe that the proposal it may be possible to put before Parliament some time in June concerning the new chemicals legislation will also take these products into account .
It will , however , take a very long time before that legislation comes into force , so it would have been helpful to have obtained this amendment at the present stage .
Now , at second reading , it might have been imagined that we should have tabled the same amendment .
I have chosen , however , not to do so , and my colleagues in the committee were of the same view .
We brought debate of this matter to a head when the twenty-third amendment was adopted following Mr Nisticò 's report .
The same debate was conducted then , and it did not actually lead to anything .
I have therefore chosen to recommend to Parliament that , on the grounds that we have had our proposals concerning cosmetic products accepted , it adopt this second-reading recommendation concerning the Council 's common position .
We have come to the end of the road where the proposals relating to the second type of product are concerned .
We must accept matters as they stand .
Mr President , on behalf of the Socialist Group , I welcome and support this proposal .
It is a step forward that 44 new substances recognised as CMRs have been added to the list of banned substances and are going to be removed from products and other uses within the Union .
It is certainly a step forward in the protection of human health .
The question of cosmetics now appears to have been resolved and we can express ourselves satisfied with that agreement .
Again , that is a significant step forward for the health of cosmetics users .
As regards the question of chemicals in products , I accept the view expressed in Parliament 's report that we should start to look very closely at this issue .
However , I agree with the Commission that this issue has much wider implications than simply controlling 44 chemicals in our existing proposal and their potential dangers .
It is now clear that this issue is going to be addressed in the new forthcoming chemicals policy .
We can therefore express ourselves satisfied that we have made good progress on this proposal and we can look to pick up the issue of chemicals in products , and a range of other issues , when we address the chemicals policy proposal that we understand the Commission will be publishing for wider consultation on 7 May .
I expect we can start work on that in the autumn of this year .
Therefore , on behalf of the Socialist Group , I commend this proposal and its results to the House and look forward to continuing our constructive dialogue and work with the Commission .
Thank you , Mr Bowe .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place at 12 noon .
The next item is the Commission statement on the crisis on the international coffee market .
Mr President , I want to thank Commissioner Liikanen for his introductory speech .
Just as he says , the price of coffee has fallen dramatically in recent years .
We now have the lowest real price in decades , and it does not seem especially likely that prices will increase in the foreseeable future .
The price of the raw material itself is at present approximately just one per cent of the price on the market .
An ordinary coffee planter in Tanzania or Kenya earns at best a few euros per week .
That means that he or she - it is often women , by the way , who work on the coffee plantations - would have to labour for a week or more in order to afford a single cup of coffee in a bar here in Strasbourg .
Until the end of the Cold War , prices were reassuringly maintained .
You could survive on planting coffee .
Developments in recent years have , however , been devastating .
Competition has become tougher .
Just one of many reasons for this is that the World Bank has helped new countries outside Africa to organise large-scale coffee planting .
As so often , subsidies - however important they may appear in individual cases - have dealt a blow to prices and , in that way , damaged the prospects of survival for millions of small coffee planters , especially in Africa .
The collapse in coffee prices has led to a major crisis for tens of millions of coffee planters in dozens of developing countries , where coffee is not only an important source of jobs and income in the countryside , but also of currency income .
One problem in this connection - also addressed by Mr Liikanen - is that cultivation is too often unbalanced , and this naturally exacerbates the consequences of the crisis .
As long as small coffee planters are dependent upon just a single crop , their economic situation is , and will remain , incredibly precarious .
It would therefore seem incredibly important to diversify production , and there are opportunities for doing this that have not been made use of .
This presupposes , however , the adoption of a comprehensive approach to the system of cultivation .
I shall not attempt a more detailed scientific analysis , but allow me to give an example .
The coffee bush cannot at present be used for animal feed .
It contains caffeine , which animals cannot tolerate .
What is interesting , however , is that it is possible to cultivate excellent , nutritious mushrooms from the remnants of the coffee bush .
These mushrooms , for example shitaki mushrooms , are of high nutritional value and produce a much higher price per kilo on the market than coffee does .
Once the mushrooms have done their job and soaked up the caffeine , the remnants may be used as animal feed .
Suddenly , the indigent coffee planter has several different sources of income and more work opportunities .
Worthwhile projects are under way at present , for example in Colombia , to promote a broader view of the cultivation system .
As everyone without exception will surely appreciate , this presupposes , however , knowledge derived from a variety of research disciplines and not a one-sided focus upon a single crop .
In common with Commissioner Liikanen , I too do not believe there are quick and simple solutions .
The issue must nonetheless be addressed , and this must happen immediately within the framework of the whole Doha process and , above all , within the framework of our continued cooperation with those countries within our immediate purview .
As our resolution intimates , a long list of measures may be taken in the short term , especially to help those coffee planters who have ended up in this very problematic situation .
It should be possible to make use of the major surpluses within the European Development Fund to step up our efforts in the field of rural development - rural development that would then become more diversified in form than it would by focusing solely upon individual crops .
Through dialogue with the big coffee producers and retailers , it should also be possible to ensure that better wagers are paid to the indigent coffee planters .
I have only had time to touch upon just a few aspects of this issue .
I would thank Mr Liikanen for his contribution , and I look forward to continued dialogue .
Mr President , it is not the big international companies that are suffering during the coffee crisis .
On the contrary , it is those who are putting such pressure on prices that farmers are scarcely earning anything from the coffee they produce .
How can they get away with it ?
At a meeting in the European Parliament to debate the coffee crisis , Louis Belinda from Uganda gave the following answer . ' We have no alternative to coffee growing , ' he said .
' We have given fisheries a try , but EU regulations prevented that .
We have experimented with traditional agriculture , but EU exports of meat and milk at dumping prices mean that we cannot even sell our goods to other African countries .
We have had a go with sugar , but the EU 's export subsidy did not give us a chance . '
It is , then , not true , Commissioner Liikanen , that everything but arms solves the problem , for the EU 's agricultural policy destroys coffee growers ' ability to diversify into other forms of work .
The EU is therefore largely responsible for the fact that 25 million coffee growers are now threatened with extreme poverty , all the more so because the EU itself gave the developing countries the fatal advice to pin their hopes on coffee production .
The EU must and shall fulfil its responsibilities in this area .
The Development Fund has a surplus of DKK 7 500 million , so why does the EU hesitate to act while the coffee growers go hungry ?
Mr Wijkman had a solution involving mushrooms .
I think that idea sounded very interesting , and I hope the Commission will look into it .
The coffee growers must , however , be guaranteed a minimum income here and now .
That could happen by subsidising institutions such as the Max Havelaar one , but the EU should also , as quickly as possible , increase the coffee producers ' own influence on the market by strengthening their negotiating capacity - through supporting the development of cooperatives - and by giving them the opportunity to come up with better products and to be given access to credits .
It is quite immoral that the international coffee giants can be allowed to exploit the crisis in order further to increase their surpluses , which are already too high .
I should also like some answers to the questions put by Mrs Kinnock .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the coffee crisis is symptomatic of the relationship between the countries of the South and those of the North .
The North exploits monocultures and , in order to put itself at an advantage , helps itself to the raw materials they produce , at minimum prices , under the most adverse conditions , and in a poverty-stricken environment .
Consumers ' spending habits and consumer policy within the European Union also have to be borne in mind here .
Policies support the consumers ' desire for raw materials from developing countries at the lowest possible prices , whilst our own agricultural policies are defended with extraordinary vigour and - I am still being polite - we concentrate on keeping prices stable .
It is inevitable that such an incongruity must come to an end , and this must form part of an action plan on the part of the European Union .
In essence , economic relations are limited to the exploitation of raw materials , coffee being only one example of this , whilst these materials are processed and utilised , thus acquiring added value through the production process , within the industrialised countries .
For as long as this incongruity persists , the economic relationship between the countries of the North and of the South will be beset by constant problems .
We talk about diversification , and rightly too , for this is an important requirement , but it must also be given substance .
It is not enough to consider this concept in isolation and see it as the cure for all ills .
We must also ask what shape this diversification is to take , and let me make clear that this will involve the possibility of raw materials being processed in the developing country in which they were produced , where , at the very least , semi-manufactured goods should also be produced , for these are the means by which added value is created .
This will also involve willingness on our part to pay a proper price for them .
Where , for example , in the European Union 's institutions , can you find fairly traded coffee ?
Where , too , in the political institutions of our Member States ?
In which of this Parliament 's bars and restaurants is fairly traded coffee served ?
I could give any number of examples .
Any action plan by the Commission must of necessity include a proposal as to how goods can be fairly traded under present conditions .
I cannot see that there is a conclusive concept for this , one that would right now allow the farmers a truly fair share in their products if the existing fair trade infrastructure were to be put to use and extended .
In this area , we owe a debt to the developing countries .
I very much hope that this will meet with a response .
Mr President , I am happy to pass on the message of this debate to my colleagues , Mr Lamy and Mr Nielson .
I will , however , make a few comments .
You must remember that the real problem with the coffee sector is the lack of demand .
The supply is essentially about the demand , and for that reason trade negotiations are not the only solution .
It is very important that discussions in the World Bank / ICO context , or in ICO itself , lead to solutions .
Today 's problem is that the United States , which is the second biggest coffee consumer , is outside the ICO .
Unless the US is ready to reconsider its position in the context of ICO , then the measures will not have the same international impact .
As far as the proposal for an action plan before the next meeting and the level of Commission participation are concerned , I will pass Mrs Kinnock 's questions to Mr Lamy and Mr Nielson .
I am sure they will reply accordingly .
Thank you very much , Commissioner .
To conclude this debate , I have received six motions for resolutions , tabled pursuant to Rule 37 ( 2 ) of the Rules of Procedure .
The next item is the vote .
Recommendation for second reading ( A5-0099 / 2003 ) by the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy , on the Council common position with a view to adopting a European Parliament and Council Directive amending , for the twenty-fifth time , Council Directive 76 / 769 / EEC on the approximation of the laws , regulations and administrative provisions of the Member States relating to restrictions on the marketing and use of certain dangerous substances and preparations ( substances classified as carcinogens , mutagens or substances toxic to reproduction - c / m / r ) ( 15703 / 2 / 2002 - C5-0013 / 2003 and 15703 / 2 / 2002 REV 2 COR 1 - C5-0013 / 2003 / COR - 2002 / 0040 ( COD ) ) ( Rapporteur : Inger Schörling )
( The President declared the common position approved )
Report ( A5-0102 / 2003 ) by Jillian Evans , on behalf of the European Parliament delegation to the Conciliation Committee , on the joint text approved by the Conciliation Committee for a European Parliament and Council regulation on the animal-health requirements applicable to the non-commercial movement of pet animals and amending Council Directive 92 / 65 / EEC ( PE-CONS 3610 / 2003 - C5-0061 / 2003 - 2000 / 0221 ( COD ) )
( Parliament approved the joint text )
Report ( A5-0103 / 2003 ) by Peter Liese , on behalf of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy , on the proposal for a European Parliament and Council directive on setting standards of quality and safety for the donation , procurement , testing , processing , storage , and distribution of human tissues and cells ( COM ( 2002 ) 319 - C5-0302 / 2002 - 2002 / 0128 ( COD ) )
( Parliament adopted the legislative resolution )
Report ( A5-0049 / 2003 ) by Anne Ferreira , on behalf of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy , on the proposal for a Directive of the European Parliament and of the Council amending Directive 94 / 35 / EC on sweeteners for use in foodstuffs ( COM ( 2002 ) 375 - C5-0341 / 2002 - 2002 / 0152 ( COD ) )
( Parliament adopted the legislative resolution )
Report ( A5-0105 / 2003 ) by Mauro Nobilia , on behalf of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy , on the proposal for a European Parliament and Council regulation on detergents ( COM ( 2002 ) 485 - C5-0404 / 2002 - 2002 / 0216 ( COD ) )
( Parliament adopted the legislative resolution )
Report ( A5-0104 / 2003 ) by Timothy Kirkhope , on behalf of the Committee on Citizens ' Freedoms and Rights , Justice and Home Affairs , on the initiative by the Federal Republic of Germany with a view to adopting a Council Directive on assistance in cases of transit for the purposes of removal by air ( 14848 / 2002 - C5-0011 / 2003 - 2003 / 0801 ( CNS ) )
( Following rejection of the proposal , and in the absence of the Council , the report was referred back to committee )
Report ( A5-0078 / 2003 ) by Danielle Auroi , on behalf of the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development , on the proposal for a Council directive amending Directives 66 / 401 / EEC on the marketing of fodder plant seed , 66 / 402 / EEC on the marketing of cereal seed , 68 / 193 / EEC on the marketing of material for the vegetative propagation of the vine , 92 / 33 / EEC on the marketing of vegetable propagating and planting material , other than seed , 92 / 34 / EEC on the marketing of propagating and planting material of fruit plants , 98 / 56 / EC on the marketing of propagating material of ornamental plants , 2002 / 54 / EC on the marketing of beet seed , 2002 / 55 / EC on the marketing of vegetable seed , 2002 / 56 / EC on the marketing of seed potatoes and 2002 / 57 / EC on the marketing of seed of oil and fibre plants as regards Community comparative tests and trials ( COM ( 2002 ) 523 - C5-0476 / 2002 - 2002 / 0232 ( CNS ) )
( Parliament adopted the legislative resolution )
Recommendation to the Council ( A5-0116 / 2003 ) by Christian Ulrik von Boetticher and Maurizio Turco , on behalf of the Committee on Citizens ' Freedoms and Rights , Justice and Home Affairs , on the future development of Europol ( 2003 / 2070 ( INI ) )
( Parliament approved the recommendation )
Report ( A5-0085 / 2003 ) by Kathalijne Maria Buitenweg , on behalf of the Committee on Citizens ' Freedoms and Rights , Justice and Home Affairs , including a proposal for a recommendation of the European Parliament to the Council on the reform of the Conventions on drugs ( 2003 / 2015 ( INI ) )
( Parliament rejected the resolution )
Report ( A5-0053 / 2003 ) by Juan José Bayona de Perogordo , on behalf of the Committee on Culture , Youth , Education , the Media and Sport , on an information and communication strategy for the European Union ( 2002 / 2205 ( INI ) )
( Parliament adopted the resolution )
Report ( A5-0111 / 2003 ) by Philippe Morillon , on behalf of the Committee on Foreign Affairs , Human Rights , Common Security and Defence Policy , on the new European security and defence architecture - priorities and deficiencies ( 2002 / 2165 ( INI ) )
Before the vote on Amendment 9 :
Mr President , with regard to Amendment No 9 , I propose adding the following phrase : ' hopes that other Member States will agree to be associated with it ' .
This concerns the initiative tabled by Belgium , France , Germany and Luxembourg .
. ( NL ) With this report the European Parliament has again gone too far with regulation .
When we decide that ' fundamental ethical principles must be taken into account ' we are skating on thin ice .
At the same time notions such as ' altruism ' and ' solidarity ' cannot be captured in legislation .
As a European Parliament we must not start deciding what ethical rules apply in the Member States .
What are we thinking of , defining the notion of ' ethics ' from Finland to Greece ?
Countries must decide for themselves what ethical standards they are going to employ .
Boarding up the legislation actually has an undesirable effect .
You make it more difficult for countries and donors to save people 's lives .
This is the reason why I have voted against the Liese report .
.
( NL ) In September 2000 rapporteur Liese secured the support of a small majority in this Parliament for his rejection of the use of human material as a means of curing disease and rectifying abnormalities in human bodies .
Even scientific research to this end was to be banned .
This position was rejected by the United Left , the Social Democrats and the Liberals .
It nonetheless secured a majority because the Greens supported the Christian Democrats .
My party too , the Socialist Party in the Netherlands , is not in the least enthusiastic about the therapeutic cloning of people .
Commercial and industrial cloning or cloning to create people with certain characteristics are also unacceptable to us .
But a solution must be found for people who need a new heart , kidney or liver and also for Parkinson 's disease sufferers .
This time Mr Liese has steered a slightly more middle course and made agreements with the Social Democrats .
Although this compromise can now secure a broad majority , I do not support it .
It is now above all a question of centralising all the decisions at EU level , and making them uniform , at the expense of the freedom of the Member States .
This proposal provides too few solutions and too many prohibitions .
This will prevent Member States from adopting a vanguard position in the difficult search for solutions .
. ( PT ) In the debate on this directive that has taken place in the European Parliament over the last few months there are two issues on which no consensus has been reached with regard to their compliance with the principles that have just been referred to .
I am talking about the voluntary and unpaid donation of stem cells removed from human embryos and the use of these cells .
On the first issue , I believe that , in order to prevent the commercialisation of the human body , we must do more than simply recommend to the Member States that they promote voluntary and unpaid donation .
The directive must state , quite unequivocally , that the donation of tissue or cells can only be done out of the donor 's free will and always without payment , except possibly for compensation to reimburse travel expenses or light refreshments .
On the second issue , - embryonic stem cells - I believe the directive must be cautious , on the one hand obliging Member States to ban both reproductive and therapeutic cloning , but must allow Member States , on the other , to take the decision on whether or not to permit research into supernumerary embryos , that is , embryos created for the purposes of in vitro fertilisation but which can no longer be implanted into the genetic parents and are therefore frozen and condemned to be destroyed .
- ( DA ) The June Movement supports a significant reduction in the limit values for cyclamic acid and is to vote in favour of the greatest possible reduction in the limit values and in favour of the European Parliament 's overall amendments to the Commission 's proposal .
The proposal added a further two sweeteners to the positive list of permitted sweeteners .
The June Movement does not wish to help extend the positive list of permitted sweeteners .
The June Movement is therefore voting against the overall proposal .
. ( PT ) Some people have specific dietary requirements and sweeteners provide considerable advantages for these individuals , in particular allowing them to use products containing fewer calories .
Nevertheless , consuming these products which contain sweeteners , such as milk-based drinks and fruit juices , can cause health problems in children and they must therefore be consumed sparingly .
The work by Mrs Ferreira is to be welcomed and I would highlight , in particular , her proposal for the dose of cyclamic acid to be reduced to 250 mg / l .
Another proposal that I wish to applaud is the proposal to encourage better labelling of products containing aspartame so that the consumer has more precise information on the Acceptable Daily Intake .
.
( PT ) I congratulate Mr Nobilia on his report .
In line with the precautionary principle and with a view to protecting the environment , we must give a boost to setting biodegradability thresholds and to implementing new techniques for measuring the biodegradability of surfactants in detergents .
Existing legislation does not fully meet these aims .
I therefore welcome this new legislation since it : increases the number of surfactants that will be monitored and measured ; it introduces a new technique for measuring biodegradability ; it harmonises risk assessment systems and promotes a new labelling system .
I do feel , however , that the directive lacks ambition with regard to limiting phosphates in detergents .
. ( PT ) The Commission is now launching this debate , belatedly and not in full public view , when it has already given into pressure by the biotechnology multinationals to lift the moratorium on GMOs .
Furthermore , the way in which it is addressing this so-called ' coexistence ' between the two forms of crop owes more to economic factors than to anything else .
This contamination is uncontrollable .
Look at the experience of the USA or Canada and of the countries that are obliged to introduce GMOs , through food aid , making States ' food policies and farmers dependent on the huge food-producing multinationals .
This report addresses the issue of seeds , which underpin all agricultural production .
Their contamination involves upstream contamination , thereby eventually preventing any mix of organic and conventional farming .
This report represents ' the lesser evil ' , given that the rapporteur 's amendments are concerned with the contamination of seeds by GMOs and with setting the minimum technically detectible quantity as a threshold for the adventitious presence of GMOs .
Although this is a step backwards , it is a way of facing up to the pressures of the multinationals and to the Commission 's attempts to increase these thresholds , which would make the presence of GMOs more widespread , which would be incompatible with the precautionary principle and with ensuring that consumers have food that is genuinely ' free ' of GMOs .
It is encouraging that cooperation within Europol can be made more efficient through its being possible to make decisions by means of qualified majority voting and codecision on the part of the European Parliament .
We wish , however , to make it clear that , in the future too , possible operations on the part of Europol must take place through intergovernmental cooperation .
This view also accords with draft Article 22 of the Europol Convention , presented by the EU Convention 's Praesidium .
. ( PT ) We are now hearing the final echo of the observations that were made yesterday about the Turco and von Boetticher reports .
In fact , this proposal for a recommendation is a consequence of the rejection of the Danish and Greek initiatives and is the corollary to the purely imaginary exercise and the game of make-believe that both rapporteurs have been peddling .
It is worth pointing out why they considered these initiatives to be misguided , and this is because , for example , they think it would be a mistake to adopt amendments to the Europol Convention ' prior to the ratification of the European Constitution ' !
They are consequently now proposing that this area , which falls under the second pillar , should be transferred to the sphere of Community competence , or the first pillar , thereby ' communitarising ' it .
Now , the European Parliament is not the Convention , it is not the IGC and this is not therefore what we should be doing if we wish to work seriously , with the welfare of our citizens in mind .
As I stated in my explanations of vote on those reports , it is possible and necessary to move ahead within the current legal framework - which was the intention of the four initiatives of the Danish and Greek Presidencies .
This is the sphere in which we should participate responsibly , sticking , incidentally , to the approach of taking small steps . This is the method with which we have successfully achieved European integration .
To be consistent , therefore , I have voted against the recommendation .
Because the European Parliament adopted Amendment No 17 , urging the Member States to implement the conventions in full , and because Paragraph 3 was completely omitted from the report , we were prepared to vote in favour of the resolution in the final vote .
We do not however agree with Paragraph 11 and Recital L.
We believe that the UN Conventions on Drugs form the basis for the entire EU drugs policy , and we want this basis to remain .
We are not in favour of amending or rescinding any of the conventions , which are international treaties that operate well .
We support a drugs policy based on preventive work , treatment and a policy of criminalisation and control .
. Whilst I always welcome the opportunity to debate the issue of drugs and drug abuse , I am a firm believer that the case for the liberalisation of the current drugs policy has not been made .
Each of us must have concern for those who suffer the horrors of addiction and we must do all that is possible to assist them to recover from their addiction : facilitating the use of drugs is not the way to assist them .
The current UN Conventions set out clear guidelines for all countries to apply their own national law and enforcement procedures .
Despite what some may say , these actions have been successful in helping to reduce the supply , exchange information on best practice and intelligence on the activities of drug trafficking and drug dealers .
How best do we serve this purpose ?
By facilitating them in harming themselves or assisting them to avoid putting themselves in danger ?
I believe that we must protect people as much as possible from the dangers of drugs .
Lastly , at a time when we rightly seek to inform people of the dangers of tobacco and to reduce tobacco use , it seems illogical to me that we would seek to legislate for the liberalisation of drugs .
( Abbreviated in accordance with Rule 137 ( 1 ) of the Rules of Procedure )
We are voting against this own-initiative report , since we are in favour neither of liberalisation nor of increased repression in the drugs area .
The conventions adopted by the UN ought not to be amended by the institutions of the European Union .
Each country should cooperate in reviewing the options for minimising drug misuse and ensure that there is fast and effective treatment to help individuals in their need to put drug misuse behind them .
. ( PT ) This report makes a broadly positive assessment of the current situation and of the proposals to be presented at the UN Ministerial Conference , which will take place on 16 and 17 April , in Vienna .
Nevertheless , other recommendations should be included , specifically on the need to change the framework of international trade , which is economically imbalanced , on resolving the problem of the indebtedness of the least-developed countries , on encouraging the cultivation of farm produce to replace drug crops and on the use of products to replace drug consumption .
In our view , it could be useful to condemn the 1988 UN Convention if we are aiming to exclude penalising drug consumption and the possession of small quantities for personal use , as is already the case in Portugal , and so we rejected the positions that seek to prevent any amendments to this Convention .
As regards the so-called drugs tables , we acknowledge that there is a need for some adjustment to the current situation , although this must always be done on a scientific basis , specifically with regard to changing the position of drugs within the table .
. ( PT ) As I said during the debate , this is not the time to weaken or to give the idea that our determination in combating drugs and the blight they represent is waning .
Given the prospect of the forthcoming meeting in Vienna , the European Parliament should not send a single sign of hesitancy , of weakness , or of retreating .
Nor should it create ambiguities for the future and even more loopholes and ways of evading the global discipline defined in the United Nations Conventions currently before us .
Consequently , since my alternative motion for a resolution has not been adopted - although I am gratified and thank those Members who supported it for the large vote it received in plenary - the best outcome would actually have been for Parliament not to adopt anything and to clearly reject the motion put forward by the rapporteur , and by implication , the entire own-initiative procedure of which it is a part .
I am glad that this is what has happened .
All those representing the European Parliament at the Vienna meeting must take account of this outcome and , adhering to the democratic method , scrupulously respect the fact that plenary has clearly rejected the ideas and proposals put forward by Messrs Buitenweg and Cappato .

. MEPs sensitive to the views of their constituents share their grave concern about the menace of drugs and drug trafficking to our young people and to our societies in general .
The police and prosecuting authorities , the courts , and the prison services bear a heavy burden in seeking to uphold and enforce the law and to protect our citizens from this menace .
They deserve our support and they certainly have mine .
We are faced today with a proposal to review objectively the question whether the UN Conventions of 1961 , 1971 , and 1998 relating to drugs are working effectively .
It may be that , after full inquiry , the international community should adopt new approaches in relation to certain problems and anomalies .
Whether this should happen or not depends on the evidence .
We need an inquiry to establish which way the evidence points .
Unilateral departure from the Conventions would , by contrast , be quite unacceptable .
The law must be firmly upheld both nationally and internationally until such time , if any , as it is amended for considered reasons .
On this ground I voted for the Buitenweg Report , and I previously signed Mr Cappato 's declaration which provided the occasion for the Report .
As Mr Cappato is well aware , I am not dogmatically pre-committed to the solutions he recommends .
. ( NL ) The use of drugs , be they hard or soft , takes people away from useful activities and renders them less healthy .
It would therefore be wonderful if drugs did not exist or if no one had any need of them .
The reality is unfortunately different .
International agreements that oblige states to apply zero tolerance are not going to produce a drugs-free world .
Many young people experience the use of soft drugs as an inalienable freedom and there are also profiteers who happily make people dependent on the use of expensive hard drugs .
A ban on soft drugs simply leads to young people rebelling and eases their move onto the use of hard drugs .
I defend the Dutch system not because I am seeking a high point of individual freedom , but because it helps prevent insoluble problems .
My Group of the European United Left has introduced two extremes to this debate .
Mrs Schröder is making herself the mouthpiece of rebellious youth and defending total freedom without any regulation by government .
Mr Alyssandrakis as a traditional Communist can see only dangerous drugs barons who must be mercilessly eliminated .
Both are telling part of the truth , but saying nothing about the rest .
Mrs Buitenweg 's report proposes a good middle way , one with which we in the Netherlands have acquired good experience .
I have supported this way thus far and will continue to do so .
. ( PT ) Our policy for combating drug addiction has proved to be a failure .
I therefore believe it is important to use the reform of the Conventions on Drugs to : 1 - look into decriminalising the consumption of some drugs and legalising them ; 2 - move towards drawing up rational prevention policies based on scientific knowledge of each drug and not on the emotional and radical approach which , by treating all drugs in the same way , ultimately removes credibility from preventive action ; 3 - boost the development of a damage reduction policy that takes account of the positive results achieved in the pilot experiments run in Berne and Liverpool , which involved administering , under medical control , opiates to patients with a long history of failed treatment .
These results include a fall in the crime rate , in the number of overdoses and in the number of cases of HIV , tuberculosis and hepatitis B and C transmitted .
We Moderates believe it is very important for people to have access to those documents we politicians discuss within the EU .
It is on the basis of their opportunities for keeping track of legislative work that people can evaluate elected representatives and subsequently make decisions in general elections .
The EU institutions can provide information about which decisions are made , and how , but it is the right of the independent mass media to make judgments themselves concerning current affairs and to decide what they are to provide information about .
It is we politicians who must take responsibility for giving out political messages and political information , something that obviously applies both to choosing the points at issue and setting them out before people .
We Moderates believe that people should have access to information .
The EU should not , however , make use of artificial channels such as sports events to put forward political messages .
We Moderates are therefore voting against the above-mentioned report .
. ( PT ) Of course we do not dispute the need for the citizens of the various countries that make up the EU to be better informed about the policies that are promoted in their countries and , it goes without saying , about the consequences of these policies .
In fact , quite the opposite is true . We think , however , that simply ' being informed ' is not enough .
We attach high priority to the need for a genuine participatory debate that airs the very different political positions that are held , all the more so because the issues we are currently debating are of key importance to the future of every country .
The report that has just been presented fails to do this and is concerned with raising the EU 's popularity through propaganda campaigns when , in our opinion , the key issue concerns the fundamental political choices made at EU level , which are all neoliberal , federalist and militaristic .
First of all , the issue is not ' how best to construct propaganda ' , using the campaign for the euro as an example for ' enlargement ' and for ' Europe 's role in the world ' .
Furthermore , I must comment on the way in which the Office of the European Commission in Portugal carries out its business , undertaking initiatives on important issues being debated in the EU , whilst discriminating against those who , like us , take a more critical view .
. ( PT ) No one any longer denies that there is an information deficit with regard to the European Union , the way it operates and its usefulness .
One only has to recall that 50 % of Europeans is ignorant of , or indifferent to , the Union and that the rate of turnout in elections to the European Parliament fell from 63 % in 1979 to 49 % in 1999 .
This information deficit contributes to creating a veritable gulf between European citizens and Community Institutions .
This is the context that forms the backdrop to the European Commission 's strategy for information and communication in the EU .
Access to information is crucial to the full exercise of European citizenship .
For this reason , effective information policy must be based on the ' assertion of its common values ' such as democracy , pluralism , cultural diversity , cohesion and solidarity .
More important still is to show , by giving practical examples , the everyday advantages gained from joining the EU , such as the euro , citizenship and freedom of movement .
In order to improve the effectiveness of EU information campaigns , every message must be clear , impartial , accessible and available in every citizen 's own language .
Lastly , information campaigns must be coordinated at Community level , by the European institutions , thereby better enabling needs to be identified . At the same time , however , such campaigns must be decentralised to national and regional level .
. ( PT ) The rapporteur has ultimately missed an opportunity to take a new , democratic and sensible look at the EU 's information and communication policy , with a view to providing a genuine service to the citizens .
He has chosen to stick with the tired old model for providing information , which is founded on clichés and sacrifices pluralism and practical sense at the confused altar of unrealistic and abstract ' joint visions ' and of politically correct banalities .
I have therefore voted against the report .
In fact , the well-known spreading across the European institutions of the single thought on the development of the European model weakens democratic debate , distances many citizens and narrows Europe 's horizons .
Impartiality and doctrinal pluralism are the main victims of this propagandist form of ' information ' , which is clearly discriminatory , frequently confusing electoral propaganda with information about the institutions .
The fact that the citizens have little knowledge of the EU and feel relatively uninvolved with it ( according to Eurobarometer ) clearly demonstrates the failure of this strategy .
The success of the Euro campaign , by way of contrast , proves that it is practical issues , consistent actions and the dissemination of tangible instruments that promote European integration - not the demand for ' a common cultural basis ' or the artificial injection of ' a sense of belonging ' .
Along the same practical and effective lines , the report urges the Council to open to the public meetings in which it exercises legislative powers and regrets the fact that the Commission is still not setting an example for respecting linguistic diversity on many websites ...
( Explanation of vote abbreviated in accordance with Rule 137 ( 1 ) of the Rules of Procedure )
We are in favour of a common foreign policy in the EU and recommend that the EU put resources into preventive work , mediation and crisis management .
Defence is a national issue .
We cannot therefore support a common military defence , increased defence costs financed from the Community budget or a collective defence clause .
We shall therefore vote against the report .
- ( DA ) We have voted in favour of the overall motion for a resolution , because it is most promising at a time when it is very necessary to strengthen the EU 's defence and security policy .
Where collective defence is concerned , we attach importance to NATO 's remaining the indispensable link binding the United States to Europe 's security interests , and we continue to attach great importance to the maintenance of good transatlantic relations .
We cannot , however , support the Member States ' and the candidate countries ' being called upon to apply the principle of Community preference in purchasing arms , in order in that way to guarantee the security of supply .
As liberals , we support in this case too the principle of the open market economy , for that is what will guarantee arms purchases of the highest quality .
We have declined to vote in favour of the desire for a protocol to the Treaty , adding a collective defence clause for those Member States that wish to divide the obligations embedded in Article V of the Brussels Treaty and so bring the Western European Union to an end .
We believe that responsibility for Danish security lies first and foremost with NATO .
.
( PT ) Even with the considerable differences seen in the positions of the Member State governments on the unjust , illegitimate and illegal preventive war against Iraq , the majority of Members still insist on giving their support to increasing the EU 's military capacities and to creating a common foreign , security and defence policy which has all the resources it requires . We reject this approach , both because it represents a clear attack on every country 's sovereignty and because of its potential for creating a Europe based on the use of force .
These Members are consequently also calling for closer collaboration with NATO , for a military force that undertakes action independently to be operational with effect from 2004 , and for an armaments agency funded from the Community budget , which we also reject .
Consequently , we have voted against the report .
We call for peace and cooperation , not war .
Conflicts must be resolved by diplomatic means , not by the use of force .
The arms race not only involves shifting to this area resources that are essential to development and to fighting poverty and social exclusion , but can also lead to wars and the destruction of humanity .
We totally reject this approach .
. ( NL ) The European Union seems to be developing into a federal superstate .
In federations many powers are in the hands of the individual states , but only the federation decides on foreign policy and defence .
On the other hand the EU Member States have so far retained their own ministers of Foreign Affairs , their own embassies , their separate seats at the United Nations and their armies .
This contrast is causing some Members of this Parliament to start working towards a single EU representative on the Security Council and a single European army , with a view to becoming the second world superpower alongside the United States of America .
Not a superpower opposed to the US , but an ally of equal standing that can intervene in the rest of the world together with the US .
My party , the Socialist Party in the Netherlands , considers this a mistaken development .
The EU will do better to concern itself with the resolution of cross-border problems within Europe and keeping control of large international concerns that take no account of the interests and the democratic rights of the vast majority of people .
In a military context Europe should confine itself to the defence of its own territory , purely humanitarian aid outside Europe and if necessary peacekeeping assistance at the request of all the parties concerned in candidate countries , as is happening now in Macedonia .
Anything that goes beyond this I reject .
. ( PT ) In reworking the underhand method of imposing European centralism , the rapporteur has chosen - even though he denies this - to disregard the current historical situation , straying from the divergent interests of the Member States with regard to the ESDP and far exceeding commitments given voluntarily , at the Helsinki European Council of 1999 in particular .
The only way we could have an EU with ' one strong and clear voice ' today would be to force most Member States to keep quiet .
This would be unacceptable . In the current context , there are no real grounds for the pressure to justify the trend to communitise the second pillar on the basis of the need to enhance ' the credibility of its foreign policy objectives ' .
The constant comparison with the United States of America , a sovereign State and a two-hundred year old nation , betrays the rapporteur 's preferred direction for the EU to take , which I clearly cannot support .
Apart from being a structural paradox , reconstructing the European institutional architecture , starting at the very top , is the complete opposite of the model advocated by the Founding Fathers , causing one to fear for the solidity and coherence that are gradually being assembled .
I have therefore voted against the report .
That concludes the explanations of vote .
( The sitting was suspended at 1.10 p.m. and resumed at 3 p.m. )

The next item is the debate on cases of the violation of human rights , democracy and the rule of law .
The next item is the debate on the following six motions for resolutions on human rights in Guatemala :
B5-0210 / 2003 by Mr Gasòliba i Böhm and others , on behalf of the Group of the European Liberal and Democratic Party , on human rights in Guatemala ;
B5-0214 / 2003 by Mr Kreissl-Dörfler and Mr van den Berg , on behalf of the Group of the Party of European Socialists , on human rights in Guatemala ;
B5-0217 / 2003 by Mr Liese and Mr Posselt , on behalf of the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats , on future cooperation policy in support of food safety and rural development in Guatemala ;
B5-0220 / 2003 by Mr Mayol i Raynal and others , on behalf of the Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance , on human rights in Guatemala ;
B5-0225 / 2003 by Mrs González Álvarez and others , on behalf of the Confederal Group of the United European Left / Nordic Green Left , on Guatemala .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats supports this compromise resolution on the human rights situation in Guatemala .
I am very glad that this issue is on today 's agenda .
I worked , for a time , as a doctor in Guatemala , and myself became familiar with the situation in that country .
The greatest problem in Guatemala was then - and still is - the extreme disparity between wealth and poverty .
Being a Christian Democrat , I certainly am not among those who leap to the defence of tax increases .
In Europe and in my own country too , taxes are certainly too high , but the situation in Guatemala is that the rich simply do not see themselves as being under any obligation to contribute to the country 's development .
That is why we have incorporated into the Joint Resolution a passage intended to ensure that the necessary adjustments are made , as it is necessary also to draw upon the financial resources of the wealthy in a given country for such purposes as the improvement of its educational systems .
The issue of land and of the way in which it is shared out is without doubt a key to future development in Guatemala and in its neighbouring countries , and , at the end of 2002 , MEPs belonging to different groups organised a conference on the subject .
What I learned from this conference was that it is possible to reach the same objective without resorting to inflammatory language , and for that reason , the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats has not used the term ' agricultural reform ' , opting instead for an expression that , although rather more unwieldy , has found its way into the Joint Resolution , simply in order to avoid provoking counter-reactions that would then get us no nearer our objective .
Something else that is very important - and I am glad that it has been incorporated into the Joint Resolution - is that any policy must have education and training as one of its basic components .
It is no use simply giving people a plot of land ; they also have to know how to cultivate it .
Taken as a whole , the Joint Resolution is an even-handed compromise , and it is out of conviction that we support it .
Mr President , Mr Liese has already referred to the conference that our group organised with him and other fellow MEPs in September last year at which we agreed to submit this resolution to this Parliament and the Commission .
We are after all convinced that the extreme poverty of the rural population that has to make a living from survival agriculture makes this the poorest population in the world .
The rural population , which in Guatemala largely consists of the indigenous population , is unfortunately no exception to this .
That is why it is of the utmost importance that each of the sentences in this resolution is considered very carefully .
We do not have the time to go into each of these aspects in depth , but it is clear that in these circumstances land reform is necessary , even if that word is taboo .
It is the indigenous population that is clearly suffering most and that has no access to healthy food , that has no access to a good education and that has no access to land .
The women are the biggest victims of all because they simply do not count , although in many cases it is they who have to provide alone for very large , extended families .
There is a wave of human rights violations at the moment and people in the country are acting with complete impunity .
In these circumstances there are good reasons to recall the ratification of membership of the International Criminal Court and we would also like to insist on the abolition of the death penalty .
All this to underline that just one of the countries for which we had some hope a few years ago is threatening to slip back into a state of impunity again , the agreements of 1996 remaining a dead letter .
We donate quite a lot of money to cooperation with these countries in Latin America .
Let us ensure that our international agreements , which come down to our aid and our cooperation having first to be for the benefit of the poorest , actually make this possible and that the government is obliged to lend its assistance in this .
Mr President , almost six years have passed since the conclusion of the peace agreements . Nonetheless , MINUGUA , the United Nations Mission to Guatemala admits the agreements are stalled .
Regression has even been noted in some cases .
As Mr Liese rightly pointed out , the House has been addressed by small farmers from Guatemala and by representatives of the institutions in that country .
It was stated clearly that some of this regression involved the murder of small farmers or threats against them . The rights of the indigenous people are again being violated .
The judiciary lacks the means to administer justice . Even the National Coordinator for indigenous peoples and small farmers has denounced the lack of security regarding land .
We were therefore requested to ensure that the peace agreements are put firmly back on track when the next advisory group meeting is held in May of this year . Renewed effort is called for on the part of the European Commission to promote the peace agreements .
This is especially urgent in certain basic areas such as the fight against impunity , appropriate fiscal reform and the fight against poverty .
More work is also needed on land distribution , together with a law on registration and land registry information .
These were the main points agreed during the seminar Mr Liese mentioned .
Mr President , on behalf of the one of the authors , Mr Kreissl-Dörfler , I should like to express the total support of the PSE Group .
It is vital that we remember the victims of the current increase in violence and call on the government to protect their rights : human rights , the right of freedom of association and freedom of belief .
Equally we are concerned at the insecurity of the indigenous peoples and their eviction from the land where they work .
We must also recognise and fight against the discrimination experienced by indigenous and peasant women .
There must be a recognition of their work and their rights on the land and within the country .
Furthermore , this House expresses with one voice its total support for the peace process in Guatemala .
With peace we can rebuild communities and with rebuilt communities we can ensure that fundamental human rights are respected .
Mr President , Guatemala , home to an ancient culture , is a country that has , again and again , suffered grave setbacks .
Recent history shows us that , ever since the murder , in the seventies , of the German ambassador Graf Spreti , who was a diplomat and politician of note , this region of Central America has repeatedly found itself under the spotlight of European and German public opinion and was battered by one crisis after another , to which any response came too late .
We were always too late in responding to the bloody acts of violence , to the revolutions , and to the terrorism .
So I thank Mr Liese and all the others who have taken the initiative in putting forward this masterpiece of pre-emptive diplomacy , a brief resolution which , for the first time , is not a reaction to a crisis of the sort with which we are familiar in our debates on topical and urgent matters - although there is of course an acute crisis going on .
Primarily , though , this is about prevention , and , moreover , prevention through action rather than through words .
It gets right to the core issues , these being the whole area of agriculture and the reforms that it needs .
Secondly , it turns to economic reform and the area of fiscal legislation , which really is bizarre .
The crucial thing is that it also embeds the peace process , to which the European Union can make a substantial contribution by supporting and setting up dialogue , as well , of course , as in the field of economic cooperation and development aid .
I am very grateful for this initiative .
It is my belief that the real task of this House is not always to merely condemn , but to actively endeavour to devise strategies for minimising disasters , or averting them completely .
Mr President , this is an important issue .
The Commission is monitoring very closely the situation in Guatemala , where , as a number of speakers have said this afternoon , mounting infringements of the rule of law and human rights , as well as the deepening polarisation within Guatemalan society , are causing increasing political and social tension on the eve of the 2003 elections .
At the same time , difficult access to food , extreme poverty and social protest are increasingly alarming issues .
Within this unfortunate and unhappy scenario , in line with the resolution on Guatemala that the European Parliament issued in April 2002 , the Commission is reinforcing the political dialogue and cooperation initiatives .
Our objective is to encourage the Guatemalan institutions and society to relaunch a national agenda based on the peace accords , good governance and the fight against poverty .
From the point of view of the political dialogue , the Commission and the Member States constantly remind the Guatemalan public institutions of the importance of respecting the dignity and securing the wellbeing of all Guatemalan people on the basis of the principles of democracy , equality , non-discrimination and social justice .
During the last months , the Commission has also participated in various EU actions to transmit to the Supreme Court of Justice and the local authorities our preoccupation about the increasing wave of threats , attacks and violence in that country .
In May 2002 the Commission adopted a strategy for cooperation with Guatemala during the period 2002 to 2006 .
That strategy is aimed at sustaining the peace accords and breaking the cycle of poverty and exclusion that affects the country .
The strategy was established with the large-scale participation of the Guatemalan Government , Member States and local and European civil society .
It will focus on three main areas : first , consolidation of the rule of law and protection of human rights ; secondly , local and rural development based on participation , inclusion and equity ; and thirdly , equitable economic growth and job creation .
The indicative financial resources are EUR 93 million for the period 2002 to 2006 .
It is also worth mentioning that Guatemala is a priority country under the European Initiative for Democracy and Human Rights .
As Members of Parliament will know , there will be a further Consultative Group meeting scheduled in Guatemala City for 13 and 14 May 2003 .
At that meeting the Commission and Member States will urge the Guatemalan authorities and society to renew efforts to accelerate the implementation of the Peace Agenda signed in 1996 , especially in those areas where unsatisfactory results have been registered so far , such as the justice system , rural development , and the situation of the indigenous people .
We shall also ask for the allocation of adequate budgetary resources for social expenditure .
Finally , the Commission stands ready to support Guatemala in monitoring the next electoral process and guaranteeing a transparent and democratic transfer of power - as it did for the last elections in 1999 .
During his visit to Brussels in January 2003 Minister Gutiérrez , asked for the support of the European Union .
The Supreme Electoral Tribunal has also asked for our support .
The Commission and Member States will decide whether to prepare an EU electoral observation mission on the basis of an exploratory mission that will be sent in May 2003 .
Thank you , Commissioner Bolkestein .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place following this debate .
The next item is the debate on the following seven motions for resolutions on human rights in Cuba :
B5-0209 / 2003 by Mr Galeote Quecedo and others , on behalf of the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats , on Cuba ;
B5-0211 / 2003 by Mr Gasòliba i Böhm and others , on behalf of the Group of the European Liberal and Democratic Party , on the most recent arrests in Cuba and on the suspension of relations between the European Union and Cuba ;
B5-0213 / 2003 by Mr van den Berg and Mr Obiols i Germà , on behalf of the Group of the Party of European Socialists , on Cuba ;
B5-0218 / 2003 by Mr Mayol i Raynal and others , on behalf of the Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance , on Cuba ;
B5-0221 / 2003 by Mr Queiró and Mrs Muscardini , on behalf of the Union for a Europe of the Nations Group , on Cuba ;
B5-0222 / 2003 by Mr Belder , on behalf of the Group for a Europe of Democracies and Diversities , on Cuba ;
B5-0223 / 2003 by Mr Wurtz , on behalf of the Confederal Group of the United European Left / Nordic Green Left , on human rights in Cuba .
Mr President , Oswaldo Payá , winner of the 2002 Sakharov Prize , stated in this very Chamber that thousands of his countrymen and women are fighting for their rights in the midst of persecution . He also stated that hundreds of his fellow citizens had been imprisoned for claiming and defending those rights .
The situation in Cuba remains unchanged .
Amongst those arrested and sentenced in the last wave of repression are human rights defenders and peaceful dissidents .
Many of them were members of the Christian Liberation Movement , and involved in the Varela Project .
Independent journalists such as Raúl Rivero were also targeted .
This gentleman is 57 years of age and received a 20-year prison sentence . Others sentenced include Omar Rodríguez , a photographer , who received a 27-year sentence and another journalist , Víctor Rolando Arroyo , sentenced to 26 years in prison .
Mr President , it is no accident that Cuba is the only Latin American country not linked to the European Union by virtue of an association or cooperation agreement .
These regrettable events illustrate why this is so . Sadly , the events took place just as the European Commission opened a representation in Havana , and when our institutions and many Members of this House were favourably disposed towards extending participation in the Cotonou Agreement to include Cuba .
I urge the Commissioner to condemn these events and further , to state the conclusions the Commission intends to draw from them .
For all these reasons , Mr President , I believe Parliament must first reject and strongly condemn these events , as provided for by the joint resolution . Parliament has to stand firm and continue to insist on freedom as a prerequisite .
Secondly , Parliament must express its solidarity with all those fighting for their freedom and dignity inside Cuba . To paraphrase Oswaldo Payá , they feel no hate in their hearts as they fight , but no fear of their oppressors either .
Fidel Castro is evidently afraid of nothing so much as his own people .
Which is why he is scared to death of democratic reforms and is eliminating opponents .
In the shadow of Iraq , Fidel now sees his opportunity to put more than 75 dissidents and independent journalists behind bars for a villainously long time .
Their only crime is that they disagree with the regime , are open about it and are possibly supported by the Americans .
On my visit to Cuba in December it became clear to me that Cuba wants better relations with the European Union and is keen to accede to the Cotonou Agreement .
To this end the Commission office was recently opened in Havana .
Four days later came the arrests .
What a slap in the face of the European Union !
If the political detainees are not released , the question arises as to what the point is of a political dialogue and of a European Union office .
Nor do any negotiations need to be conducted with regard to the Cotonou Agreement .
I would like to hear what Commissioner Bolkestein has to say on the subject .
As human rights rapporteur I have spoken to many Cuban authorities , including the Vice President and the Minister for Foreign Affairs .
Unfortunately , I have to say now that they wrong-footed me with their evasive answers .
Political processes behind closed doors are old Soviet practices for which there is no longer a place in a civilised world .
The American boycott is ill-advised .
Cuba is crazy about dollars .
That is why a new invasion is needed .
Not of soldiers but of peaceful visitors from America and Cuba .
Democrats of the world unite ... in Cuba and give Castro a fright , by opening not only your wallet but also your mouth .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , Commissioner , the Socialist Group fully and unequivocally supports the motion for a resolution we are now discussing .
The Socialist Group protests with great indignation at the monstrous wave of repression that has crashed down on anyone who dares to dissent , disagree , think differently or create freely in Cuba .
This incredible wave of repression reveals , to anyone still harbouring doubts or illusions , the true nature of the Cuban political regime .
This is a totalitarian regime that could be called Orwellian , in other words , of the type imagined by George Orwell in his masterpiece entitled ' nineteen eighty-four ' .
Once Cuban music , symbolised by Compay Segundo , Ibrahim Ferrer and their Buena Vista Social Club , was liberated we thought that we would also see the liberation of the spoken word - poetry -embodied by Raúl Rivero , a great poet who has been sentenced to twenty years in prison . And the liberation of political speech , personified by Elizardo Sanchez and Osvaldo Payá , to whom we awarded the Sakharov Prize .
This is not , however , what has happened .
We were deceived .
The Cuban dictator has had intellectuals , journalists , political dissidents and members of the Varela project arrested and brutally repressed , using the usual pretexts and means employed by any common or garden dictatorship : spying on its citizens , arbitrary imprisonment , court-room farces and absurd sentences .
There are no good or bad dictatorships , Mr President .
All dictatorships are intrinsically evil .
There is no point in grading them on a scale of evilness and calling Fidel Castro 's dictatorship ' benign ' .
It makes no sense for the left to call Fidel Castro 's dictatorship a ' respectable ' dictatorship .
I personally wish to protest against this !
The cynical , barefaced and shameless breach of fundamental freedoms and human rights now represents a challenge and a provocation thrown down by Fidel Castro to all citizens and democratic countries .
We must unite our efforts to isolate Cuba politically .
I am not talking about economic isolation , because in fact the US economic embargo has provided the greatest excuse for the Cuban dictatorship .
I am talking about moral and political isolation .
We must support the dissident Cuban socialist Elizardo Sanchez , who has spent eight years in Fidel 's prisons and heads the Committee on Human Rights and National Reconciliation , when he demonstrates exemplary courage by stating in an interview with a French newspaper on the subject of this wave of repression , that what is being called into question in Cuba - these are his words - ' is the totalitarian model ' , which has failed there as elsewhere , and calls it an obscene model , adding that the Cuban regime is in its final throes .
These are troubled times for dictatorships , Mr President .
I fervently hope that democracy will triumph in Cuba and that the admirable Cuban people will regain the freedom of assembly , the freedom of association , the freedom to demonstrate , the freedom of speech , and the freedom to travel beyond their island .
In short , I pray that the Cuban people recover the dreams which underpinned a revolution that I have always supported , but whose most important ideas have been betrayed and negated .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the only thing worse than a dictator is an unrepentant dictator and the only thing worse than an unrepentant dictator is an unrepentant dictator who is also an opportunist .
The Cuban dictator Fidel Castro has carried out this action with shocking cynicism and brutality , taking advantage of the international crisis , in the belief that since the world 's attentions are currently focused on another part of the globe - Iraq - international attention would be shifted and would therefore allow him to unleash all his rage and fury on those citizens who disagree with him .
Were this situation not so tragic , we might say , given this proof of Fidel Castro 's regime once again showing its true colours ; that communism and Stalinism are like riding a bicycle : once you have learned how , you never forget .
We in the UEN Group support the joint motion for a resolution , the compromise resolution that has been tabled and that will certainly be adopted .
I wish , however , to say something further about the action that we feel should be taken .
We believe that we in the European Parliament have a particular responsibility at the moment because last December we awarded the Sakharov Prize to Oswaldo Payá .
We cannot abandon our Cuban brothers and sisters to their fate and we must show that awarding the Sakharov Prize serves some purpose .
A European Parliament delegation must go to Cuba without delay to meet these detainees and particularly Oswaldo Payá .
We must once again express our solidarity and once again invite Oswaldo Payá to come to Strasbourg for the May part-session .
If he cannot come in May , then in June and if he cannot come in June , then in July , to tell us what is happening in Cuba .
We must act rapidly , to show our solidarity with our Cuban brothers and sisters .
We know that the European Union has already expressed its condemnation .
This is important and is to be welcomed but it is not enough .
We must do more ; we must send a clear message to the Cuban dictator that we do not accept this , and that we shall not concede on this matter .
We must put Cuba 's application for Cotonou membership on hold , and we must show quite clearly that we are prepared to support the Cuban situation changing to become a regime of freedom , democracy and respect for human rights , but also that we shall not give in to any backsliding and particularly to any renewal of this Stalinist brutality .
Let us call for the immediate release of all detainees .
Mr President , once again the tyrannical regime of Fidel Castro has shown its criminal face .
In the severest wave of repression for ten years the dictator wants to rid himself of dissidents who are disagreeable to him .
Sudden , mass arrests of critics of his regime are followed by quick show trials .
The first so-called ' traitors ' were picked up in mid-March .
Last Monday the first draconian punishments had already been fixed in a judicial process that rode roughshod over international legal standards .
Cubans who did nothing other than exercise their right to free speech were charged with subversive activities .
This serious charge gives Castro the chance to impose excessively severe punishments under Law 88 .
This violation of the international legal order is unacceptable .
It is precisely now that the United Nations Human Rights Commission , which has been extremely critical of Cuba , is meeting in Geneva .
It is precisely now that the European Union has opened official representation in Havana .
It is precisely now that Castro is attempting to seize his chance in the shadow of the liberation of Iraq .
We must put a stop to this .
In the resolution we argue for the immediate release of all detainees and an end to these dubious detentions .
Only then can the European Union consider the continuation of the political dialogue with Cuba and the accession of that island to the Cotonou Agreement .
To which I would add the Cuban request to accede to the ACP countries .
Mr President , I shall do my best to convey the stance endorsed by the majority of my group if not unanimously .
Firstly , our group has strongly criticised what we consider the unduly harsh sentences handed down to the Cuban dissidents referred to earlier in the House .
Secondly , we state clearly that freedom of expression and assembly must be respected as the fundamental rights they are .
It is important however to take account of the context in which these sentences came about .
Firstly , the embargo or blockade , call it what you will , which has had drastic social and economic consequences for Cuba over the last 40 years , and which the international community has condemned at the United Nations year after year .
Secondly , the constant harassment by the representative of the United States in Havana for the last six months .
That individual , Mr James Cason , has drawn on substantial financial resources to destabilise Cuban institutions . The sum of USD 20 million has been mentioned .
Thirdly , the incredible leniency shown by the United States to those who hijacked two aircraft and a vessel during the last month , putting hundreds of lives at risk .
Fourthly , the imprisonment of five Cuban citizens sentenced in the United States without guarantees . This was simply for attempting to prevent the terrorist attacks that took place a few months ago in tourist establishments .
They caused serious damage , injury , and the death of an Italian holidaymaker . It was because the situation on the island had not been taken into account that we decided not to sign this joint resolution .
Mr President , I should like to conclude by expressing a personal view .
I believe it is regrettable that the majority of Members who are being so severe on Cuba today should have voted last year against the resolution calling for diplomatic relations with Israel to be broken . This was because of the repeated killing of Palestinians , many of whom were children .
Thirty-four Palestinians have been murdered over the last three days . I also believe the vote against any proposal or amendment to condemn or stop the illegal , immoral and unjust war against Iraq during the last mini-session was most regrettable .
Mr President , I do not know what to make of these double standards . Such an attitude is unfair above all to the victims .
These run into the hundreds in Palestine . We may never know the number of victims in Iraq , as history tends to be written by the victors .
Mr President , the repressive process set in train with impunity against Cuban citizens in Cuba has shown up the Castro dictatorship in its true colours once again . All these individuals had done was to attempt to exercise their right to rights , as Oswaldo Payá explained in his address to this House .
This amounts to a flagrant violation of fundamental rights and freedoms .
In a sense too , it is a response to the Varela Project . The House is honour bound to respond with strong condemnation of the actions of the Castro regime and that caricature of justice subservient to the dictatorship .
The House must call for all those imprisoned to be released . It must also speak out against what Oswaldo Payá described as the fallacy or myth that Cubans have to live without rights to sustain the independence and sovereignty of their country .
Fundamental rights are not negotiable and their infringement can never be justified .
We are called on to assure those fighting for the rights of all Cubans that we stand shoulder to shoulder with them and that their fight is our fight also .
Indeed , it is our moral and political duty to do so . We should also assure those who have found the courage to support the Varela Project that we support their efforts to re-empower the people of Cuba by constitutional means .
We must do more than simply condemn , however . I therefore call on the Commissioner to reject Cuba 's request to participate in the Cotonou Agreement if by the time the request comes up for consideration repression still persists and those detained have not been released .
I would call on the Council to act in this way too , if the Council were represented here today .
Article 9 ( 2 ) of the aforementioned agreement requires Cuba to make a commitment to human rights .
In no way can such a commitment be compatible with the repression currently endured by so many Cuban citizens merely because of their love of freedom .
Mr President , a great deal has already been said .
I believe we must express clear condemnation of the Fidel Castro regime , but we must also attempt to help the Cuban people , who are currently both suffering from the effects of an embargo and the victims of oppression .
We must not make the mistake of failing to understand the tragedy of this people and we - including the Commission - must strive to intervene in the Cuban situation in such a way as to isolate the Cuban regime while upholding the fundamental and economic rights of the Cuban people .
I was one of those who - while realising that these few minutes will not allow an in-depth analysis of the situation in Cuba - upheld the need for a resolution to be adopted now on the arrests and , in particular , on the sentences , which are not just excessive but groundless . The incredible thing is that we are talking about detentions and even death sentences .
The incredible thing is that the regime is actually in earnest , given that sentences as long as 26 years have already been inflicted .
I would also like to point out to the Members that political persuasion is no guarantee of safety here , for countless Social Democrats have seen the inside of Fidel Castro 's prisons .
I too , therefore , consider that we in turn must send out a clear message , and we await the reaction of the Commission .
Mr President , I too of course am greatly concerned by the arrest of more than 70 dissidents , among them journalists and leaders of the illegal opposition parties , including the leaders of our two sister liberal parties in Cuba , which are also members of Liberal International , and the excessively long custodial sentences given to them in legal proceedings held away from the public gaze .
I myself visited Cuba a few years ago on behalf of Liberal International .
That has to be one of the most incredible experiences I have ever had anywhere in the world .
How those people resist what Castro is doing to them !
I am therefore puzzled by the remarks of Mrs González , who ventures to say that what is happening in Cuba is a good thing , because she does not think much of the United States as a country , because she disapproves of the war in Iraq and because the situation in Israel is unsatisfactory .
Try telling that to these people in Cuba , Madam !
Try telling these people who are locked up in Cuba that it is okay , that it is absolutely fine that they are locked up , because you do not think much of the situation in other parts of the world !
That is a betrayal of democracy that you are committing , Madam !
Mr President , I have until now sincerely supported all the UN resolutions demanding that the economic sanctions introduced by the United States against Cuba should be lifted .
I have looked forward to its being possible for Cuba to become the 78th member of the ACP group , have been delighted about the political dialogue with the EU and hoped for a rapid Cuban accession to the Cotonou Agreement .
I therefore deeply regret the fact that I must on this occasion most vigorously condemn Cuba , and I would call upon that country immediately to release all the detainees .
At the same time , I would also call upon the EU to decide at its June summit to postpone any signature of the Cotonou Agreement with Cuba until these people have been released .
The EU would be sending out a very poor signal if we were to sign an agreement with a country that , at the same time , is infringing its people 's fundamental human rights . The EU should , moreover , also take steps , on precisely the same grounds , to suspend the trade agreements with Israel .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I will abstain on this resolution .
I see the arrests made in recent weeks as a thank you for our support for Cuba 's entry into the ACP , a thank you for Commissioner Nielson 's visit two or three weeks ago and for the opening of a Commission office in Cuba .
The dictator , Fidel Castro , has shown us his appreciation .
This resolution , which expresses clear condemnation , does not , however , say what we should do - and Mr Ribeiro e Castro mentioned this - it does not say what the European Union ought to do to put an end to this dictatorship .
It does not suggest suspending the aid provided by the Member States as well as that provided by the Commission or suspending any negotiations on the Cotonou agreements : no specific measure is proposed for putting pressure on the Cuban Government .
It follows that , should the dictator , Fidel Castro , release a prisoner in the coming weeks , it might well be appropriate to produce a resolution to show our appreciation .
In my opinion , we are playing the dictator 's game , albeit unintentionally , I realise .
The regime is on its way out , and the large number of detentions is a sign that Fidel Castro has lost control of the situation .
The time has come to give him a shove to help him on his way , proposing to this vile character - for he is truly vile - that he go into exile , so that the country can , at last , be governed by those fighting for democracy .
- ( ES ) Mr President , we cannot endorse the arrests and trials taking place in Cuba . We certainly condemn them .
Nonetheless , we feel it is wrong to take these events out of the current context within that country . It is unfair and often perverse to do so .
Cuba is the victim of aggression by the United States .
This aggression has been condemned by the international community more times than any other . The blockade has recently acquired a new dimension in the context of President Bush 's foreign policy .
The Cuban authorities could well be justified in anticipating the danger of a qualitative change in the aggression they have been subjected to . Given the philosophy of pre-emptive wars which is now the official doctrine of the White House , a military invasion could take place .
It is therefore understandable that the Cuban Government and of course a large part of the Cuban population should respond with defence mechanisms appropriate to a war situation .
We are not surprised these responses are sometimes disproportionate or unjust . We are however saddened by them .
It will be difficult to convince Cubans that they are not justified in acting as they do . The virtual state of war Cuba has been in for years has suddenly become all too real .
It is every bit as real as the Iraq war .
It will be even more difficult to convince Cubans to change if the increasing provocation instigated by Mr Cason , who is in charge of the interests of the United States in Cuba , is not condemned whilst Cubans are criticised . Piracy and terrorism must be condemned too .
I refer to the recent hijacking of two aircraft and a passenger vessel .
We consider ourselves friends of the Cuban people . We understand them and are in solidarity with them .
We therefore feel we are in a position to appeal to them for moderation and generosity . At the same time we would denounce the situation outlined earlier , and commit the European Union to developing cooperation with Cuba .
Regarding the resolution before us , I agree in general with the little it does say . Nonetheless , I disagree with all it does not say .
I also believe it contains serious untruths .
These detract from its credibility .
For instance , there are statements concerning requests for the death penalty . In my view , this is a text ridden with errors and omissions .
It is unbalanced and therefore not useful . These are the reasons why I shall not vote in its favour , Mr President .
Mr President , I wish to begin my reply , on behalf of the Commission , by saying that the Commission is seriously concerned about the recent detentions and trials of journalists and opposition supporters by the Cuban authorities .
The European Union has made a declaration strongly condemning those measures .
That was followed by a démarche of the troika in Havana on 26 March 2003 in which the Commission participated .
The grave concern which was felt was highlighted in the European Union 's statement on human rights in the world at the United Nations Commission on Human Rights in Geneva last week .
The statement called for the prompt release of those whom the Union considers to be prisoners of opinion .
The human rights situation is and will remain an important aspect of our relationship with Cuba .
The European Commission believes that a policy of dialogue is the most effective way to help bring about a positive evolution in this respect .
In order to facilitate a peaceful transition , the European Union follows , under the common position , a policy of ' constructive engagement ' with Cuba .
The EU common position distances itself from the use of coercive measures which might increase the hardship of the people of Cuba .
Instead , it gives priority to a constructive dialogue with the Cuban authorities and civil society .
In a nutshell : the European Union is of the firm conviction that a policy of constructive dialogue has more chance of success than one of isolation and embargoes .
As far as Cuba 's request for accession to the Cotonou Agreement is concerned , that could provide a good framework to continue and deepen a meaningful dialogue with the Cuban authorities , in particular in the field of human rights .
Respect for human rights , democratic principles and the rule of law are essential elements of that agreement .
The Commission is therefore preparing a communication on that subject , in which it will present a full assessment of the situation , including an assessment of the most propitious timing for Cuban accession to the Cotonou Agreement .
This is my response on behalf of the Commission , and , in particular , of my colleague Mr Nielson .
Mr President , I should like to say that I am very unhappy with the Commission 's reply .
A number of questions were raised , yet we have not even heard the Commission call for those detained to be released . This is what most if not all the political groups in the House would wish .
I would remind the Commissioner that politically , the Commission is not answerable to the Council . It is in fact answerable to this House .
Mr President , I am afraid the Commission does not share the opinion which has been expressed by the honourable Member .
Indeed , the grave concern which the Commission feels was highlighted in the European Union statement on human rights in the world at the United Nations meeting in Geneva last week .
That statement calls for the prompt release of those whom the European Union considers to be prisoners of opinion .
It goes without saying that a prompt release excludes the death penalty or any other kind of penalty .
That is feeling of the Commission and Mr Nielson , in particular .
Thank you , Commissioner Bolkestein .
We are unable to take many supplementary questions today , and so that is the last I shall be allowing today .
By way of clarification , does the Commission consider it conceivable that the European Union will allow Cuba to accede to the Cotonou Agreement as long as the political detainees now sentenced remain in detention ?
Mr President , I wish to make a point of order .
I know that Commissioner Bolkestein is not the commissioner responsible for this dossier and I do not , therefore , expect him to give me a definitive answer .
I wish to ask the Commissioner to convey to the Commission and to Commissioner Nielson , in particular , my , indeed our , deep surprise at the explanation that we have been given here .
We are familiar with the policy that had just been drawn up for Cuba .
We are familiar with the policy and our attitude towards Cuba was one of goodwill .
But the dictator Fidel Castro has betrayed this !
He has actually changed the situation and this policy must therefore be changed .
We cannot continue to pursue a policy as if the facts remained the same when they have suddenly changed .
Commissioner Nielson must come before Parliament at his earliest convenience to give an answer on this matter .
Mr President , may I assure Members present this afternoon that I will certainly apprise my colleague , Mr Nielson , of the sentiments which have been expressed by the vast majority of this Parliament .
I will tell him that Parliament takes a very serious view of what is happening in Cuba .
However , may I repeat , my colleague , and the Commission as a whole , shares those views .
The main point at issue at the moment appears to be the matter of the participation of Cuba in the Cotonou Agreement .
Mr van den Bos referred to that possibility and asked whether its participation in the Cotonou Agreement would be possible should serious infringements of human rights in Cuba continue .
As far as the Commission is concerned , it would be difficult to square participation in the Cotonou Agreement with a continuation of the present situation in Cuba .
Therefore , I agree with Mr van den Bos that those two situations are difficult to reconcile .
However , once again , I should like to be allowed sufficient time to hold further discussions with my colleague , Mr Nielson , in order to give a more definite reply .
While the invaders are slaughtering the Iraqi people , the European Parliament is concerned with ' violations ' of human rights in Cuba .
We know how the European Parliament and the European Union interpret human rights from Yugoslavia and elsewhere .
They cite them to achieve political objectives , as is abundantly clear from the resolution on Cuba , the purpose of which is to slander the socialist system of the country , which has given its people the highest standard of living in Latin America .
The motion abides by the ' common position ' of the European Union , which makes cooperation with Cuba dependent on changes to the country 's political system .
At the same time , the European Parliament turns a blind eye to decades of subversive activity by the USA and the criminal embargo .
It also denies the Cuban people the right to defend their revolution , while openly defending foreign agents and criminals .
We condemn the hypocrisy of the European imperialists and their partners but we understand their concern .
Socialist Cuba is a thorn in their side .
However , we cannot but condemn certain ' lefties ' who have no hesitation in joining forces with the reactionaries , so that they do not appear to be lagging behind in supposedly defending human rights .
The next item is the debate on the following five motions for resolutions :
B5-0212 / 2003 by Baroness Ludford and others , on behalf of the Group of the European Liberal and Democratic Party , on human rights violations in Egypt ;
B5-0215 / 2003 by Mr Cashman and others , on behalf of the Group of the Party of European Socialists , on human rights violations in Egypt ;
B5-0216 / 2003 by Mr Sacrédeus and Mr Posselt , on behalf of the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats , on human rights in Egypt ;
B5-0219 / 2003 by Mrs Boumediene-Thiery and Mrs Flautre , on behalf of the Group of the Greens / Free European Alliance , on human rights in Egypt ;
B5-0224 / 2003 by Mr Vinci and others , on behalf of the Confederal Group of the United European Left / Nordic Green Left , on human rights violations in Egypt .
Mr President , last month 21 homosexual Egyptians were sentenced to three years ' imprisonment and forced labour because of their sexual inclination .
They were part of a group of 52 homosexuals arrested in Cairo last year .
On 16 January of this year Wissam Toufic Abyad was arrested and later sentenced to 15 months ' imprisonment for ' repeated licentious behaviour ' .
These events are no isolated incidents .
They are part of a growing and above all alarming trend that is characterised by an increase in reports of discrimination , arrests , mistreatment and wrongful convictions of homosexuals .
This trend is all the more disturbing because homosexuality is not illegal in Egypt .
At the same time the Euro-Mediterranean Treaty between the European Union and Egypt is on the point of ratification by both parties .
Article 2 of this treaty requires respect for human rights and democratic principles .
Everything suggests that Egypt is not respecting these principles .
My group in the Parliament has always argued for the promotion of tolerance in the Mediterranean Sea area .
We also recognise the importance of good relations between Egypt and the European Union for the stability and the development of this area .
I therefore very much regret that these relations are coming under pressure because of the repeated violations of human rights by the Egyptian authorities .
I am however delighted by the release of human rights activist Saad Eddin Ibrahim , but wish to add immediately that things cannot stop at this individual case .
The Egyptian authorities must keep working on greater respect for human rights in their country , the persecution of homosexuals because of their sexual inclination must come to an end and their individual freedoms must be protected .
I therefore make an urgent appeal to the Council and the Commission to develop programmes in the framework of the European initiative for democracy and human rights that are aimed at strengthening democracy in Egypt .
I urge our fellow MEPs in the Delegation for relations with the Mashreq countries to broach the human rights issue in Egypt at their next meeting with Egyptian parliamentarians and also to involve representatives of the social midfield in this process .
Should these steps prove to be of no avail , Mr President , then I would plead for a postponement of the ratification of the Euro-Mediterranean Treaty .
Mr President , in relation to the previous debate I am not interested in clear replies from the Commission .
I want clear replies from the governments who are actually indicted in these resolutions before this House this afternoon .
If these governments , including the Egyptian Government , do not take human rights seriously then we must take further action , if necessary suspending any agreements that we have with them .
The appalling onslaught against minorities in Egypt is terrifying to behold .
People are being entrapped on the Internet because of their homosexuality .
Let me refer to one individual , because this is what human rights are about : the rights of individuals .
We in this House standing here , talking , debating , take everything for granted , yet these people , because of their difference , have everything robbed from them .
Do we listen ?
No .
Some of us talk on , whilst others call for tolerance .
A young man , Wissam Abyad , was entrapped on the Internet .
He went with a friend to meet a supposed gay man .
He was arrested , along with his friend .
He is now in prison . He is awaiting appeal .
I call for his sentence to be suspended immediately , because that is this man 's only way out .
The cases of two more men out of the 52 who were arrested over a year ago were not reviewed .
They are undergoing not forced labour , but hard labour .
As to the three British men awaiting trial in Egypt and the allegations of torture that they have made , have their cases been independently investigated ?
Of course not .
I say this to Egypt , and I say it as a friend : the litmus test of any civilised society is how it treats its minorities .
It is for Egypt to show us here in this House , that it takes the rights of their minorities seriously , to call for an end to discrimination against those minorities and to release from prison and end immediately the investigations and the arrests of gay men throughout Egypt which worry us here in this House .
Mr President , we Christian Democrats really wish to emphasise the importance of Egypt and of relations between Egypt and the EU for stability and development in the Mediterranean region .
Like previous speakers , we wish to emphasise respect for human rights , especially freedom of information , expression and association .
These are fundamental values included in the association agreement between the EU and Egypt .
What is happening in Egypt at present is therefore beyond the pale .
We believe it is time to stop persecuting people because of their sexual orientation .
People must , moreover , be able freely to express their opinions and values in demonstrations .
We are also concerned here with the status of religious freedom in a country in which 12 % to 15 % of the population belongs to the Christian Coptic minority .
The common resolution from all our political groups demands that the minority Coptic Christian group be fully respected and represented in Egyptian society .
Allow me to quote some examples of the ways in which they are not so respected and represented .
Different regulations apply to restoring and constructing churches as distinct from mosques .
The regulations governing churches are very complicated and long-winded .
Coptic Christians are not represented at all within the police , higher education and the security service .
School books still use terms such as ' unbelievers ' to describe both Jews and Christians .
Other examples are the murders of two Christians in 1998 in the El-Kosheh community - crimes which the local Christian population does not consider to have been solved equitably .
Relations with Egypt are fundamental to the Mediterranean region and the EU , but they must be based upon respect for human rights .
Mr President , I think that this afternoon 's debates suggest a very important responsibility to us .
Egypt is a densely populated and important country in the Arab world and we want to conclude an association agreement with Egypt .
Yet Article 2 of that association agreement expressly includes a clause requiring the observance of human rights and democratic principles .
We ought to develop tools that can be used to promote the implementation of this Article in practice .
After all , there is an atmosphere of all or nothing prevailing here and that is not of course the right way to promote a good dialogue .
Let us not forget that Charles Dickens too was imprisoned for homosexuality in nineteenth-century England .
Evolution is possible therefore .
But here we clearly have a case of three kinds of human rights violations .
First of all , I would like to associate myself with the protest against the human rights violations in respect of homosexuals , because the free consent of adults in their sexual relations with one another cannot be prosecuted in any civilised country and is even permitted by the Egyptians by law .
Why should these drastic charges be brought over and over again ?
Making intimidation attempts with the use of private information by way of telephone , Internet , etc . ?
A second series of violations concerns those in respect of the Coptic church , one of the oldest cultural communities and a minority in Egypt .
And thirdly I would like to underline that we have all been witness to the serious violations of human rights during the marches for peace in Iraq .
We were amazed at the violent way in which the police opposed them .
I therefore ask the European Commission to consider carefully how use can be made of that Article 2 on the signing of the association agreement not only to denounce the practices condemned here , but also to bring about their cessation .
Mr President , the international agreement on civil and political rights is very clear regarding relationships between adults .
Relationships may be of whatever kind they deem appropriate .
We are therefore distressed that fifteen homosexuals have received three-year prison sentences in Egypt . Another 29 individuals were effectively cleared , however .
In addition , under the provisions of the state of emergency , many people have been arrested recently in connection with anti-war demonstrations .
Kostas Kastanias , the Greek citizen , is still in poor health . I remember the Spanish Presidency called for him at least to be transferred to Greece .
There is one piece of good news , however . This is the decision by the Egyptian Appeal Court to annul the judgment on Saad Eddin Ibrahim and exonerate him .
We had already referred to this individual in the House .
He is a human rights defender .
Mr President , in view of the Association Agreement with Egypt , I believe the European Commission and the European Union should bring pressure to bear to ensure there is no repetition of such incidents .
Mr President , ' Egypt : where everyone wears a smile ' is the slogan advertising Egypt to the world .
There are no smiles on the faces of the gay men and boys of Egypt who have been harassed and their homes raided , and who have been entrapped via the Internet on trumped-up charges .
There is no smile on the face of Wissam Abyad , in prison and badly treated since January , after just one meeting .
There is no smile on the face of Zaki ' Abd al-Malak .
There is no smile on the faces of the 21 Egyptians from the infamous ' Queen 's Boat ' discotheque trial , whose sentences have been increased on appeal to three years ' imprisonment and forced labour .
There is no smile on the faces of those anti-war demonstrators who were arrested on 20 March in Cairo and reportedly tortured .
There is no smile , as we have heard , on the members of Coptic Church in Egypt persecuted for their faith .
Egypt has contributed so much to our civilisation , we must urge it now to follow a civilised path on these issues .
You do not have to agree with other people 's beliefs , their political opinions , and their sexual preferences .
You do , if you believe in the fundamental principles of democracy , have to defend their right to believe , their right to hold opinions , their right to choose their personal lifestyles .
Those are the principles this Parliament must uphold .
Mr President , I would like to start by thanking the European Commission for its work , which has led to an improvement in the situation of Professor Saad Eddin Ibrahim , whose release Parliament had called for .
Thanks precisely to the intervention of the European Commission , this goal has been achieved .
We hope that the same patience and drive will be invested in the resolution of this case too .
Almost everything has already been said , but perhaps there is something we have overlooked : it is completely unacceptable for the democratic clause laid down in the various agreements with third countries not to be observed to the letter .
I would like to make it clear to the House and to the Commission that the increasing use of European taxpayers ' money to serve the interests of dictatorships and finance violations of human rights , at the same time erasing any hope these countries might have of freedom and democracy , is totally unacceptable .
This is the acid test : we have to decide whether these debates are destined never to have any effect outside our archives or whether we want , once and for all , to take that leap forwards and make a clear , definitive political decision .
Mr President , I thank you once more for the fact that you have given me the floor on this important subject .
The draft resolutions to be discussed today seem largely prompted by the recent reconviction of 21 Egyptian men for ' debauchery ' .
It is therefore with this issue that I shall start .
The Commission has followed the ' Queen Boat ' affair since the arrest in May 2001 of 52 men under laws to control prostitution .
We were concerned by the nature of the charges ; the use of security courts and national security legislation ; the allegations of police harassment and entrapment ; and the severe sentences that were meted out .
The inflammatory language at the trial and in the media undermine Egyptian claims that the men were not charged for their sexual orientation .
We were encouraged when President Mubarak subsequently ruled that the case should be retried in a misdemeanour court .
But the conduct and outcome of the second trial were unexpected since the 21 men previously sentenced were re-sentenced to the maximum sentence of 3 years .
The 21 men have appealed and an appeal verdict is provisionally expected on 4 June .
Homosexuality remains a sensitive issue for Egyptian society .
But that does not mean that the Commission will condone the harassment and prosecution of people for their sexual orientation , or any measures that deprive them of their normal rights .
The Commission will continue to monitor this and other similar prosecutions and h