Resumption of the session
I declare resumed the session of the European Parliament adjourned on Thursday 14 March 2002 .
May I inform the House that I have taken the chair because Mr Cox is on his way back to Strasbourg from Great Britain , having travelled there earlier today to pay his respects to the royal family on the occasion of the death of the Queen Mother .
We shall be observing a minute 's silence in memory of the Queen Mother tomorrow .
Ladies and gentlemen , a tragic incident took place in the town of Nanterre in France on the night of Tuesday 26 March .
An armed man gunned down members of the municipal council during a council meeting , leaving eight councillors dead and fourteen very seriously wounded .
May I express my deepest condolences and sympathy on behalf of the European Parliament to the town of Nanterre , to the municipal council and to the victims ' families .
I should also like to praise the courage of the members of the council who managed to overpower the intruder .
Elsewhere , Juán Priede Pérez , the only Socialist councillor in the village of Orio in the Basque country , was murdered by two terrorists on 21 March .
The House sent its condolences and sympathy to Mr Priede 's family and to the Chairman of the Spanish Socialist party the very same day .
We also sent a message of support to the Spanish authorities .
In murdering Juán Priede Pérez , the terrorists demonstrated yet again that they deny not only the right to life but , in this case , the right to life of a man who had dedicated himself to the welfare of his fellow citizens .
They even deny the right to attend local political events and the right to exercise democratic rights .
Ladies and gentlemen , I invite you to join me in a minute 's silence for these two incidents .
( ? he House rose and observed a minute 's silence )
Mr President , I know that a resolution is going to be adopted on the problem of Israel and Palestine during this sitting , but I believe we cannot start it without remembering that there have been 200 murders in Palestinian territory and that the Palestinian people are being humiliated by the army of a State .
I therefore believe that we need this sitting to begin also ...
( The President cut the speaker off )
Mr Nogueira Román , may I ask you to repeat your comment when we get to the debate on the Middle East .
Mr President , on a point of order , I should like , through you , to thank President Cox for his visit to the UK today .
In that context , on behalf of the PPE-DE Group , may I say that a number of my British colleagues wish to participate at least in some way in the occasion of the state funeral of the Queen Mother tomorrow .
That is to take place at 12.30 p.m.
I have raised the matter in my group , which supports my request , that the vote tomorrow might be brought forward to 11.30 a.m. so that all British Members who wish to can at least watch the state funeral at 12.30 p.m.

Mr President , I would like to thank you for the comments you made earlier and to say briefly to the House and to the citizens who are listening , that when terrorists become madmen and when madmen become terrorists and kill Members of Parliament , at a time when civilians are the target of increasingly ruthless attacks which seek to eliminate politicians and MPs , it is worthwhile recalling that these people , these MPs , are showing utmost courage to protect the public good .
Mr President , I would like , respectfully , to point out that , very often , when we rise and observe a minute 's silence , the people in the public gallery remain comfortably in their seats .
Considering that those people are European citizens too , I feel that they should also rise and observe a minute 's silence with us .

Mr President , on a point of order , in connection with the point raised by Mr Evans , I too would like to thank President Cox for his visit to London today to pay his respects on behalf of the European Parliament on the occasion of the death of the Queen Mother .
I hope that the Conference of Presidents can give positive consideration to the request made by Mr Evans that the votes be brought forward tomorrow morning , so as to enable those British Members , and other Members , who may want to watch the funeral on television to do so .
Thank you , Mr Murphy .
The draft agenda , as finalised by the Conference of Presidents of the political groups at its meeting on 4 April , has been distributed in accordance with Rule 110 .
Tuesday :
The Group of the Party of European Socialists has asked for the vote on the joint debate of the six discharge reports of the Committee on Budgetary Control to be held at noon on Wednesday .
The Chairman of the Group of the Party of European Socialists , Mr Barón Crespo , who tabled the request for the vote to be moved , has the floor .
Mr President , the postponement of the debate is proposed specifically in relation to the Morgan report referring to the other institutions .
But of course the discharge is a joint vote .
And the reason is that the Council has to take a step forward in relation to Parliament on the specific issue of the implementation of the foreign and security policy and its monitoring .
The Council has a positive attitude and it has to respond to the Commission tomorrow .
We believe that it is important to take this step and that to postpone the debate until Wednesday would help us to assess this positive attitude on the part of the Council .
We have therefore requested this postponement which , furthermore , will help to make tomorrow 's voting time shorter .
Mr Barón Crespo , if I may be so bold , I shall take your intervention as being in favour of moving the vote to noon on Wednesday .
No one wishes to speak against .
( Parliament approved the proposal )
Tuesday :
As regards the Council and Commission statements on the situation in the Middle East , which are scheduled as the first item on Wednesday , the High Representative for foreign policy , Mr Solana , has informed us that he can attend Parliament to give his statement after 5 p.m. on Tuesday .

As this is the case , the agenda for Tuesday afternoon could be scheduled as follows : joint debate on defence and arms from 3 p.m. to 5 p.m. , joint debate on the situation in the Middle East , with statements by Mr Solana and the Commission from 5 p.m. to 7 p.m.


I should inform the House that , if this change is accepted , the debate on the situation in the Middle East will replace Question Time to the Commission .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , our group supports the proposal to timetable Mr Solana 's statement for 5 p.m. tomorrow , and to combine it with a debate , so that the time from 5 p.m. to 7 p.m. would then be available for it .
Members must also be aware of the fact - which we must view sympathetically - that Mr Solana cannot be here on Wednesday , as he will be on his way to meet the American Secretary of State in Madrid .
We in Parliament have to accept this reason for his absence .

I have , though , one request , and would be grateful if other groups could join me in making it .
I am , in particular , addressing Mr Barón Crespo , as I do not want to place conditions on our agreement to defer the vote on budgetary control .
We have , though , accepted your argument , and I ask you to accept , when we prepare a resolution on the Middle East , that the vote be held on Thursday rather than on Wednesday .
Our group is not actually in favour of a resolution , but the Conference of Presidents took the contrary view that there should be one .
As democrats , we accept that .
We will also be joining in the negotiation of a resolution , although we already had a very sound resolution in the last part-session , and will be playing our part as the ground-rules of Parliament require .

If , though , negotiations take place on Wednesday in Madrid between the European Union - represented by Mr Solana and Mr Piquet - on the one hand and Secretary of State Powell on the other , it must be possible for the results of their discussions to find their way into the text along with everything else .
That will probably not be that straightforward in procedural terms , but the groups here should in any case be able to comment verbally on what comes out of Madrid .
It is , then , my urgent request that we should not vote on the text of the resolution on Wednesday - that would in any case be too late for the talks in Madrid - but should vote on Thursday , when the results from Madrid will be known .
I should be grateful if you could agree to that , for we too are accommodating when you bring to this House matters in which you have a justifiable interest .
Mr President , please allow me to correct Mr Poettering on some of his information .
There will not be a bilateral meeting between Europe and the United States on Wednesday in Madrid , but rather a summit chaired by the President-in-Office of the Council - Mr Aznar , a political colleague of yours - which will be attended by the Secretary-General of the United Nations , Mr Kofi Annan , who is currently in Madrid , the Russian Minister for Foreign Affairs , Mr Ivanov , Mr Powell , Mr Piqué and Mr Solana .




This summit will be dealing with a matter that this House has already voted on .
We believe it is very important that everybody should be there , including , if possible , a representative of the Arab League , but that is yet to be confirmed .
Therefore , the summit in Madrid on Wednesday is of particular importance .
I am not going to go into the debate we are holding tomorrow , but I believe it is important and essential that Parliament can speak with a strong voice in defence of the role of Europe and try to offer a glimmer of light and a degree of hope during these tragic times .
I therefore believe it would be politically timely for a resolution to arrive at the Madrid Summit alive and kicking , which is perfectly feasible .
Furthermore , in its Standing Committee of 6 April , the Parliamentary Assembly of NATO , which is not known for its Socialist tendencies , tabled a resolution which I believe is in accordance with what we ourselves would propose .
I believe and hope that we can achieve a resolution along similar lines .
I am referring to something very dear to the PPE-DE Group , the Parliamentary Assembly of NATO .
Therefore , I insist that , in accordance with the philosophy of President Cox , who is not here at the moment , but would advocate this , it is essential to keep up with events and therefore I believe it is especially timely that we should vote on Wednesday and that the result of the vote should be known in time for Madrid .
Mr President , we should not lightly move Question Time to the Commission .
It is all very well to play high politics in this House but to many of our Members Question Time to the Commission is extremely important .
Indeed , much of our work of scrutinising of the Commission is done through Question Time .
I accept the case on this occasion , since we wish to have representatives of the Council and the Commission present for the debate .
However , I would appeal to my colleagues in the other groups that we do not make a habit of moving Question Time to the Commission .
It is an important part of our work .
Our view on the question of the vote is that we are in a very fast-moving situation .
We will certainly know more by Thursday than we will by Wednesday .
There is a good case on this occasion for taking that vote on Thursday lunchtime and not on Wednesday .
Mr Watson , may I assure you that your comments on the matter of Question Time to the Commission have been noted .
Mr President , I have just returned from Jerusalem and Ramallah and I would , above all , like to support the principle of tomorrow 's debate , whether or not Question Time to the Commission has to be moved , although this is also an important part of our proceedings .
This debate must be held in the presence of Mr Solana .
My group and myself believe it is crucially important that the substance of our joint resolution provides a response to the unacceptably dismissive act of the Israeli Government with regard to Mr Solana and Mr Piqué , the representatives of the European Union , in other words .
It is of secondary importance whether the vote takes place on Wednesday or Thursday .
If I have to choose , I would prefer to take the vote on Wednesday for the reasons given by Mr Barón Crespo .
But the main thing is that our position is unambiguous and is independent of the compromise reached and statements issued in Madrid .
Mr President , I will be very brief for I fully agree with what Chairman Wurtz has just said .
I would especially like to stress how important it is - and I am addressing Chairman Barón Crespo and Chairman Poettering , in particular - that , this time , Parliament adopts a resolution which is absolutely unambiguous .
I feel that we , at least , have all the tools necessary to be able to speak with one voice and that it is important that we do so .
My group would also prefer the vote on the resolution to take place on Wednesday , as Chairman Wurtz has suggested .
Mr President , although , like the vast majority of this House , I naturally regard the tragic problem of the Middle East to be an absolute priority , as Vice-President responsible for Questions to the Commission and the Council and on behalf of all those who have asked and wish to verify what the Commission 's position is , I would like to add my voice to what the Chairman of the Liberal Group , Mr Watson , has just said .
We cannot cancel Questions to the Commission .
Change the time , find the right solution , but Question Time cannot be treated as a joker which , according to the Commission or the Council 's ability to come here , can be thrown away by Parliament .
It seems to me to show a lack of respect to cancel these events and I trust in you and the House to maintain Question Time , even if we hold it at another time .
Mr Puerta , may I assure you that there is no intention of losing Question Time to the Commission .
It is just that there is a problem in this particular instance which I think we all understand .
Nonetheless , your comments have been noted , as were Mr Watson 's .

Mr President , as this is the first time you have been in this situation , my reproach is not directed at you ; in recent years , though , I have known many Vice-Presidents of this House who said in discussions of this sort on the issue of Question Time that they would endeavour to ensure that it did not happen again and that it was an exception .
It is , though , increasingly becoming the rule .
I can give you statistical evidence that this is a fact and so I ask you as a matter of urgency to put Question Time back at an hour when it is absolutely certain that it can take place .
It used to be held at the beginning of the Tuesday evening sitting and was always on time .
It has regularly been wrecked , every other or every third time , since being moved to the afternoon .
Nowadays we are regularly stopping at 5.30 p.m. on Thursday through apparently not having anything to discuss until 6.30 or 7 p.m.
We do not sit on Fridays , yet we do not have time for Members to exercise their elementary right , guaranteed by the Treaties , to ask questions . This is absolutely unacceptable , and I am asking not only that this be changed , but also for the restoration , as soon as possible , of the Question Time with Commissioner Busquin and others , which many of us have carefully prepared for .
We do not want to be sent written answers drafted by civil servants , but to be able to ask supplementary questions , as is the custom in parliaments .
Mr Posselt , as I explained earlier , we are in a very difficult situation in this particular instance .
Your comments have been noted and I can assure you that there is no intention of doing away with Question Time .
We shall now proceed with two votes :
The first is on whether we agree to hold the debate on the Middle East on Tuesday , as stated earlier .
( Parliament gave its assent )
The second vote is on whether to hold the vote on the motions in question on Wednesday or Thursday .
( Parliament voted in favour of Wednesday )
Mr President , I would like you to clarify an earlier point .
You said we would be losing Question Time , but are we also losing the Commission communication at 5.30 p.m. ?
You are quite right , Mr Provan .
We shall also lose the Commission communication at 5.30 p.m.
Wednesday :
I must remind you , now that we have taken these decisions , that the debate and the Council and Council communications on the Middle East will now be held on Tuesday afternoon .
I have a request from Mr Leinen for the debate to be held on Wednesday .
Mr President , extraordinary situations sometimes do call for extraordinary actions .
I would have liked the President of the European Parliament , after the vote on Wednesday , to call for a lunchtime demonstration in support of peace in the Middle East .
We have a wonderful atrium , which is at other times the venue for celebrations .
We have a wonderful square in front of the building .
All our aides , all our people here , would be able to join in .
All we need is a microphone , and if that is too much of a problem , then I would do my bit to get one .
I believe that an extraordinary action of this kind would send a strong signal that Europe is not willing to accept this spiral of violence in the Middle East .
Those were powerful images on Wednesday of all days , the most significant day for a peaceful solution in the Middle East .
I ask you , with your colleagues in the Conference of Presidents , to give some thought to that .

Thank you very much for your comments , Mr Leinen , which I shall relay verbatim to the President of the European Parliament .
Thursday :
As far as the topical and urgent debate is concerned , we have received a request from the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats and from the Group of the Party of European Socialists for a new item entitled ' EU position for the next special session of the UN General Assembly on Children ' to be added beneath the title ' Human Rights ' .
( Parliament gave its assent )
Similarly , the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats and the Group of the Party of European Socialists have asked that the title of the fifth item be formulated as follows : ' Torrential rain in Tenerife and eastern Spain and climate change ' .
( Parliament gave its assent )
That finalises the agenda .
Speeches on points of order
Mr President , on a point of order , perhaps the House would like to know that at the Joint Parliamentary Assembly held in Cape Town , which was ably co-chaired by Mrs Kinnock , we passed a very strong resolution .
That is the good news .
The bad news is that under the new draconian laws which have been brought in by President Mugabe , the editor of the daily newspaper which printed the resolution , in full and accurately , has been threatened and charged with a USD 2 000 fine - or two years in prison if he does not pay it .
He has declared that he would rather go to prison than not tell the truth .
Since this House is founded on freedom of speech , could the presidency write to Mr Mugabe and say that we would not expect any harm to come to this man and that we support freedom of speech .
Mr President , I naturally support what my colleague , Mr Corrie , has said .
This would be the first application of the Access to Information Act recently adopted by the Parliament in Zimbabwe .
We should not underestimate the seriousness of the threats to these journalists on The Daily News .
We should accordingly be very careful not to inflame the situation in any way .
Therefore I would ask that we should perhaps consider writing to the Minister of Justice rather than to President Mugabe , and also that we should say that we are merely confirming the facts of what happened in Cape Town .
In the current situation we do not want to say anything that does not sound neutral . I would just urge that we bear that in mind when the letter is sent .
As you know , we held a minute 's silence in memory of the victims of terrorism .
Please let us respect the memory of the people we honoured .
Mr President , on a point of order , I want to make a complaint about my colleague , Mr Helmer .
He produces an electronic newsletter called ' Straight Talking ' and in that he has written what I consider to be a very serious insult to Mrs Nicole Fontaine .
He describes her views as socialist verging on Marxist - which I think would come as a surprise to Mrs Fontaine , as well as to others in this House - but the most serious thing he says is that the title of her memoirs should be ' Mein Kampf ' .
That is a serious matter and I would like to invite Mr Helmer , through you , Mr President , either to apologise and retract these remarks , or alternatively to explain them .
Mr President , I thank Mrs Read for giving such a good plug to my electronic newsletter .
If any colleagues wish to go on the circulation list , please let me know and I shall be happy to oblige them .
Mrs Fontaine gave a speech before the Lisbon Summit in which she criticised the evils of capitalism .
I therefore feel entirely justified in describing those views as socialist verging on Marxist .
The remark I made about Mrs Fontaine 's book Mes combats was , as I recall , that humorists in Parliament had been saying that the German edition should be entitled ' Mein Kampf ' , which is , I believe , German for Mes combats .
Thus , I was merely repeating gossip , which I feel I am entitled to do .
I would say to Mrs Read , my regional colleague , that the issue of the speech which Mrs Fontaine made before the Lisbon Summit was aired in this Chamber nearly two years ago .
So she is a little behind the times .
Mr President , I only wished to say that I sent a letter to Mr Cox last week to inform him about a disaster which struck the island of Tenerife , specifically the capital , Santa Cruz de Tenerife , where unfortunately , as well as the material damage , seven people lost their lives .
I would be grateful if you could pass on our condolences to the Mayor of the city and I would also be grateful if on Thursday this House could support the motion for a resolution that some Canarian Members have tabled .
Mr President , the Council has requested that urgent procedure be applied when it comes to special restrictive measures aimed at certain persons in terms of what is referred to as the fight against terrorism .
The Committee on Citizens ' Freedoms and Rights , Justice and Home Affairs has an extra meeting this evening .
I hope that account will also be taken of the fact that some of us in the Confederal Group of the European United Left / Nordic Green Left have asked a number of victims of this terrorist legislation in the European Union to come here to the European Parliament on Wednesday , both for a press conference and a round-table conference .
There are three of them : Swedish citizens who have ended up in a rat trap .
This is a huge legal scandal , at least in my view and that of many others .
In this connection , I would also say how genuinely sorry I am that the Council is unwilling to be represented at this round-table conference .
I think it is downright disgraceful , given that these are in actual fact people who are not in a position to defend themselves .
They have not even been charged with any offence , yet all their financial assets have been frozen .
Mr President , may I inform the House that the international convention held in Nicosia on 5 and 6 March , to express solidarity with the Palestinian people and attended by 43 left-wing and other parties and organisations from 22 countries , adopted a resolution condemning Israel 's all-out attack on the Palestinian people , the Palestinian Authority and the Palestinian leadership .
? his resolution also expressed solidarity with the peaceful forces of Israel and called on the international community , and the permanent members of the UN Security Council , the European Union and the Arab League in particular , to exert pressure on Israel to comply with both the recent and not so recent resolutions of the United Nations .
One wonders how Israel can engage in this sort of barbarianism against civilians , including children , while the powerful nations on earth stand by and do nothing .
One wonders where it finds the courage to beat up Greek Members of Parliament , deny entry to a Cyprus parliamentary delegation and even stop high-ranking European Union officials from meeting President Arafat .
One wonders why the European Union does not use the means at its disposal to stop Israeli aggression , why it does not take financial measures , why it does not stop arms exports to Israel .
Under these tragic circumstances , our failure to condemn Israel and our silence make us accessories to the crime of genocide of the Palestinian people and murderers of peace .
Mr President , I will just come back to Mrs Read 's remark and Mr Helmer 's statements .
Mr Helmer obliges me to make a remark that I actually did not believe I would ever have to make .
I speak as one who , in this House during Mrs Fontaine 's term of office , was often harshly critical of her .
I find myself now constrained to say that when Mr Helmer writes in his newsletter that Mrs Fontaine 's statements bordered on Marxism or socialism , I must contradict him in the most emphatic terms .
Nicole Fontaine deserves many things , but to associate her with Marxism or socialism is false .
It is , Mr Helmer , as if one were to associate you with clever remarks .
That would be just as erroneous .
I must say that we cannot allow Members or representatives of this House to be smeared in this way , for , alongside the facetious comment , the recommendation that a representative of Parliament should call her book ' Mein Kampf ' equates her with historical parallels which make it unacceptable in any way whatever .
I find that even in this House we have to be able to censure such a thing .
I will just ask the following of the ladies and gentlemen in the PPE-DE Group .
This House envisages that politicians of the same political orientation join together in a group - how can the PPE-DE 's people actually sit together with such a man in the same group ?
Mr President , with reference to the Israeli-Palestinian question , I would like to draw your attention and that of the Members to the fact that our fellow Member , Mrs Morgantini , who went to the occupied territories with a delegation of members of the Italian parliament and Italian trade unionists , was seized and used as a human shield by the Israeli army .
I am quite aware that the situation is extremely serious and that this might seem an insignificant incident , but I feel that such treatment of a woman who , in addition to being courageous , is a Member of our Parliament , must be condemned .
I would be grateful to the President of this House if he could send a message to the Israeli Government , protesting at the treatment suffered by Mrs Morgantini .
Mr President , I am going to speak on the same subject as Mr Bigliardo but I have something different to say .
I am sorry - as I believe we all are - that Mrs Morgantini has suffered such an experience , but not because she is a Member of the European Parliament but because she is a European citizen : in other words , I would be just as concerned for any other European citizen .
However , even before Mr Bigliardo spoke , I wanted to ask that , in tomorrow 's debate on the events in Israel and Palestine , the Commission call upon all the European citizens who are not officials of the United Nations , NATO or the European Union to refrain from indulging in macabre tourism out of curiosity and false solidarity .
Those who go to a land where there is a genuine war taking place do so completely at their own risk and peril and cannot hope to involve the international community .
They do not need any of this sort of tourism down there : our solidarity must be displayed within our own towns and countries and in parliamentary chambers .
Two or three delegations of left-wing members of the Italian parliament have been stopped at Tel Aviv airport and sent home again : they did no more than visit the inside of the airport , creating further disturbance and generating further concern .
I do not think there is any need for this .
I therefore ask the Commission to call explicitly on the European citizens not to indulge in this sort of tourism .
Mr President , I would just like to reply to Mr Schultz .
He makes two points .
The first point is a political point about Mrs Fontaine 's attitude contained in her speech at Lisbon .
There she made a speech attacking capitalism in very clear terms .
( The President cut off the speaker )
Mr Helmer , we have , I think , discussed the matter in detail .
You have had a chance to express your views and the honourable Members have had a chance to form an opinion on certain matters .
Let us not now enter into a whole debate . I think we have exhausted the subject .
Mr President , I would just like to make a brief observation , namely that the situation with Mr Helmer is one thing and the attack on another group is another matter .
Firstly , anyone who is acquainted with the range of Europe 's Social Democrats and their historical background over the past ten to fifteen years should not make statements about such diversity in the way that Mr Schulz just has .
Secondly , there is no arguing about matters of taste , and on that we are once more in agreement .
Mr President , on a point of order , I am rising to ask you to contact the Colombian authorities and to ask them to clarify the situation and to guarantee the safety of two fully accredited human rights workers who are in the Bolivar province of Colombia under the aegis of the Corporation of Professional Community Services ( Sembrar ) .
They are two EU citizens .
One is an Irishman , Gearóid Ó Loinsigh , and the other is a German woman , Gudrun Christa Kern .
They are two fully accredited human rights workers .
They travelled to the region on 13 March to meet , by appointment , the board of management of the South Bolivar Agri-Mining Federation .
They ran into considerable difficulties , initially with the fifth brigade of the national army there , and subsequently having their hotel ransacked .
I am asking through the presidency of Parliament that you contact the Colombian authorities and ensure their safe passage to carry out the work they have been asked to do by the Irish Government and the Irish NGO , in the case of the Irishman , and I am sure the same applies to the German woman .
Mr President , I wish to follow on from what Mrs Doyle has said .
Mr Gearóid Ó Loinsigh is a personal friend of mine and two years ago I travelled with him to Colombia .
These people , who are working with a human rights organisation , were invited by the local farming and mining community to investigate human rights abuses in a particular area .
As soon as they arrived in that area they were confronted by the army asking them why they were there , etc .
Then they recommended that they stay in a specific hotel which was known to be frequented by death-squad personnel .
Fortunately they did not stay there , but at midnight that night that very hotel was raided by death squads .
Parliament has a duty to send a clear message to the Colombian authorities .
This issue of death squads , of the paramilitaries , and of their backing by the Colombian authorities has to be addressed .
The UN office in Bogotá , which is co-financed by the EU , has on about 100 occasions issued recommendations to dismantle these paramilitaries .
The Colombian authorities are basically doing nothing but paying lip-service to these recommendations .
The UN and Amnesty International have both confirmed that paramilitaries are involved in about 75-80 % of human rights violations in Colombia .
It is about time that the Colombian authorities lived up to international norms , and Parliament should send a clear message that if anything happens to these two human rights workers then they will be held responsible .
The next item is the debate on the report ( ? 5-0047 / 2002 ) by Mr Deprez , on behalf of the Committee on Citizens ' Freedoms and Rights , Justice and Home Affairs , on the draft Council decision concerning security in connection with football matches with an international dimension [ 12175 / 1 / 2001 - C5-0067 / 2002 - 2001 / 0824 ( CNS ) ] .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , as you know , sport in general , and football in particular , occupy a very special position in society , both in defining behaviour and in the collective imagination .
The crowds which regularly travel to big matches , and big international matches , in particular - as well as the number of television viewers - is quite simply staggering .
Professional football today is highly popular ; it is a massive game , a massive spectacle and , it has to be said , a massive business .
Too often , unfortunately , the big matches - and especially the big international matches - are also the stage on which unacceptable aggression , rioting and violence are acted out with scant regard for sporting principles or the respect due to persons and property .
Furthermore , no Member State totally escapes the risk of disturbances , even if some international matches are more sensitive than others and the supporters of some clubs or national teams are seemingly easier to control than others .
It is precisely in order to more effectively prevent and control the risk of disturbances during international competitions that the Kingdom of Belgium took the initiative to put forward a proposal for a Council decision on which we are due to vote tomorrow .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the draft decision is based on three observations .
First of all , the number of football matches taking place at international level is currently increasing rapidly , such as the various European competitions , the European Championship and other tournaments , which , owing to the increase in the number of travelling supporters , entails greater risk of disturbances , or even violence , during competitions .
The second observation is , in order to prevent disturbances and to maintain law and order in connection with football matches is to have , first and foremost , it is essential to have an organised and efficient system for exchanging information regarding the risks that some matches present - and more specifically , certain types of supporters who travel to matches - and therefore , secondly , to improve coordination between the organisations responsible for security .
In this respect , we must recognise that the current system of cooperation between police forces , based on non-binding agreements and ad hoc contacts fostered at each match , has demonstrated its weakness if not its inefficiency .
It is also unreliable , slow and inconsistent .
Therefore , ladies and gentlemen , the draft decision proposes that each Member State formally establishes or designates a police-run national football information centre to act as a single , central and direct point of contact between the authorities and the police force of the Member States responsible for ensuring security at international football matches or competition with an international dimension .
Each national football information centre must therefore have the necessary resources and qualified staff .
It goes without saying that the operational needs are not the same in Finland , Austria , France , Germany , the United Kingdom or the Netherlands .
The various national information points that are established or designated must therefore function as information exchange networks providing data of a general nature - such as the number of supporters travelling , high-risk groups , the presence of hard core groups - and personal data , in other words , supporters posing risks to law and order and security .
In adopting the proposed report , the Committee on Citizens ' Freedoms and Rights , Justice and Home Affairs gave its approval to the broad guidelines of this proposal for a Council decision .
It also approved 19 amendments , which all seek either to strengthen the operational nature of the network or , Mrs Buitenweg , to increase the protection of citizens when exchanging personal information .
If it adopts the report , the House will demonstrate its will to combat hooliganism more effectively and , in doing so , it will help professional football to confirm its main purpose , which is to provide enthusiastic supporters with a high standard of play , thus preventing a handful of savages from turning stadiums and host cities into training camps for rioters or battle grounds for rival gangs .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I should like to start by congratulating Mr Deprez warmly on his report .
It was not an easy task , because the Council continuously submitted updated versions .
Despite this , he succeeded in presenting a sound report on this important matter in which citizens feel very closely involved .
I wholeheartedly endorse his proposal as long as it deals with the proper exchange of information and better coordination with the bodies that are responsible for security at football matches .
It would certainly benefit efficiency if information were to be centralised within one establishment for each Member State , which could then act as a port of call for all those involved .
This is essential , and works very well in the Netherlands , for example .
I should like to warn you , however , that the privacy and personal rights of the individual supporter may not be flouted in the process .
Article 4 ( 3 ) is of crucial importance .
National and international legislation forms the basis for collecting , exchanging and using information .
Acting against actual football violence should fall within the remit of the judiciary and not of sports bodies that organise football matches .
Controlling football vandalism , however , is not only a matter of more effective police action .
In my view , it is far more important to change the mentality of the supporter .
Sport and both professional and amateur football fulfil a broad , social function .
Experts have ascertained that football-related violence originates , for example , in the pursuit of masculinity and status and the battle for territory .
This must change , and clubs , supporters ' associations and the players themselves clearly have a role to play in this .
In addition , the UEFA has a major role .
This organisation knows - as no other - the problems which can occur , through its close contacts with the national football bodies and extensive experience in organising football matches .
I should like to call on them to cooperate .
I should also like to urge the national information points to closely involve sports clubs , supporters ' associations and the UEFA in its activities , so that these can be implemented as well and effectively as possible so as to enhance security at football matches with an international dimension .
Mr President , firstly I would like to respond on behalf of Mr Cashman who is a Socialist Group shadow on this report and cannot attend this evening .
He would like to inform the House that the PSE Group welcomes this report and the measures in it intended to prevent the activities of hooligans and organised thugs at matches .
We will , however , need to monitor the way these monitoring centres carry out their functions to ensure that the football community is fully engaged in the exchange of information .
Most important of all is the need to ensure adequate resources both in financial and personnel terms .
It would be wrong to raise expectations to a level which cannot be met .
We can , of course , defeat hooliganism .
The proposals indicate we have the will to do the job , but the resources must follow .
Then I would like to intervene personally in this debate .
I too would like to add my support to Mr Deprez 's report and its amendments , specifically , his amendment 10 calling for closer cooperation and an organised exchange of information .
If the European network of national football information centres is to be effective , then we need to address the current weaknesses in the system of information exchange and ad hoc contacts .
On Friday , I visited the football intelligence unit in the Greater Manchester police service .
Unfortunately , we have a wealth of experience and expertise in tackling football-related violence in my city .
The assistant Chief Constable of Greater Manchester Police has read this report and he welcomes the initiative in the light of what he calls " different standards in dealing , for example , with Manchester United away fixtures and England away fixtures " .
On Friday the unit was preparing for two key matches on Saturday .
One of those was Oldham versus Stoke City : the last time these two teams had met , known hooligans had rampaged through the town , wrecking property and attacking people .
In the UK we have pro-active football legislation to deal with our hooligan problems .
This allows us to impose banning orders ; so , when a hundred of those fans arrived in Oldham , they were immediately arrested because they are banned from attending any matches .
Those banning orders also apply to international matches .
The football intelligence unit has a sophisticated database of so-called ' football prominents ' , using the latest digital image technology to update and record cases .
Let me tell you where the unit believes the EU information exchange system has to do better : 150 fans were deported from Charleroi in June 2000 .
Among those arriving in Manchester airport were Belgian nationals , some of whom may not have been involved in any hooliganism at all .
Rounding up and deportation without prosecution does nothing to help the intelligence network on hooliganism .
A list of , and report on , the deportees was then sent to the intelligence unit : very helpful as far as it went , but the report contained no information .
Officers could not read it because it was not in English , and they could not act on it because the information did not allow for any further action due to prosecution or conviction .
During Euro 1996 , German fans arrived in Manchester .
As a result of German data protection and privacy laws , no lists of known hooligans could be passed on to the local intelligence forces and the officers working in the unit therefore had no information accessible in a usable format to tackle the hooligans .
So there is an issue here , Commissioner , in that we do need to standardise our information formats while recognising that there are different cultures on policing and information collection across the EU .
Perhaps we need to consider some form of information protocol .
This was the idea of my own football intelligence unit officers .
We need to deal with hooliganism pro-actively not re-actively .
On the issue of cost , which is an amendment tabled by Mrs Sanders-Ten Holte , no doubt it would be useful to have a study on whether clubs should pay more for the policing of hooliganism .
The difficulty is , however , who pays those costs after hours in cities where football hooligans are still engaged in activities .
In 2004 we will be hosting the final of the European championships at Old Trafford in Manchester .
Our priority has to be to protect the law-abiding supporter and clamp down on hooligans who spoil the game .
We need a practical , pro-active approach to information sharing for national monitoring centres .
Their existence alone , Commissioner , will not guarantee the end of football hooliganism .
The proposal to set up a European network of permanent , national football information points , in other words , to enhance cooperation between the Member States where the enforcement of law and order in international football matches is concerned , is a Belgian initiative which is based on the experience gathered at Euro 2000 , the European national teams championship , which , as you know , was organised jointly by Belgium and the Netherlands in June 2000 .
The proposal and report are sound , and the initiative is excellent in my view . I should , however , like to make two observations .
First of all , the proposal only applies , of course , to EU Member States .
You may ask , what about the countries outside the European Union , many of whose clubs also take part in international competitions ?
Turkey , Romania and Croatia also play teams of the EU Member States .
I hear you say that candidate countries will obviously need to adopt the acquis communautaire , and that is right .
But that is not now nor in the immediate future .
For some of them , that is not until 2004 at the earliest .
And then , what about the others ? What about the non-candidate countries ?
It may be possible to link up with the UEFA and with the national football unions , to find a way round this .
Secondly , greater involvement and cooperation by the clubs and supporters ' associations is important to improve the climate and the quality .
And I believe that specific efforts must be made in order to achieve this .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , major international football matches are the absolute high point for supporters ; for law enforcers and local authorities , however , they are often expensive nightmares and , for the people living in the vicinity of sports stadiums , often a source of distress and a great deal of misery as a result of the damage caused to their front gardens , to cars , to pavement cafés etc . The list goes on .
This Council decision is first of all directed at a hard core which , so far , has been able to exploit the loopholes in the exchange of information between the different police services .
The effective coordination of the exchange of information is therefore not an unnecessary luxury .
However , let it be clear that this is , first and foremost , a preventive instrument which must allow for effective risk assessment .
Incidentally , Mr Deprez ' report is very good .
He managed to clarify the original text and also to tighten it up , by , inter alia , devoting more attention to the times before and after the games .
A well-oiled network of ' football ' information points must be able to deploy forces in a targeted and effective manner .
The international football competition takes up a great deal of energy and resources of the police services involved , resulting in the risk that other tasks may be carried out to a lower standard .
The key question surrounding instruments of this nature , however , is how the law-enforcing bodies themselves can be monitored .
An almost self-evident first step in this is to inform the individuals involved about the fact that they have ended up in this database and to grant them access to this .
A counter-argument could be that this could hamper the monitoring function of the police services and offer the people included on the database a tactical advantage .
I , however , believe this to be a misapprehension about what actually happens .
This is not purely about a self-evident right , namely that of knowing whether or not you are included in a database . It is also about issuing a clear warning which also has a deterrent effect .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , speaking quite frankly , I can summon up but little enthusiasm for couch potatoes who sit in front of the telly or in a football stadium for ninety minutes watching a small round leather thing and about two dozen men in jerseys , leaving their seats in the meantime only to roar with enthusiasm , or wring their hands in shock .
It is not that , though , with which we are dealing here , for the protection of fundamental rights -which I believe to be threatened by this proposal - only makes sense if it applies to all the people in a State , and not only to those whose thoughts and actions enjoy the State 's approval .
Within the so-called area of freedom , security and justice , the Deprez report aims at the actual gathering of more information on football hooligans .
Over and over again during discussions on the proposal , the rapporteur disputed that this would , in the long term , entail travel bans , preventive custody and the infringement of fundamental rights , as no measures are envisaged over and above the collection of data .
I will take an example from the country in which I was elected in order to make clear how , in my view , it will certainly not , in the long term , remain just a matter of gathering data .
In the Federal Republic of Germany , for example , there has already been a legal document , according to which hooligans who are allegedly equipped for violence may have their right to leave the country restricted .
A year ago , though , that was used , not against hooligans , but against people who were equipped to demonstrate and wanted to travel to Genoa .
Some of those who had originally voted for this law have since said in the media that this was far from being what they wanted .
They had , they said , voted for the law at that time only on the presupposition that it really only applied to football hooligans , and not to people who wanted to express their political views .
I think this shows very well what can happen to documents of this sort .
I would be surprised if this really were only about the gathering of data , for what is a database for if nothing is done with it afterwards ?
It is very easy to see through the political manoeuvre that lies behind it .
A new target group - the hooligans - has been found , which is well suited to legitimising police measures in the eyes of the bourgeoisie , and thus measures are justified which very definitely restrict the protection of fundamental rights and which are then extended to other people .
This , then , means in the long term that this will not just be a matter of gathering data , but that travel restrictions , preventive detention and so on will very definitely find their way into this ' fortress Europe ' policy , which will then be applied to other groups .
If you want to give your approval to that , if that is your understanding of the area of freedom , security and justice , then you should indeed vote in favour of the Deprez report .
Mr President , the Council 's initiative and Mr Deprez ' report plug a huge gap in legislation to prevent and suppress hooliganism and violence at football matches , which have taken on explosive dimensions over recent years as a result of the Member States ' failure to apply efficient measures .
Without doubt , the commercialisation of football and the profit motive are the prime cause of violent episodes at football matches .
Brawls are no longer led by wild crowds of fans , they are led by organised mafias using fanaticism and violence to serve specific illegal purposes which have nothing to do with the love of sport .
In short , it has been suggested that violence at football matches sells , it brings in a profit .
Violence at football matches is organised and orchestrated nowadays , frequently using sport as a front for common crime , such as selling drugs and laundering dirty money , according to an investigation carried out in Britain .
Over recent years , various groups of hooligans have been making blatant use of new technology , mobile telephones and the Internet , to organise their activities and , of course , to mislead the police .
This being the case , we cannot create a European area of freedom , security and justice unless we first create a network of information points and reinforce police and judicial cooperation between the 15 Member States in order to suppress violence at football matches .
Of course , the sports associations still have a crucial role to play in distancing themselves from hooliganism and teaching their fans the importance of friendly competition , collaboration , dialogue , respect for other people 's differences and peaceful coexistence .
Finally , I should like to point out that the 2004 Olympic Games in Athens will be a important opportunity to revive the Olympic spirit and the ideals of the Olympic truce and peace , as an alternative political proposal to the mindset and culture of violence .
Mr President , I would also like to thank Mr Deprez , and indeed the Belgian State , for this excellent report and excellent initiative .
It is true that the scourge of violence , often organised violence , has plagued international sport , particularly international football , for too long .
We wholeheartedly support initiatives that are aimed at increasing cooperation between authorities in different Member States .
They are a vital tool in the battle to keep sport clean and to keep it as it should be .
We like you to consider one small , but important , textual amendment .
The proposed decision is flawed in one respect : it appears to assume that each Member State is represented by just one single national team .
This is not so , as you well know .
My own country , for example , is represented by an independent Scotland team , despite the fact that Scotland is , for the time being anyway , not an independent Member State .
We have a long footballing pedigree and indeed the first international football match ever played was the game between Scotland and England in 1872 .
Scottish supporters - the so-called ' Tartan Army ' which is tartan , but not an army - have for quite a few years now had an unparalleled reputation for good behaviour and good humour .
It is for this reason that I and my EFA colleagues have tabled three amendments to the Council text .
They will not change the substance but they will give recognition to the distinctive footballing and indeed legal histories of Scotland , Wales , Northern Ireland and England .
Do not speak about the national team , but about national teams .
I see Mr Deprez accepts the point and I am most grateful to him for that .
Mr President , the fact that three speakers have taken the floor on behalf of the Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance is striking and , in my view , illustrates at least two points .
Firstly that we , unlike Mrs Schröder , are very much interested in 22 men running in shorts after a ball . And secondly , that our group also wants to seriously address the problems surrounding these matches .
I too should like to bring one amendment to your attention which has already been touched upon by my fellow MEP , because I hope that you are still prepared to endorse it .
It concerns the amendment which stipulates that , if data is stored about persons who constitute a danger to public order , these persons should be informed of the fact that their data has been recorded .
This is a different situation from that in the case of criminals , for example .
I can imagine that , in the case of criminals , it is not helpful if , while the investigations are still under way , they know that they are being pursued .
In the case of persons who constitute a danger to public order , however , it has a very preventive effect .
They know that they are being monitored .
As a result , anyone who has been wrongly registered can be removed from this register , but it also acts as an effective deterrent , in fact .
If people know that they are being watched , they will think twice before misbehaving again in this way .
I hope you will be able to endorse Amendment No 22 , nevertheless .
Thank you , Commissioner Vitorino .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 p.m.
The next item is a report ( A5-0036 / 2002 ) by Mr Kirkhope , on behalf of the Committee on Citizens ' Freedoms and Rights , Justice and Home Affairs , on the initiative of the Kingdom of the Netherlands with a view to the adoption of a Council Decision setting up a European network of contact points in respect of persons responsible for genocide , crimes against humanity and war crimes [ 11658 / 2001 - C5-0499 / 2001 - 2001 / 0826 ( CNS ) ] .

Madam President , following on from Mr Deprez 's excellent report , it seems to me rather tragic that I have to address this House on matters which frankly , here in the twenty-first century , we should not have to be debating , let alone dealing with : genocide , crimes against humanity and war crimes .
Only a few short years ago , I was the UK minister responsible for legislation , setting up the appropriate mechanisms for dealing with war criminals from a past era .
It is therefore particularly sad that we have a situation where there are still many extremely evil people in the world who behave in a manner which is totally unacceptable to all decent people who believe in democracy and the freedom of individuals , as I do .
I want to say a word or two about this report , because some people have commented that it is unnecessary to have a system of contact points in Europe to deal with these matters , that there is already plenty of cooperation at police level , for instance , and justice ministry level .
Sadly , that is not the case .
Although we had the statute for the International Criminal Court in July 1998 , this is ultimately a matter which is still the prime responsibility of national governments and national criminal jurisdictions .
The cooperation between national governments and national police enforcement authorities , for instance , is absolutely critical in bringing to book some of the rather more unpleasant people who we need to deal with , owing to the international and horrendous nature of their crimes .
I remember , as minister , speaking to my Polish opposite number , Mr Miller , - who , coincidentally , is now the Polish Prime Minister - about certain war criminals .
Although Poland is not currently a member of the EU , but hopes to be before too long , it was clear that there was much work which still had to be done in an attempt to produce a more cooperative effect between the different law enforcement authorities .
One of the possibilities is , as my report suggests , to have contact points which are readily identifiable in the different nation states .
Indeed , an amendment which we have tabled to the report makes it clear that we believe that we should not leave this as a vague proposition to be determined at some point in the future , but that it should be clearly the case that the contact points should be based in the police or justice departments of the Member States . That is the first point .
It is also important , as was noted in the previous debate , that we look at the latest methods and make sure that there is a coordination of those methods in bringing about the necessary prosecutions and convictions .
The issue of data , for instance , is most important .
There were concerns shown by some people about the privacy of individuals and the rights of defendants that might be effected by a duplication or by a different approach to data matters .
I am trying , in this report , to bring about consistency .
I am sure that Commissioner Vitorino would agree that we need to have more consistency in a cooperative effort .
I do not agree with everything that happens on a European basis , but here we have a situation where there is a clear need for cooperation at a level at which we are consistent in our approach . We also need to have systems in place which can be easily recognised and easily transmitted between the nation states that are concerned .
Cooperation is the key to success .
It is the key to success in the areas which Mr Deprez has spoken about .
It is the key to success in the areas that I am proposing here .
It is a necessary measure .
This report underlines this need and , above all else , it shows the determination of all of us in the different states of Europe to get together to deal with the more unpleasant people who sadly still exist on this globe .
Madam President , this Dutch initiative is fundamentally to be welcomed .
An initiative of this kind towards European cooperation in more effective prosecution of crime deserves support , especially when the crimes in question are as detestable as genocide , crimes against humanity and war crimes .
I aimed to keep the initiative on exchange of information among the contact points as simple as possible , something which the Germans and the Dutch supported in Council .
That being so , I would have considered it right to refer , in Article 2 ( 2 ) to the law on judicial assistance between Member States currently in force and laid down in bilateral and multilateral agreements .
Whatever the rapporteur may think , such an agreement does indeed exist between all the Member States ; it is the one that was adopted by the Council of Europe on 20 April 1959 .
Over and above that , there is a new judicial assistance agreement dated May 2000 , which is adapted to more modern circumstances but has not yet been ratified by all the Member States .
This new judicial assistance agreement would already represent a marked simplification , and would also make the creation of a new procedure superfluous .
Now , the rapporteur was in agreement with the reference to the existing agreement , but was not willing to support the deletion of the procedure in Articles 3 to 6 , which was to be newly introduced .
As I did not want to risk the committee adopting such a contradictory report , I finally refrained from submitting the amendments I have referred to , but I still have serious misgivings .
Equally , though , I would like to emphasise that I see the creation of a European network of contact points as extraordinarily important .
I also hope that the success of this network and of this important initiative will not be impaired by procedural disputes .
I congratulate Mr Kirkhope on his report .
Madam President , my group very much supports the report by Mr Kirkhope .
It is very important in that it has not changed the spirit of the Dutch proposal , and we will be voting in favour of it .
The creation of networks or contact points in each Member State for war crimes is extremely important .
It is important that there is contact with the police and judicial authorities in order to facilitate cooperation in the Member States in relation to war crimes .
This is exemplified by current developments in international law , and in particular the success of the UN tribunals on the former Yugoslavia and on Rwanda in tracking down and prosecuting persons who have committed war crimes , crimes against humanity and genocide .
This action is attracting more public interest and support than ever before .
There are cases where people who have committed crimes against humanity have more or less escaped unpunished - for example the Pinochet case - and there are other cases where a blind eye is turned to war crimes and to major international human rights abuses until the occasion arises when it is politically correct to challenge them .
We have to challenge these abuses from the very beginning .
It is important that this report is not aimed at establishing a central coordination department .
The initiative basically leaves implementation up to the Member States , which must then supply information about the places that have been set up .
The initiative also highlights one of the important problems , data protection , which can develop with the transfer of data and information .
We also must never forget that data protection is an extremely important issue and it must not be left out of any of these debates .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , the Commission supports the Dutch proposal to create these contact points for crimes of genocide , because we feel that this is a reasonable proposal , which seeks to achieve a structure that is flexible rather than unwieldy .
This proposal does not affect the existing legal mechanisms for judicial assistance , but represents an important additional measure in that it enables the Member States of the European Union to fulfil their obligations as laid down in the Statute of the International Criminal Court established in Rome by Convention in 1998 and which is ready to enter into force as soon as the necessary number of Member States ratifies it .
Cooperation in this field between the States of the European Union , on preventing this type of crime , has already been subject to a common position , issued by the Council on 11 June 2001 .
We therefore feel that the initiative by the Netherlands is part of a coherent and consistent approach to these particularly odious crimes on an international scale .
The Commission agrees with the emphasis placed by the rapporteur , Mr Kirkhope , whom I should like to congratulate on his excellent report , on the need for this type of cooperation mechanism not to affect guarantees for the protection of personal data or to endanger the rights of those on trial to a defence .
Common rules apply here , primarily the European Convention on Human Rights and the Council of Europe conventions on such matters , and this is another example of issues which , together with those on which Mr Deprez has drawn up a report , we are considering as the legal base for guaranteeing the protection of personal data in the field of judicial cooperation in the European Union .
Thank you , Commissioner Vitorino .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 p.m.
The next item is a report ( A5-0082 / 2002 ) by Mr Coelho , on behalf of the Committee on Citizens ' Freedoms and Rights , Justice and Home Affairs , on the proposal for a Council decision establishing a framework programme on the basis of Title VI of the Treaty on European Union - Police and judicial cooperation in criminal matters [ COM ( 2001 ) 646 - C5-0694 / 2001 - 2001 / 0262 ( CNS ) ] .
Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I should like to begin by congratulating the Commission , in the person of Commissioner António Vitorino , on the excellent initiative that it has presented .
We often criticise the Commission - and rightly so - but today it is only fair to congratulate it on the initiative that it has presented and which provides a positive response to the recommendations made by the European Parliament when it approved the Kessler report to bring together the five programmes covered by Title VI in a single framework programme .
As we all know , under the terms of Article 29 of the EU Treaty , the Union is obliged to pursue the objective of providing its citizens with a high level of safety within an area of freedom , security and justice by initiating actions in conjunction with the Member States in the field of police and judicial cooperation in criminal matters too .
This was the rationale underlying the creation of the five biannual financing programmes under Title VI that are due to end in December 2002 and that were - and still are - Grotius II , designed for legal practitioners , OISIN II , for Member State law enforcement authorities , STOP II , for those responsible for combating trade in human beings and the sexual exploitation of children , Hippocrates , in the field of crime prevention in general , and Falcone , for those responsible for action to combat organised crime .
The proposal we are debating here today establishes a single framework programme that is intended to bring together and provide a harmonised legislative and operational framework for all the actions that fall under Title VI of the EU Treaty , reflecting developments in Community programmes in general and the experiences of five years ' work on the ground .
Consequently , we have , in our opinion , managed to ensure that the actions we have supported are more consistent and have an even greater impact , to make possible a more effective use of financial resources , to prevent potential overlaps between the various programmes and to fill in existing gaps .
Although I consider the approach that the Commission is following to be fundamentally correct , I felt it would be appropriate and sensible to table some amendments with the following objectives :
firstly , to make the programme 's line of action clearer , and to make the wording more precise , not least because projects submitted are to be evaluated for conformity with the programme 's objectives . In these circumstances vague , meaningless terms have to be rejected ;
secondly , to give our endorsement to the inclusion in the programme of cross-border projects in the field of assistance to victims of crime , in addition to the promotion of police and judicial cooperation .
We will , in this way , be promoting the effective protection , in the Member States , of the interests of victims in criminal proceedings , specifically through the creation of a network of contact points .
It might also , for example , prove appropriate to provide for an independent evaluation to be undertaken on the implementation of the framework decision , accompanied by proposals for improvement for every country ;
thirdly , to acknowledge that it is important and appropriate to involve the applicant countries , but also that it must be made clear that they must participate in both drawing up and implementing the project .
Merely taking part in the project as what amounts to a ' consumer ' , cannot be considered to be sufficient ;
fourthly , to state that the power of initiative to draft proposals cannot be confined only to the public sector of the Member States and of the applicant countries ; it must be extended to NGOs , universities and other interested parties ;
fifthly , with regard to financing , a maximum co-financing of up to 70 % has been provided for although , in some cases , it could reach 100 % .
These are specific projects and complementary measures .
A hundred per cent financing from the Community budget could be justified only in the case of projects which were in the very best interests of the European Union and which could not be carried out with a lower rate of funding .
However , it should be emphasised , and I am sure that this is also the approach of Commissioner António Vitorino , that the underlying idea is to attempt to finance the greatest number of projects possible with the resources available ;
my last but one point is that the Commission 's proposal is consistent with this Parliament 's desire to provide greater support for projects promoting the creation of an area of freedom , security and justice , but it is rather difficult to accept a proposal that exceeds the existing financial perspective .
Hence the proposal that this framework programme should operate in the period 2003 to 2006 , following which it must be renewed in accordance with the new financial perspective .
To conclude , I find it regrettable that the position of the European Parliament does not demonstrate the appropriate degree of prudence .
I have therefore proposed that Parliament should be given the option of being involved , which will surely give it the opportunity to exercise its responsibility as budgetary authority in the best possible way .
The construction of an area of freedom , security and justice is one of the fundamental objectives of this Parliament , and therefore , its involvement is of the greatest importance .
.
( DA ) Madam President , on behalf of the Committee on Budgets , I wish to thank the rapporteur , Mr Coelho , and the Committee on Citizens ' Freedoms and Rights , Justice and Home Affairs for having incorporated most of the Committee on Budgets ' amendments into the report .
The proposal tabled by the Commission does in fact combine five existing programmes - Grotius II , Oisin II , Stop II , Hippocrates and Falcone - in one , and I think that the proposal is broadly in line with Parliament 's wish to secure more aid for projects that can give people in the European Union an EU with greater security .
Internal security is of course one of the priorities also emphasised by Parliament in the guidelines for the budgetary procedure for 2003 - next year - which were of course adopted at the last sitting here in Strasbourg .
Part of the thinking behind the way in which the programme has been put together is that , in future , there should be a closer link between police cooperation and judicial cooperation . For the Committee on Budgets , this is , moreover , an aim with the not insignificant effect of making for a better use of financial resources .
It is gratifying that the candidate countries too are to be given the opportunity to participate in those projects that are financed under the programme , but it must be clear that , as a budgetary authority , Parliament cannot accept a situation in which the financial estimates are exceeded .
The programme ought , then , to be limited to the period 2003-2006 in its initial phase , and in that way shortened by a year .
That means , of course , a corresponding reduction in the framework appropriation , and the programme can subsequently be extended .
Finally , I think that it is important for the budgetary authority to be listened to if it should nonetheless become necessary to increase the appropriations to the programme , for the consequence of increasing the appropriations to this programme must not be reduced appropriations to other programmes also financed under category 3 of the financial estimates .
Madam President , the Union treaty makes it our duty to create an area of freedom , security and justice for Europe 's citizens .
The Council proposal is an important step in this direction .
Admittedly , it does nothing more than combine five already-existing programmes , but this combination creates homogeneity and clarity , which is particularly necessary in the difficult area of judicial cooperation in criminal matters .
The combination of the programmes can now serve to prevent overlapping and close loopholes .
The creation of a single framework programme will also further improve the uptake of financial resources .
Only cross-border criminal prosecution and enforcement can combat contemporary criminality , for those who commit crimes are taking extensive advantage of the freedoms of the European Union .
The EU 's citizens will also feel their sense of security reinforced .
They know that there are no no-go areas for the law in its pursuit of criminals .
They will be pursued right across the EU , and in like manner .
It is in this context that the amendment on the publication on the Internet of the results of the investigations and studies cofinanced under this programme is particularly to be welcomed .
This is a further step towards the greater transparency that we need in order once again to bring the advantages of European cooperation to our citizens ' attention .
Greater protection for victims is especially to be highlighted and much to be welcomed .
It is the victims who have most to endure , but who are far from receiving the best protection and care .
It must therefore be ensured that effective protection of victims ' interests in criminal proceedings can be guaranteed .
It is particularly to be welcomed , in view of EU enlargement , that the Council proposal can take into account the candidate countries and involve them in projects .
What cannot , however , be accepted is the way in which the Council proposal disregards Parliament ; in particular , Parliament 's sovereignty in budget matters makes it necessary for it at least to be informed concerning the progress of the programme and not to get a report only as late as 2005 .
The rapporteur should therefore be supported in his efforts to bring about an amendment on this point .
I would like , in conclusion , to congratulate Mr Coelho on his report , in particular on his success in achieving , as was necessary , more precise use of language .
Madam President , this report is , of course , of little importance in the broad political scheme of things .
From a financial point of view , we are concerned here with less than one per mille of the EU 's annual budget , and the direct political consequences are cause neither for approval nor contradiction .
What is at issue here is a programme on the basis of Title VI of the Treaty on European Union .
As a lawyer and democrat , I have to say that cooperation and development are always to be welcomed and that they can be useful and increase our awareness , but it is very difficult to take the rhetoric seriously .
The report 's explanatory statement includes the following words : ' If the European citizen is to be offered an area of freedom , security and justice , we have to ensure that criminal investigations , prosecution and the execution of penalties can take place efficiently across borders ? .
It is as if freedom , security and justice had not been invented until these decisions were made , but the fact is of course that by far the greater part of judicial criminal investigation and police work is done nationally and locally .
What we have here is a rhetorical device that is part of , or to be seen as a stage in , the process towards unified decisions in the fields of policing , the law and criminal investigation .
Where the funding is concerned , it may be pointed out that EUR 65 million is not to be sneezed at , and it is one more item in the long list of programmes interfering with the EU 's administrative procedure .
I must not dwell any further upon this matter but just point out in conclusion what is so curious about the Commission 's statement that these programmes have been assessed .
In that case , they were assessed in 2000 , irrespective of the fact that the majority of the programmes were not adopted until 2001 .
That really is an impressive act of clairvoyance which bodes well for the projects .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I should like to begin by thanking Carlos Coelho and by congratulating him on his excellent report . I must emphasise that the aim of this proposal for a framework programme is to rationalise and simplify the implementation of the programmes of police and judicial cooperation between Member States in criminal matters , thereby complying with the specific request made by the European Parliament in the Kessler report .
As to the content of this framework programme , this covers all five of the previous programmes and also the implementation of actions linked to the plan to combat drugs , for which the European Parliament had created a specific budget heading , due to end in the course of this year .
The programme covers all the fields that are and that must be subject to European action , which demonstrates the commitment of the public authorities and of the beneficiaries of the projects , with whom we are in close contact , and also reflects the results of the external evaluation carried out two years ago on , of course , the development of the programmes that preceded the evaluation .
The Commission is sometimes accused of being a schizophrenic institution , but we have not yet reached the point of assessing things that have not yet been done ?
With this in mind , the basic legal provision was voluntarily confined to laying down the broad guidelines , because the Commission felt that the task of defining priorities more precisely must be left up to the annual programmes , year by year , in line with developments in the political situation and the actual requirements of the situation as regards crime .
From this point of view , the amendments tabled to Article 2 , emphasising one specific issue or another , are , I believe , hard to accept .
The Commission takes the view that in the framework programme , objectives must be defined in general terms , leaving it up to each annual programme to define its priorities .
Nevertheless , all matters and issues to which amendments have been tabled are , as I understand it , fully covered by the general wording of the Commission proposal and can be included in every annual programme .
The framework programme also highlights the concept of partnership . This element is crucial , because projects must be developed not only through broad European participation , but also - and from their very inception - in the context of close cooperation between the main players involved in the various countries .
The amendment tabled by the rapporteur that defines this concept of partnership more clearly is , therefore , totally acceptable to the Commission .
As Mr Coelho stated , the countries that are candidates for accession can already participate in projects .
The Commission would like to go further and , in line with European agreements , has developed a system of financial protocols that will enable organisations established in the candidate countries to be equally eligible to submit projects on the same basis and according to the same rules as Member State organisations .
I therefore welcome the amendment also tabled by the rapporteur on this point , which proposes a wording that I consider to be fortuitous , because it further clarifies the concept of the eligibility of the candidate countries .
With regard to the remaining amendments , the Commission can accept those that have an effect on the recitals and which enrich the text , or certain explanations , such as , for example , the more explicit reference to the inclusion of universities , NGOs and police academies as eligible organisations .
In relation to the request to bring forward the interim report to June 2004 , the Commission would propose that the date of June 2005 be maintained .
Instead , we propose that the presentation of the annual report be brought forward to June 2004 so that the European Parliament can be informed as quickly as possible on the first results of the implementation of the programme to have already produced effects that are likely to be assessed .
Finally , on the duration of the programme , I must admit that , in relation to other existing programmes in the European Union , the argument of ' a legal base providing for its implementation beyond 2006 ' , in other words , beyond the lifespan of the financial perspective , has not been used .
Bearing in mind , of course , that the financial envelope for the period after 2006 will always be dependent on the financial perspective adopted following 2006 , we would , therefore , ask Parliament to ensure that the limitation on the legal base does not stop at 2006 and could cover actions programmed up to the year 2007 , with the proviso , naturally , that a given financial appropriation will always be dependent on the new financial perspective .
Lastly , I wish to thank the rapporteur , Mr Coelho , and the European Parliament for the support , the boost and the encouragement that they have given to this important task of rationalising programmes in a particularly sensitive area : the area of police and judicial cooperation in criminal matters at European level .
Thank you , Commissioner .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon .
The next item is the joint debate on :
report ( A5-0080 / 2002 ) by Mr Di Lello Finuoli , on behalf of the Committee on Citizens ' Freedoms and Rights , Justice and Home Affairs , on the draft Council framework decision on the protection of the environment through criminal law ( renewed consultation ) [ 15525 / 2001 - C5-0022 / 2002 - 2000 / 0801 ( CNS ) ]
report ( A5-0099 / 2002 ) by Mrs Oomen-Ruijten , on behalf of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy , on the proposal for a European Parliament and Council directive on the protection of the environment through criminal law [ COM ( 2001 ) 139 - C5-0116 / 2001 - 2001 / 0076 ( COD ) ] .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , we are all quite familiar with the history of this framework decision .
We are being consulted a second time because the framework decision , on which we first expressed our opinion two years ago , has been revised .
In the meantime , however , the Commission expressed a general reservation about the framework decision , to the effect that environmental protection is covered by a large number of Community acts , most of which make provisions for administrative penalties , and that the issue should therefore be dealt with by means of a first-pillar instrument .
The Commission insists that , given the environmental degradation in the Union , existing penalties are clearly inadequate .
The proposal for a directive , which is the subject of Mrs Oomen-Ruijten 's report , must therefore be seen as complementing the draft framework decision .
According to the Commission , a first-pillar instrument must be adopted which takes precedence over a third-pillar instrument .
That means that , when an area falls within the Community sphere of responsibility , it is legally impossible for the Union to adopt common rules by means of a third-pillar instrument without encroaching on the Community 's powers .
I would point out that Parliament agrees with the Commission on this point : in the sitting of 15 November 2001 , with a procedure without debate , we adopted a recommendation on criminal penalties and Community acts , point 6 of which , to be precise , called upon the Council not to undertake any action concerning criminal law in the field of the environment before the proposal for a directive on the protection of the environment through criminal law had been adopted .
Now then , these two documents - the framework decision and the directive - complement each other and are designed to be used together , so as to avoid inconsistency with two documents saying different things about the same subject .
As you will see in the amendments , the framework decision refers precisely to the directive as regards the definitions and penalties , for we are convinced that the directive is the instrument we need , precisely because it is a Community instrument , if we are to protect the environment from destruction .
I would like to draw your attention to an additional , very important consideration : whereas the directive appears to be based on the approach of preventive protection of the environment , that is protection which takes place before the environment is completely destroyed , the framework decision proposed by the Council would , in actual fact , only impose criminal sanctions once the environment has already suffered destruction or , at any rate , irreparable damage .
Here , we do not , of course , have enough time available , but in committee we have already outlined this difference of approach quite clearly .
I therefore stress that we must endorse both the framework decision , which has already been approved in committee , and the directive , for , as they stand , these two documents complement each other .
If , however , we were to adopt a decision which was inconclusive as regards the basic approach or , worse still , if we were to adopt Amendment No 28 to Mrs Oomen-Ruijten 's report , which completely rejects the Commission 's proposal , we would cause the two documents to be totally inconsistent .
We therefore need to agree on the complementary nature of these two instruments and adopt them both in their current forms .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the Environmental Crime Directive will provide a new European legal instrument which is to contribute towards a more effective enforcement of the European environmental laws transposed and implemented in the Member States . The topic is an exciting one .
Exciting , because the judicial system which is being selected is sound , but also because it will provide much material for the European legal experts in years to come .
The view that the Member States must have at their disposal the option of criminal sanctions as a way of enforcing European environmental law is unreservedly shared by the Commission , Parliament and the Council .
However , we are divided about the way in which such a system of criminal sanctions for serious environmental offences must be formulated and introduced , and about the question as to who can be involved in the codecision process .
Along with Mr Di Lello Finuoli of the Committee on Citizens ' Freedoms and Rights , Justice and Home Affairs , I side with the European Commission and support an Environmental Crime Directive under the first pillar .
With what is known as the Danish initiative , the Council has opted for measures under the third pillar .
The members of the Committee on Citizens ' Freedoms and Rights , Justice and Home Affairs are right to reject this decision .
The thing that unites the Council , Parliament and the Commission is that we all wish to act upon the very explicit request expressed at the European Council of Tampere in October 1999 for common definitions , administration of justice and penalties aimed at a limited number of sectors of special significance , but where explicit reference is made to environmental crime .
Since the choice of legal basis in the first pillar still elicits questions on the part of the Council , and on the part of some colleagues of my group , as I found out a moment ago , I will make a few enlightening observations which I hope , incidentally , will also convert the cynics .
I will break these down into a few points .
Why do we opt for the first pillar , and why do I recommend that the first pillar be chosen ?
Firstly , with regard to the Danish initiative , the Council refers to Article 31 , introductory line and letter e ) of the Treaty on European Union whereby the authority for common action on judicial cooperation in criminal matters is given , and whereby e ) provides for progressively adopting measures establishing minimum rules relating to the constituent elements of criminal acts and to penalties in the fields of organised crime , terrorism and illicit drug trafficking .
This clause is included in title VI .
However , in accordance with Article 29 of the EU Treaty , the provisions of this title apply ' without prejudice to the powers of the European Community ? .
But also in Article 47 , it is stated that the Treaty on European Union does not prejudice the Treaties establishing the European Communities .
In other words , criminal law does not exclusively fall within the remit of the European Union .
Case law of the European Court of Justice , to which , incidentally , I also make reference in the report , confirms that the Treaty on European Union cannot constitute a barrier .
Secondly , the question which subsequently arises , now that there are no general barriers to arriving at criminal measures within the scope of the Treaty on European Union , is : what is the EC specifically capable of doing and what is it allowed to do ?
If we look at Article 280 ( 4 ) of the Treaty on European Union , which corresponds to Article 5 which enshrines the subsidiarity principle , then I note that in the field of environmental criminal law too , it should be ensured that EC legislation does not prejudice the organisation of the national administration of justice .
Thirdly , it is therefore crucial that this directive should not be about specific provisions concerning criminal law , but that criminal law is used to make environmental policy effective .
After all , the application of criminal law is in many areas an important coda for the enforcement of the rules , whereby , taking into consideration this subsidiarity , a certain level of harmonisation of criminal law enforcement can be useful for the implementation of Community provisions as a whole .
Fourthly , the environmental crime proposal is based on Article 175 ( 1 ) of the Treaty on European Union , which stipulates that the Council , according to the codecision procedure of Article 251 , affects all measures which can help the environmental objective of Article 174 , provided that this process is not hindered by subsidiarity .
Fifthly , the proposal for a directive is based on environmental directives and regulations laid down on the basis of Article 175 ( 1 ) and merely adds a criminal-law aspect to this legislation .
The existing line is therefore extended , whereby the directive requires Member States to provide for criminal sanctions for activities which cause substantial damage to the environment .
I based my assessment of the proposal and the submission of amendments on the aforementioned criteria .
I did not alter Article 1 of the directive , which aims to lay down minimum standards for punishable offences .
This enables Member States themselves to determine the punishment .
In the definitions of Article 2 , I also included incitement as an environmental offence , for which , incidentally , I used the Danish initiative as the basis .
Thirdly , I included in Article 3 punishable offences which are now mentioned in the annex , with two minor changes .
I unreservedly condemn Amendment No 22 , because I am of the view that there is no legal basis for it .
Fourthly , I have clarified the term ' framework ' in Article 4 .
Instead of allowing the Member States to determine the punishment , it is preferable to use the term criminal sanctions .
I have adapted Amended No 25 , because subsidiarity plays a role here too .
We can only invite the Member States to introduce measures such as confiscation if this element is specifically provided for in the Member States ' own legal systems .
This directive amounts to a fine balancing act .
We , as the European Parliament , must be very specific , because I assume that the European Court will verify the facts , and we , along with the European Commission , will possibly head in that direction too .
Finally , I should like to thank my fellow MEPs , not only those from the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy and the rapporteur of the Committee on Citizens ' Freedoms and Rights , Justice and Home Affairs , but also my fellow MEPs in the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market and all shadow rapporteurs .
We have worked in unity and , even if the contribution now appears very technical , it is founded on extensive policy , which is not only important to the Commission , but certainly also to the European Parliament .
We are serving a worthwhile goal , namely improved environmental protection .
Mr President , I simply wish to say that at 7.30 p.m. an extraordinary meeting of the Committee on Citizens ' Freedoms and Rights , Justice and Home Affairs will begin , for an urgent consultation that the Council has requested .
I have asked for the floor in relation to the two subsequent reports and I believe that the same is true for several members of that committee who are here at the moment .
I have taken the floor so that our reason for leaving the Chamber may be recorded in the Minutes and to say that , as coordinator of the Group of the Party of European Socialists on the committee , I have no choice but to leave , and I hope this demonstrates that we should avoid this type of situation .
We fully understand your situation and this will be noted in the Minutes .
Mr President , in thirty years there has been a huge increase in the number of standards relating to the environment , with more than fifty times the number of national agreements , protocols and similar instruments in this area .
Within the UN we have more than five hundred of these sorts of agreements , and there are more than a hundred directives within the framework of EU Community law .
In general they are flawed in that they are not sufficiently specific and their implementation has been inexcusably ineffective .
In the end we need criminal sanctions and for that reason it is now important that we should lend our support to this Commission proposal for a directive .
It is considerably wider in scope , more coherent and will prove more effective than the Council framework agreement , which suffers from the usual weaknesses in environmental regulation and whose legal basis is furthermore clearly flawed .
The proposal for a directive , which is based on the EC Treaty and Article 175 ( 1 ) , is the correct instrument in this instance and , pursuant to Article 47 TEU , the Community legal instrument under the first pillar must clearly take precedence , as the Committee on Citizens ' Freedoms and Rights , Justice and Home Affairs has stated in more detail in its opinion .
Mr President , the two excellent reports before us are abundant proof of the need for thorough institutional reform integrating the Union 's responsibilities in matters of judicial , criminal and police cooperation , which currently fall under the third pillar , into the Community framework .
This European Parliament has been calling repeatedly for this and I hope the Convention on the future of Europe itself and , therefore , the Intergovernmental Conference on reform of the Treaties , will put forward such a proposal .
Only thus will it be possible to avoid future counterproductive disputes and institutional conflict , and , most importantly , will we be able to act effectively to protect the citizens of the EU .
Quite clearly , some of these rights - such as the right to a high level of environmental protection and the improvement of the quality of the environment , which is enshrined in Article 37 of the Union 's Charter of Fundamental Rights , are not being adequately safeguarded by the Member States for lack of effective Community intervention .
None of the Member States has ratified the 1998 Council of Europe Convention on the protection of the environment through criminal law .
Even the many Community directives on the environment fail to provide sufficient protection because of failure to apply them and frequent failure to comply with them encouraged by the lack of effective penalties .
The Commission 's proposal for a directive requiring the Member States to introduce penalties therefore deserves our full support with the incorporation of the useful amendments advocated in the Oomen-Ruijten report .
Although the Commission , Parliament and the Council Legal Service itself have , on several occasions , stressed that the protection of the environment is a fundamental Community objective pursuant to Articles 3 and 6 of the Community Treaty , that the proper legal basis for the protection of the environment through criminal law is Article 175 of the Treaty and that Community law prevails over Union law , the Council is attempting to adopt a framework decision on the same subject that does not just integrate the proposal for a directive but interferes with it , limiting its field of application and scope and making the issue no longer subject to the procedure of codecision with the European Parliament .
The Di Lello Finuoli report quite rightly states that this framework decision must be consistent with the directive , must wait for it to be promulgated and must refer to it , without repeating points already covered by the directive but , where necessary , incorporating them .
I hope that Parliament will adopt both reports and I call upon all the Members to reflect on the need to avoid similar damaging disputes in the future and to achieve full communitisation of the third pillar .
Mr President , the Group of the European Liberal , Democrat and Reform Party also welcomes this proposal for a Commission directive , in the same way as it welcomed , equally favourably , the draft framework decision by the Council in December 2001 .
The Liberal Group would , of course , like to thank the two rapporteurs , Mrs Oomen-Ruijten and Mr Di Lello as well .
These two initiatives are a practical response to one of the people 's major concerns : 88 % of European citizens want the European Union to take practical measures to protect the environment .
This is one of the findings of a Eurobarometer survey carried out less than a year ago and which my fellow Member Mr Coelho mentioned earlier .
In response to acts of ecological delinquency , the Liberal Group supports the position defended by Mrs Oomen-Ruijten , namely that the Community framework under the first pillar is the most suitable .
We believe that a directive is the most appropriate tool for establishing a European list of environmental crimes and a common foundation of criminal sanctions .
As for the more specific content of this proposal , I believe , as most of my colleagues do , that incitement , as well as the act itself to breach European environmental legislation , must be punished .
Similarly , we should use general terms when referring to breaches of the law , in order to avoid ecological crimes from being swallowed up in a potential legal loophole .
Having said this , and due to the dispute on the legal basis between Parliament and the Commission , on the one side , and the Council , on the other , I believe it is crucial that we take swift action , that we reassure our citizens by taking repressive measures against these modern-day polluters , because , today , and it seems with regard to the environment in particular , the reason why the law is toothless and benefiting unscrupulous individuals is that it is not being implemented .
To take an example , most of our Member States have strengthened their criminal weaponry .
This is a positive step .
At the same time , it is worrying to note that in the same Member States , criminal cases involving the environment represent only 2 % of the total number of all litigation .
That is why we must use this dissuasive tool at Community level to ensure current regulations are applied , but also so that we are more effective in combating the organised networks which have made pollution their chosen new weapon .
Mr President , criminal law concerning environmental offences is still a bit of a mockery in the Member States .
As a result , it cannot possibly be used to fight the deliberate pollution of our environment effectively .
One of the reasons is that the European directives are not implemented , observed or enforced .
Experience has taught us that the present sanctions for infringements of European and national environmental legislation are inadequate , to put it mildly .
It appears that criminal sanctions are the only instrument that can act as sufficient deterrents in order to ensure that environmental legislation is observed .
European environmental legislation is there for a good reason , since we are facing cross-border effects in the case of , for example , air and water pollution .
In addition , the transportation of waste to locations where waste is not processed in an environmentally responsible manner has many negative implications .
The internal market could also be distorted as a result .
For these reasons , I am endorsing an international approach to environmental crime .
I take the view that the present directive is a suitable and effective instrument in order to achieve this .
This is convincingly supported in Mrs Oomen-Ruijten 's report .
The question remains whether we need a framework Council decision for this .
Finally , I shall be voting in favour of the directive , but I am tempted to vote against the draft framework decision , unless Commissioner Vitorino can convince me that the framework decision is absolutely vital for the entry into force of the directive .
Mr President , the Commission is today proposing a directive which requires the Member States to provide for criminal sanctions to punish a number of particularly serious breaches of Community environmental law .
No one is denying that we must improve our protection of an environment which is suffering increasing degradation and that we must use severe preventive measures .
The problem , in our view , however , is the Commission 's intention to use the Community instrument - namely , the directive - based , in this case , on Article 175 ( 1 ) of the Treaty establishing the European Community - to do this .
This Article provides for several joint actions to protect the environment , but it fully respects , in accordance with the general spirit of the Treaties , the autonomy of the Member States in the area of criminal law .
The claim that the right to provide for criminal penalties is implicit in the Community responsibility for environmental protection on the grounds that it is an essential part of its implementation and cannot therefore be separated from it is utterly unfounded .
If criminal penalties are implicitly provided for in Article 175 ( 1 ) , why are they not also implicitly provided for in all the other articles of the Treaty which allow Community law to be drafted in a number of areas ?
We will eventually reach a situation where we are disregarding a fundamental principle of the Treaty , namely national competence in the area of criminal law .
And if we disregard this principle , we will edge slightly further towards the concept of a centralised Union which is not what we want .
This does not mean that we must take no action at all - quite the opposite , in fact !
The Danish Presidency presented a draft framework decision on the protection of the environment through criminal law , which proposed enforcing stricter penalties whilst also respecting the freedom of the Member States to establish their legal basis on the third pillar , which is on the purely intergovernmental part of the Treaty .
This option is much more suitable and this is the option , Mr President , that we should choose .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , why are the proposals now put before us so important ?
Some Member States have indeed so far neglected to adequately back up Community regulations on environmental protection with the threat of sanctions .
It was thus that the number of violations in the environmental field identified by the Commission rose from 612 in 1999 to 755 in 2000 .
As a member of the Committee on Petitions , I would like to add that such cases are increasingly brought to light as a result of petitions being submitted .
It is our EU 's citizens themselves who have developed a feel for environmental concerns and who increasingly report such offences or who turn to us in search of help for frequent lack of protection on the part of their Member State .
It would , then , be great if governments could demonstrate something like the same degree of environmental awareness as do their citizens .
In 2000 , the Commission took Member States to the European Court of Justice in connection with 39 cases , and so it is time for us to respond on an EU-wide basis .
In doing so , it is not our intention to annul national criminal law - the directive applies only to activities in defence of Community environment law and the regulations by means of which the Member States have hitherto transposed it .
We are laying down only minimum requirements for the protection of the environment through criminal law , so that the retention or creation of stricter safeguards is left to the Member States .
What this directive combats above all is environmental pollution that is attributable to private individuals or corporate bodies , in which respect inducement must incur a penalty in the same way as active behaviour and failure to act where there is a legal duty to do so .
Environmental offences still appear to be regarded as excusable peccadilloes in some Member States .
That must come to an end .
The directive , like the framework decision , is necessary , appropriate , and proportionate to that purpose .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , there are numerous European directives and regulations that aim to protect the very many diverse aspects of the environment .
We all know , however , that a number of these texts are ' dead letters ' due to a lack of effective penalties .
The general public believes that , most of the time , the use of the polluter pays principle to impose financial or material sanctions is insufficient and it is all too aware that these penalties are a poor deterrent given the enormous profits which can be made from the activities that cause the greatest amount of pollution .
We also know that some environmental damage is completely irreversible and cannot be made good .
These considerations therefore justify the adoption by the Member States of provisions to penalise non-observance of European environmental requirements through criminal law .
That is why - together with my fellow European Socialists - I am fully supporting the Commission 's initiative .
However , we must not underestimate the main difficulty that we must face here , in other words , the problem of the legal basis .
For my part , I support the point of view that this matter falls squarely within the Union 's areas of competence under the first pillar and therefore requires the adoption of a framework directive endorsed by the House .
This is also the meaning of the recommendation adopted by Parliament in November 2001 .
It is worth reminding the Council that , had it finalised its draft framework decision under the third pillar , this would have certainly have been against the political will of the European Parliament .
Furthermore - and because we are committed to strengthening environmental legislation by applying effective , proportionate and dissuasive criminal sanctions - we must adopt a sound text , which is above all legal argument and which is unlikely to be condemned by the Court of Justice .
This means that we must pay particular attention to the subsidiarity principle and the rules on competence that are laid down by the Treaty .
Although the Community has the power to require the Member States to adopt criminal sanctions if substantial Community standards are breached , it does not , however , have the power to define the types and levels of sanctions to be applied .
That is why we must show particular care when referring to concepts such as extradition , which specify how serious the offences and sentences are .
I am , however , reassured by the wording which was adopted more recently by Mrs Oomen-Ruijten .
By the same token , the Community has no competence to adopt provisions whose efect is to approximate national criminal provisions .
Therefore , to mention the concept of incitement - which does not exist in all the Member States ' legislation - is to seek to bring the national provisions closer together , which , in my view , considerably weakens the legal validity of this text .
Aside from these comments , I would like to reiterate my full support for the adoption of this text and congratulate the rapporteur , Mrs Oomen-Ruijten .
We believe that this text sends out a strong political signal in respect of a crime that our fellow citizens regard in an increasingly poor light .
Mr President , following the events of 11 September there was a real international will to streamline and improve systems of extradition in connection with terrorist crime .
Whilst it is true that terrorism may have an environmental impact , for example the release of pathogens or the deliberate poisoning of water , this report goes much further than terrorism .
I agree with Mr Berthu that we must resist attempts to extend the EU 's sphere of influence into the judicial area , environmental or otherwise .
I am particularly worried about the amendments which talk about extradition or about the surrender or confiscation of profits as first pillar powers .
The advice of Parliament 's legal services is that there is no legal base under Article 175 for this measure .
Why do we pay these lawyers to give us advice and then ignore it ?
I am keen to see Member States cooperating to adopt measures under the third pillar to combat environmental crime , for example in common definitions of criminal offences ; but the British Conservatives will vote for rejection of this report as amended because it has no legal base .
It talks a lot about subsidiarity in the recitals , but the articles themselves fly in the face of the principle of subsidiarity .
The European Union would be better advised to divert its energies to an area where it does have legal powers to bring errant Member States before the European Court of Justice for non-compliance with existing directives , as Mr von Boetticher suggested earlier .
Mr President , if the Community wants to take seriously the task of protecting the environment , it cannot and must not limit itself to the mere enactment of protection standards .
It must also make it its business to see that the relevant regulations are complied with .
If the machinery of mere sanctions is not sufficient , it must be possible to bring the big stick of the criminal law to bear - only , of course , in important and exceptional cases and with due regard for the division of secondary responsibilities , both in matters of environmental protection and - indeed , above all - in matters of criminal law .
Thus far , almost all the groups in this House approve this Commission proposal and the amendments to it by the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy , for which we can warmly thank the House 's rapporteur , Mrs Oomen-Ruijten .
Some of us fear that this proposal opens the door too wide , paving the way for uniform European law on the environment and perhaps eventually even for a European environmental agency with powers comparable to those of the FBI .
Such concerns are groundless .
None of these things is envisaged .
The right tool has been chosen - a directive to be transposed by the Member States - and an array of amendments ensures that it does not trespass upon the core area of the competence of the State and of the civil and criminal courts .
These are virtually the words used by Amendment No 30 , which makes explicit reference to extradition , for example , being envisaged only where there is provision for it in the Member State 's own legislation .
By this modus operandi , we are using the right instruments in pursuit of an important Community objective .
The proposals made by Mrs Oomen-Ruijten and the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy should therefore be approved .
Mr President , I wish to thank Mrs Oomen-Ruijten and Mr Di Lello Finuoli for their excellent work on two texts that cover the same subject : the proposal for a directive and a draft framework decision on the protection of the environment through criminal law .
Both reports contribute significantly to an important European-Union-level debate .
The extraordinary European Council meeting in Tampere in 1999 agreed in that common definitions , common incriminations and common sanctions should be established in a limited number of sectors of particular importance , and among those sectors it highlighted the environmental crime issue .
As the House will recall - and several Members referred to it - in 2000 , Denmark presented an initiative for a framework decision on combating serious environmental crime .
This framework decision is based on the rules of the Treaty on European Union and therefore belongs to the third pillar .
In 2001 the Commission adopted a proposal for a directive on the same subject , which is based on Article 175 of the European Community Treaty .
Both proposals pursue the same objective . They seek to improve the implementation of Community environmental law and have the same starting point : we all recognise that there is a lack of effectiveness in the protection of the environment in our Member States .
Nevertheless , the Commission has taken a more ambitious approach by proposing a directive . The Commission has pursued this line for a number of reasons .
The Community has , within given competence parameters , the power to regulate behaviours in order to achieve a Community objective .
The Commission has never contested that , as regards concrete criminal sanctions , the Community cannot purport to act in the criminal area in isolation .
However , to the extent that this is necessary for the achievement of Community objectives , the Commission is convinced that the Community can oblige Member States to provide for criminal sanctions where criminal law guarantees that Community law is enforced effectively .
The Commission believes that the sanctions currently established by Member States are not enough and that they do not guarantee full compliance with European Union law .
The Commission is not seeking an interinstitutional conflict .
The key aim of our proposal is to create an additional guarantee of impartiality and to give authorities greater scope for cross-border investigations of environmental crimes .
Mr Blokland , this is the reason why it is necessary to have a framework decision together with the directive .
We can provide for the provision of criminal sanctions in the directive , but the concrete scope of those criminal sanctions must be included in the framework decision .
The framework decision has the leverage to allow the judicial authorities of the Member States to pursue cross-border investigations on environmental crimes .
Whether measures concerning criminal law should be based on the rules of the European Union Treaty or of the European Community Treaty , is not just an interesting legal question for European lawyers , it is of fundamental institutional importance , in particular as regards the role and powers of the European Parliament , the jurisdiction of the Court of Justice and the legal effects of European legislation in this area .
I can fully subscribe to the arguments that have been put forward by Mrs Oomen-Ruijten .
I would like to inform you that the Commission has never called into question the fact that matters of judicial cooperation belong to the third pillar .
The draft framework decision is therefore to be seen as a complementary text to the directive .
All the amendments tabled seek to transform the draft framework decision into a complementary instrument to the Commission proposal for a directive .
All the fundamental aspects of the issue are covered by the Commission proposal for a directive .
The Council framework decision will deal with three relevant matters : liability of legal persons , jurisdictional competence and issues concerning extradition and prosecution .
We respect subsidiarity because the framework decision put forward by Denmark very closely follows the Council of Europe Convention concerning environmental crime .
To date , nobody has accused the Council of Europe Convention of being against the principle of subsidiarity .
The reports by Mrs Oomen-Ruijten and Mr Di Lello Finuoli follow exactly this same line .
On behalf of the Commission , I therefore welcome the opinion on the draft framework decision by the Committee on Citizens ' Freedoms and Rights , Justice and Home Affairs .
As far as the specific amendments to the proposal for a directive are concerned , I am glad to inform you that the Commission can accept all the amendments suggested with the following exceptions : Amendments Nos 8 and 9 , 10 , 11 and 13 , 19 , 20 and 27 , 21 , 24 , 25 , 28 and 29 .
Overall , I am very grateful for Parliament 's significant contribution to improving both texts on which the House is going to vote .
I would like to thank again the rapporteurs , as well as Mr Wuori , the draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market , for their valuable input and support , especially as they all had to work within very tight time limits on a very complex matter .
I hope that the reports will receive across-the-board support tomorrow from this House .
Thank you , Commissioner .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon .
. ( NL ) I should like to ask the Commissioner a question .
I gather from the committee meetings that it actually would be possible for the European Commission to accept all the adopted amendments .
I should like to find out from the European Commission tomorrow morning why it does not in fact adopt certain elements .
This marks a slight departure from the usual procedure , but since the question is interesting and if the Commissioner would like to give an answer , I shall give him the floor .
Mr President , I could specifically mention each of the amendments that the Commission cannot accept , but if the honourable Member agrees , I will give her in writing the reasons why we cannot accept the list of amendments I have just read out .
There is at least one amendment for which this is easy to understand : Amendment No 28 .
It rejects the Commission 's proposal in its entirety .
This is one which , I am sure , the Commission will never accept !
There is your answer .
Thank you , Commissioner .
The next item is the joint debate on :
report ( A5-0085 / 2002 ) by Mr Oostlander , on behalf of the Committee on Citizens ' Freedoms and Rights , Justice and Home Affairs , on the proposal for a Council decision adopting an action programme for administrative cooperation in the fields of external borders , visas , asylum and immigration ( ARGO ) [ COM ( 2001 ) 567 - C5-0553 / 2001 - 2001 / 0230 ( CNS ) ]
report ( A5-0078 / 2002 ) by Mr von Boetticher , on behalf of the Committee on Citizens ' Freedoms and Rights , Justice and Home Affairs , on the initiative by the Kingdom of Belgium , the Kingdom of Spain and the French Republic with a view to the adoption by the Council of a Decision amending Article 40 ( 1 ) and ( 7 ) of the Convention implementing the Schengen Agreement of 14 June 1985 on the gradual abolition of checks at the common borders [ 11896 / 2001 - C5-0563 / 2001 - 2001 / 0820 ( CNS ) ] .
Mr President , the topic of the ARGO proposal is a very interesting one .
However , it struck me during the reading of the Commission proposal that the draftsmen had already covered themselves quite well against any kind of resistance that might be expected from the Council .
In other words , it is my feeling that , in transferring tasks from the third pillar to the first pillar , too many concessions are already being made to technical devices - or even gimmicks - designed to organise things in such a way that the Council bureaucracies still remain in command , while the powers of the European Parliament and the European Commission remain a mere formality .
This is a hesitant attitude which , in my view , befits a Council Secretariat more than a federal government in the making .
The Commission is the guardian of the treaties and of European values and , in my opinion , it should fulfil this task in an assertive manner .
I , with the help of the Parliamentary committee , have tried to strengthen the Community dimension of the proposal on a variety of scores .
We therefore want to give the Commission a boost , especially where the Commission 's right of initiative is concerned .
The implementation of ARGO cannot only be a task of national government offices .
It is , for example , very odd that in the case of the enormously successful Odysseus , NGOs etc were able to contribute , but not in the case of its successor , ARGO .
This is why I value the reinforcement of the Commission 's right of initiative .
This must be emphatically underscored for , via the Commission , others too can share in the success of ARGO .
In addition , ARGO cannot simply be a case of collaboration by national bureaucracies .
It requires Community guidance , so that the intentions of the directives can be monitored as objectively as possible .
Once again , the Commission is the guardian of the treaties and of everything it has presented in directives .
I was also somewhat annoyed at the way in which both implementation and control are being relinquished , particularly under the pretext of transparency .
In my view , transparency hardly ever has anything to do with clubs of officials , but always with representatives of the people .
Using the word in another way undermines it completely . That is something we must avoid at all costs .
So , on the basis of transparency , we cannot justify monitoring of the procedure by clubs from the national bureaucracies , while the national parliaments and the European Parliament remain outside .
I would make particular reference to Article 3 , point e ) .
According to normal parliamentary and rule-of-law principles , the key points of the policy should be indicated and drafted by the executive power , the Commission , and should be approved and monitored by the representative of the people , the European Parliament .
After all , we also have powers in the field of the budget .
The implementation details can then be given shape by means of national recommendations , as suggested in the proposal .
Moreover , a clear distribution of tasks and responsibilities is needed to establish who monitors what .
In my view , the Commission and the European Parliament should be responsible for the Community aspects , while the national authorities and parliaments should take care of national aspects .
Finally , I should like to say something about the EU 's external borders which will very shortly be moved to coincide with the external borders of the underprivileged candidate countries .
In my opinion , ARGO should actually think ahead and should do the groundwork for bringing about communitisation , or common responsibility for the external borders , and preferably on time , for these countries will be joining in only a few years ' time .
I have also seen an amendment with which we struggle .
This is the amendment from liberal quarters , which concerns people who are persecuted , but not by government bodies .
In most cases , we only talk about those who are persecuted by their own governments for their political beliefs .
I think that this , in general , is only fair .
If people are persecuted in their own countries by non-government bodies and they can still live safely elsewhere in the country , then they need not necessarily be brought to Amsterdam .
They can simply stay in Turkey or Russia .
In addition , we would always argue in favour of regional reception . Accordingly , I do not endorse the amendment tabled by Baroness Ludford which favours reception in the European Union , via asylum legislation , of those who could also be sheltered elsewhere in their own countries , and we set great store by making this clear .
Finally , the European Parliament is asking the European Commission to adopt an assertive stance , and I hope that the latter will interpret this as a shot in the arm .
Should the Council refuse , there is still time to broadcast the fact at home .
rapporteur . ( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the dismantling of our internal borders and the police cooperation associated with it , as well as the securing of our external border , will be among the greatest challenges to face the European Union in the new century .
Mr Oostlander , in his report , has earned our gratitude by referring in his report to the need for a common immigration policy on the external borders .
My report , though , covers the future development of the Convention implementing the Schengen Agreement in the area of cross-border surveillance .
Where the internal borders have already been dismantled , the national police are able , after consultation with the police of a neighbouring state , to observe suspects who are active on both sides of the border .
Together with hot pursuit , the instrument of cross-border surveillance has thus to date , offered the most effective option in enforcing the law across borders .
It was only last week that it became clear in Germany just how necessary such an arrangement is , when hostages were taken following a bank robbery and the culprits fled over the border into Poland and then into the Ukraine .
Although there was good cooperation in this instance , an arrangement such as the Convention implementing the Schengen Agreement would certainly have made enforcement even easier .
The Council proposal is intended to extend the range of offences liable to cross-border surveillance by adding to them organised fraud , offences in connection with the trafficking in human beings , the laundering of proceeds from organised crime and dealing in radioactive materials .
The question remains in my mind as to why we do not also fall back on the catalogue of terrorist offences that we adopted only a few months ago , which I see as having been a very important decision , and one that we should incorporate into this proposal .
I therefore felt that Mr Buijtenweg 's proposal , and the proposals made by other Members , had something positive to add .
We otherwise find ourselves increasingly lost in a thicket of innumerable and different regulations on judicial cooperation in criminal matters .
We will in the future have to work at standard penal frameworks significantly more than we have done in the past .
At the same time , the fact is overlooked that the Convention implementing the Schengen Agreement has to date suffered not only from a narrow scope of application , but also from bureaucratic obstacles .
I have therefore proposed a number of systematic clarifications , which met with wide-ranging support in the committee .
We should , then , have the courage to achieve real new developments and move forward with the Convention implementing the Schengen Agreement .
The number of times that cross-border surveillance has been used has tripled in the time since it was introduced .
The most frequent obstacle , according to the officers engaged in its implementation , is often the lack of a right of arrest .
Officers carrying out surveillance duties on foreign territory have hitherto had to watch impotently as crimes were committed .
They are not permitted to intervene , but can only inform their colleagues with jurisdiction in that state , who tend themselves to be stretched to their full capacity already .
By the time they , in their turn , intervene , the culprits are , as a rule , over the hills and far away .
I therefore propose that it should also be possible for foreign police officers engaged in cross-border surveillance work to detain culprits until police officers of that state arrive , if , firstly , an extraditable offence has been committed and , secondly , if that State 's own police are no longer in a position to prevent the offence being committed .
It is no doubt impossible to get our European citizens to understand why foreign police officers may observe , but are unable to intervene when the situation becomes critical and a crime is being committed .
In this respect , we should be significantly better at adapting our laws to the realities of this Europe of ours , which is growing together .
The Convention implementing the Schengen Agreement , however , continues to develop , it is my firm conviction that there is a need in a Europe that is growing together , for the European Union to have real police competences .
Within the framework of the Convention , which , as is well known , is looking to reshape the Treaties , we will not only be able to discuss what competences we might have to relocate in the Member States , but we must also specify the areas in which we additionally need primary competences at a European level .
The combating of organised crime , and across borders at that , is one such area , one where we as a Parliament must emphatically make the point that , in order to facilitate control by Parliament and by the public prosecutors , we need a primary police executive for a limited sphere of activity .
Mr President , I believe that the administrative cooperation programmes within the immigration policies and connected areas are of great importance .
Today we are debating the ARGO programme , the ultimate aim of which is to provide a guarantee of homogenous treatment for third-country nationals .
I would like to point out that , in the fields fully or partially covered by this programme , there are very many directives , regulations and other instruments in force , and that this Community acquis must be applied consistently , guaranteeing equal rights to third-country nationals .
There are some extremely important aspects which the programme should take into account : it is essential that we implement actions to prevent illegal immigration , actions against the counterfeiting of documents and essential actions in the field of consular cooperation .
The objective of establishing a common policy in this area is a great challenge and its success largely depends on the Union becoming an area of security and freedom .
In a few years , my country has gone from a country of emigration to a country receiving a large number of immigrants and at the same time is experiencing problems resulting from its status as an external border of the Union .
Although it is not an innovation - since it continues the previous Odysseus programme , with certain new approaches - the ARGO programme is a key element .
An increase in appropriations is a sign that we are taking a serious approach to the effort we must make to ensure that the national administrations act homogeneously , applying best practices .
I agree with the approach of the rapporteur , Mr Oostlander , and I congratulate him , because his report contains proposals which improve the text and make it very clear that the Commission and Parliament must play a leading role in the implementation of the programme .
Mr President , much has been achieved in this field under Commissioner Vitorino , but there is still a very long way to go .
It is therefore right and proper that the objectives of the current Presidency include making progress with the Tampere and Laeken commitments on asylum , immigration and border control policies .
This requirement does not only stem from the present reality of immigration in the Union , but also from the citizens ' desire for a genuine political Union .
Mr President , I greatly welcome the ARGO action programme .
It is my firm conviction that it is only through greater cooperation between the authorities of individual States that the existing discrepancies in the application of Community regulations can be removed .
Proof that the inequality of treatment in the Member States has to be done away with is provided above all by the great number of petitions addressed to Parliament .
In recent years there have been 468 petitions alone on the subject of inequality of treatment in this area .
It really is time to do more about this issue .
Another improvement in comparison with the present Odysseus programme is the explicit inclusion of the visa issue , another area that has seen the submission of numerous petitions .
The electronic exchange of data is of particular importance to cooperation across Europe , and I call for the creation of a common database for the whole of Europe , a database that must be accessible to the competent authorities in the Member States - if need be , to third countries as well - and also to the competent agencies of the European institutions .
In this context , the protection of privacy and the confidentiality of information must be safeguarded unconditionally and to the fullest extent .
Alongside that , we must ensure that the authorities in the individual States provide information within an appropriate period of time when asked to do so by the Committee on Petitions .
This obligation is the sole protection for the petitioner 's legitimate expectations .
Delays in passing on information , which have occurred up to now , cause petitioners unacceptable detriment , something which can , in my view , be prevented only by the Committee on Petitions being enabled , in cases of urgency , to bring negative conduct by the authorities to the public 's notice .
Bad publicity is no doubt something that every public body wants to avoid .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , what these reports and this action programme show is that the EU is on the right road , the road towards being a union of security , and is demonstrating that security begins at the border .
If we want our internal borders to be open , our external borders need surveillance systems that work , and we also need compensatory elements along the lines of cross-border surveillance .
That is underlined here with broad strokes of the pen .
It is for this purpose that we need the new ARGO action programme .
This is not only because the money from Odysseus has been used up . It is also because it must be our objective to build up and create an equal level of security on all our external borders , including those we will have in the future , in order , on the one hand , to safeguard ourselves against illegal immigration , organisations that traffic in human beings , and international organised crime , and on the other , to have available to us opportunities for monitoring , assistance and legal immigration and also for preparation for the grant of asylum .
It seems to me particularly significant that such measures as the establishment of unitary standards for the use of information technology are highlighted , or that emphasis is laid on the fact that , at the end of the day , we are endeavouring to create common core training , that is , to achieve a common standard of training and qualifications .
We should also be trying to tackle our future need for border security operations composed of experts from several Member States .
I consider it significant that - as formerly with Odysseus - the possibility is envisaged of the candidate countries also being able to participate in the programme , whereby we are guaranteeing that they will be optimally prepared for greater security in the greater European Union that we share .
Mr President , Commissioner , I wish to concentrate on the ARGO programme and begin by thanking Mr Oostlander for a good report .
At the committee reading , a number of proposals went through which further strengthened the programme 's common dimension .
Mr President , it cannot be emphasised enough how important it is for the EU to acquire a common approach when it comes to asylum issues .
It is important , then , for the administrative routines to operate similarly everywhere .
Those who try to come to Europe must be treated respectfully , humanely and equally .
They must not be shunted like mere objects between the various Member States , as unfortunately often happens at present .
Events in recent years indicate very clearly the need for common programmes and common funding within the sphere of asylum .
Just as other MEPs have stated , there is a need for education , the exchange of experiences and the development of common practice .
The candidate countries , which will form the EU 's new external borders , are also important in this context , of course .
Unfortunately - and this , I think , is something that deserves to be pointed out - the EU 's refugee and asylum policy has in recent years been characterised mostly by directly opposite tendencies .
The Member States have often acted short-sightedly and without proper consideration , with catastrophic human suffering as a consequence .
Sometimes , the thought arises as to whether certain Member States have competed in setting aside humanitarianism and the rule of law .
As Mr Oostlander pointed out , the Group of the European Liberal , Democrat and Reform Party has tabled an amendment concerning a further definition of what precisely constitutes a refugee under the Geneva Convention .
The latter certainly constitutes the mainstay of asylum and refugee policy , but it makes sense to adapt one 's practice to changes in the real state of affairs .
As Mr Evans pointed out , experience in recent years has shown that this is so .
Refugees must be able to seek protection both from the State and from persecution in their own countries , and a further definition is therefore needed .
We therefore propose such a definition , and we hope that this House can also accept our proposal .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the ARGO programme is supposed to ensure that the EU 's external borders continue to be secure against intruders .
The model for this fortification of the EU 's borders is Germany 's system of bulkheads on its border with Poland .
This strategy comprises well-trained police officers , high-tech apparatus , the efficient cooperation of the various authorities , and , to an increasing extent , the involvement of private security companies and informers among the population . I know you will think that crazy , but I will tell you what I think of it in a moment .
The ARGO programme is meant to ensure the establishment of the same level of fortification on the EU 's new eastern border prior to removal of controls on the newly-created internal borders in accordance with the Schengen Agreement .
It is no secret that apologists for a European policy of repression see this as the nucleus of a European border police force .
The action programme aims at the creation of effective bulwarks against the migration into the EU of unwanted refugees , who can scarcely find a way in without the help of smugglers .
Greater sealing-off will - as is intended - lead to higher prices being charged in the market for this sort of assistance and make it more hazardous .
All the stances taken up in favour of refugees but against people-traffickers are , at best hypocritical and at worst help to close off borders with fatal results .
The planned amendments to the Convention implementing the Schengen Agreement are also in line with the ARGO programme 's objectives .
The re-armament of the police on the external borders is accompanied by ever more competences for the police in the interior .
Where , as in this case , it is cooperation by the repressive authorities that is at issue , it is interesting that the role played by borders is relegated to the background .
In principle , the planned amendment of the Schengen Agreement envisages nothing other than to hand over more powers to foreign police officers in cases involving cross-border surveillance .
In future , it will not only be suspects that will be under observation , but also their friends .
The initiative is therefore pursuing the European government 's objective of making a priority of the implementation of repressive security measures rather than the guaranteeing and securing of human rights and freedoms .
Mr von Boetticher and the Commission thus furnish a further example of the folly of believing that security can be created by more repressive police action .
Both initiatives thus contribute to a development that directly leads from a neoliberal state characterised by competition to a police state bearing the stamp of authoritarianism and an obsession with security .
They represent a further step on that road - the road that leads towards a European panopticon .
Mr President , a few comments on the Oostlander report .
I too would like to thank the rapporteur , but I feel I have to express a few comments on the subject of the right to asylum , a humanitarian principle that no civilised person could fail to support but whose bounds must be very clearly set if we are to avoid the severe , real danger of it being used for the totally unacceptable purpose of facilitating the entry of illegal immigrants into European Union territory .
The document before us states that it aims to avoid asylum applicants being moved between States within the Union , but we harbour some doubts as to whether this can be achieved with minimal standards such as those contained in the proposal , considering , not least , the right accorded to the States to provide greater assistance for asylum applicants .
In this regard , I would like to point out two of the proposal 's shortcomings .
Firstly , recourse to the judicial authority is provided for in many cases for the concession or refusal of subsidies , housing , healthcare etc . , and this means making an infinite number of people dependent on state welfare and binding the host State by law to providing facilities which , in many cases , it does not even provide for its own citizens .
Secondly , application of the principle of the free movement of the applicant and their family will then clearly lead to asylum applicants having less chance of being granted asylum and being more likely to attempt to cover their tracks , with the number of untraceable illegal immigrants increasing as a result .
These are serious , practical problems .
In effect , many rules treat the situation of the applicant as if this status had already been ascertained , for example by regulating access to longer-term activities such as professional training .
To sum up , the effect of the document needs to be modified so that it does not become a hindrance instead of being a directive providing practical , effective protection of people who have the right to asylum .
This is what we fear , that it might become an obstacle to preventing illegal immigration , which is a serious , disturbing phenomenon .
Mr President , the proposal for the ARGO action programme falls short on crucial points .
It is , though , to be welcomed that the proposal for Odysseus ' successor programme allocates funds , among other things , to improving the training of officials , but what use is a programme of training , exchange and cooperation if no change is made to the overall conditions that have prevailed to date ?
The situation cannot go on in which asylum seekers are turned back at the EU 's external borders by the relevant border authorities , as they have been hitherto .
The situation cannot go on in which they run the risk of going down a chain of deportation and ending up back in the country where they were persecuted .
As the Commission proposal for a Council Directive laying down minimum standards for the reception of applicants for asylum in Member States envisaged , their applications for asylum must be examined by an independent authority in the Member State in question .
Asylum seekers must be able to have recourse to the law when administrative decisions go against them .
That is the least that we can expect of a state founded on the rule of laws such as our own .
Let us not forget that border officials can be as well-trained as you like , but all that good training is of no use if they are entrusted with tasks that cannot but overwhelm them , such as deciding on the welfare or otherwise of asylum seekers .
Mr President , cross-border surveillance is a strictly regulated procedure , which enables the police officers of one Member State who are keeping a suspect under surveillance , to continue their work , if necessary , by crossing a border into another Member State , having made a request to the latter for assistance .
The draft decision before us today on the proposal by Belgium , Spain and France improves this procedure , notably by adding to the list of offences which justify its use .
The responsible committee of the European Parliament is also proposing to add terrorism to this list , which seems wise .
We are , however , somewhat perplexed by the parliamentary report .
By tabling other proposals for amendments such as that seeking to extend the right of surveillance to some private locations or to allow police officers , in some cases , to bypass surveillance and arrest suspects , the committee responsible appears to be giving the impression that it wants to transform cross-border surveillance into the beginnings of a right to multilateral intervention within the framework of a Union that has no internal borders .
This kind of move must obviously be rejected , Mr President , as it would , in time , cause confusion as regards responsibilities and the disadvantages would be far greater than any anticipated benefits .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , first of all , I would like to thank the two rapporteurs , Mr Oostlander and Mr von Boetticher , for their excellent reports .
The first proposal before us today is a proposal for a financing programme that aims to promote cooperation between the national administrations responsible for implementing Community rules under Articles 62 and 63 of the Treaty .
The ARGO programme will supplement the legislative initiatives that have already been launched or are due to be launched on the basis of Articles 62 and 63 of the Treaty .
I agree with Mrs Kaufmann in recognising that the programme must be examined along with the legislation , and I hope that we will be able to agree on legislation .
However , we must also acknowledge that in areas such as these , European legislation and its transposal into national law are not enough to harmonise practices .
A very important area is the practices that the national administrations follow when they are monitoring the external borders , issuing visas or examining asylum applications and immigration issues .
As several of you pointed out , the ARGO programme will replace the Odysseus programme .
However , there are considerable differences between the two that need to be very clearly defined .
First of all , ARGO is a programme for administrative cooperation .
That is why it focuses in greatest detail on the national administrations and the services responsible for implementing Community legislation based on Articles 62 and 63 of the Treaty .
It is wrong to claim that these are simply programmes for cooperation between police forces because , in the area of asylum and immigration , there are extremely important tasks which fall to the civilian administration services of the Member States .
In this case - and I must stress this , as it may be an issue on which Mr Oostlander and myself do not agree - the national administrations are the key players in this programme .
Indeed , when we have reached agreement on legislation , the national administrations of the Member States will have primary responsibility for applying the European legislation .
However , this programme does not rule out the national administrations which receive ARGO funding being able to delegate responsibilities for implementing the programmes in question to non-governmental organisations which propose implementing projects and programmes on the basis of the programme 's objectives .
The legal basis of ARGO not only establishes general objectives , it also defines more precise objectives in each of the following areas : external borders , visas , asylum and emigration .
ARGO envisages new forms of action such as the definition of better practices , techniques for collating , analysing and disseminating information and actions in third countries .
I would like to draw your attention to the fact that , as regards the monitoring of external borders , the Schengen acquis was split , within the framework of the European Union , with important aspects coming under the first pillar and also important aspects coming under the third pillar .
Hence the difficulty in correctly distinguishing between the Community aspect and the intergovernmental cooperation aspect , a distinction that is necessary if we are to target them properly .
In any case , I would like to thank Mr Oostlander for the support he has given to the Commission 's proposal and to assure him that we can support , in spirit , many of the amendments that have been proposed , particularly those that seek to strengthen the role of the Community and those seeking to supplement or to strengthen the administrative cooperation objectives .
Our priority is to ensure that the Council adopts the programme as soon as possible , so that the Commission can , this year even , launch the procedures necessary for the implementation of the programme and the proper implementation of the budget allocated for this year .
With regard to the second proposal , which relates to the amendment to Article 40 of the Convention implementing the Schengen Agreement , an amendment proposed by Belgium , Spain and France , its objective , as Mr von Boetticher points out , is to grant , under certain conditions , the police force of the Member States the right to continue to keep under discreet surveillance a person suspected of being involved in an extraditable offence if that suspect crosses a border .
I hope that this stresses the improvement - which I believe is significant and practical - that this amendment represents for the work of the law enforcement services .
As the rapporteur has noted , cross-border observation is an instrument to maintain public order and safety which , with the removal of common borders between Schengen countries , will become extremely important .
I would also like to stress that , whilst the proposed change will facilitate enquiries , it will not change the legal framework applying to them , since the national authorities will , of course , only be able to act within their own national legislation , as well as that provided for by the Schengen Convention .
I am sorry , but we have a long way to go before we become a totalitarian State .
To sum up , the two initiatives and proposals before us and on which considerable work has been done by the Committee on Citizens ' Freedoms and Rights , Justice and Home Affairs should enable a great deal of progress to be made in areas which I believe are crucial for the area of freedom , security and justice which is gradually taking shape .
The debate is closed .
The vote will be taken tomorrow at noon .
The next item is the report ( A5-0081 / 2002 ) by Luís Marinho , on behalf of the Committee on Citizens ' Freedoms and Rights , Justice and Home Affairs , on the proposal for a Council regulation establishing the criteria and mechanisms for determining the Member State responsible for examining an asylum application lodged in one of the Member States by a third-country national ( COM ( 2001 ) 447 - C5-0403 / 2001 - 2001 / 0182 ( CNS ) ) .
Mr President , when someone knocks on Europe 's door , fleeing violence , war or civil war , that person is a refugee under the terms of the Geneva Convention and is applying for asylum in the name of fundamental human rights .
That person cannot , in all honesty , be told that he or she has got the wrong street or the wrong house and that it is not here but somewhere else , somewhere in another country , whose name someone will give them , if they insist and insist and if they ask ...
It is to put an end to these and other situations that we frequently see in Europe that the Commission has drafted this timely proposal for a regulation , a type of road map for the right to asylum , which states , for each situation and specific case , who must provide an answer and where , which country must examine an application for asylum and , when all is said and done , what door will open to the anguish of a refugee who wants only to see someone with whom they can speak .
The very nature of the problem explains the scope of the initiative .
We will not be resolving the entire asylum issue , but we are certainly taking a step forwards .
As rapporteur , I take pride in having done everything I could - and my conscience is , therefore , clear - to ensure that this initiative would be approved , supporting the Commission in the fight that it will still have to engage in with some Member States . Not many , I hope .
I therefore wish to thank the Members of this House and my colleagues in the Committee on Citizens ' Freedoms and Rights , Justice and Home Affairs and most particularly and with great feeling , Mrs Eva Klamt , the draftsman , without whose effort and understanding it would have been extremely difficult for us today to hope for the approval of this Commission initiative .
Thank you very much , Mrs Klamt .
The fact is , Mr President , that we have been lawlessly adrift in a sea of good intentions .
There have certainly been laws , ratified by those countries that want to , and which apply in some places and not in others ; some doors open and others close , and it is this murky area in which a little law is mixed up with no law at all that gives rise to dubious dealings , tricks , skilful manoeuvres and escape from the authorities .
And this is how illegal immigration and the organised networks start , with the growth of mafias and crime , involvement in which is inexcusable but which is only possible because States , consisting of well-intentioned individuals , have never agreed on minimum standards for actually making one State responsible for examining an asylum application .
The Commission proposal is a brave one .
First of all , it guarantees that an application will actually be examined ; it will prevent the confusion caused by multiple applications and refugees being left in limbo , and subjects these laws to its own vigilance and to monitoring by the Court of Justice .
Basically , it is grounded in the principle that each Member State is responsible for the illegal entry or stay of a candidate for the right to asylum in its territory , thereby forcing each State to improve its mechanisms for combating illegal immigration .
This responsibility , based on objective facts , can only be overridden by additional criteria concerning the importance attached to family group unity .
Consequently , minors accompany the asylum application of the adult and unaccompanied minors are transferred , according to the wording that I propose , to a State where they have any relative willing and able to look after them .
Similarly , entry or residence criteria can be dispensed with in order to guarantee the unity of the family group when one member has already applied for asylum in a given Member State .
Finally , Mr President , what we are looking at in the initial proposal and in the feasible amendments , and whatever the result of the vote on these may be , is the broadest possible concept of the family : it covers marriage and de facto unions , where the law of any State recognises such arrangements .
This would eliminate discrimination on the grounds of gender , recognising a family link for elderly relatives and minors and extending it to other children and other relatives where it can be proved that they lived with or were dependent on a successful applicant in the country of origin .
And also , for humanitarian reasons to do with health or other matters , the asylum applicant can , according to the wording approved in my report , go to any relative as long as the State in which the application is made accepts this .
Mr President , the important thing is to ensure that the application for asylum and the refugee who makes this application are given an answer and that the European legal system serves the rights of applicants and Member States ' obligations and prevents a lack of legislation leading to an upsurge in racism and xenophobia .
This initiative ensures that we will meet these three objectives and , therefore , I believe that it will be endorsed .
Mr President , I would like to start by congratulating the rapporteur . Next , I would like to point out , in a spirit of realism , that the Member States have often chosen to forget a very simple but obvious fact : that throughout history , no matter what the geographical circumstances , no barrier has been able to prevent people in search of refuge finding a way to cross the border or the barrier itself .
I feel , however , that this report does justice to the problem and seeks , first and foremost , to find a sufficiently sound solution , not least with a view to finding a better alternative to the Dublin Convention itself .
This is therefore an important contribution which will undeniably improve on the regulation .
I have to say that , with regard to the current situation , the report seeks to find a balance between two conflicting requirements : on the one hand , it attempts to prevent abuse of asylum procedures and , on the other , it attempts to provide effective access to the procedures for determining the refugee status of those who genuinely need it .
At the same time , there are new criteria and new derogations that we welcome , aimed particularly at preserving family group unity in one Member State .
The same applies to the responsibility placed on a Member State which does not take effective action against the illegal presence of third-country citizens on its territory , making liability equivalent to that of a Member State which fails to control its borders properly .
We therefore feel that the Council must introduce a ' fair and efficient ' asylum procedure and a ' clear and workable ' method including these new provisions on the criteria and mechanisms for determining the Member State responsible for examining an asylum application .
Lastly , we welcome , in particular , the fact that Article 27 of the regulation , Mr President , bans any discrimination based on sex , race , skin colour or even age , a criterion whose introduction we feel to be necessary and particularly progressive .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I wish to thank the Commission for their balanced and pragmatic proposal and Mr Marinho for his report and for his willingness to cooperate in a constructive manner .
The Committee on Citizens ' Freedoms and Rights , Justice and Home Affairs adopted this report by a large majority and thereby confirmed the rapporteur in his views .
The Commission proposal represents a perceptible advance on the Dublin Convention and is thus an important step towards the establishment of a common European asylum system .
The most important innovations are :
Firstly , the emphasis laid on the responsibility of the individual Member States when such Member States permit persons who have entered them illegally to remain in their national territory .
Secondly , the adaptation of the procedural time limits to the time limits for the granting and revocation of refugee status , ensuring that applications for asylum can be processed speedily .
Thirdly , the introduction of provisions aimed at maintaining the unity of the asylum seeker 's family .
The procedures for determining which Member State is responsible are also intended to serve the purpose of sharing burdens fairly .
The making of the application in a specified Member State must not , therefore , create a fait accompli ; that is , it must not determine responsibility .
This requirement is taken into account by the measures intended to simplify procedures and simultaneously speed them up , while maintaining the principle of responsibility , as does the planned less onerous burden of proof when determining which Member State is responsible .
It was thanks to a compromise with the rapporteur that we in the Committee on Citizens ' Freedoms and Rights , Justice and Home Affairs were able to adopt a report that disregarded impractical and unacceptable amendments .
This opens up the possibility of the Commission , Parliament and the Council finding together a rational way of deciding on the responsibility of Member States in asylum matters .
The excluded amendments , which envisaged a widening of the family circle and the deletion of essential parts of the Regulation , were now reintroduced .
The Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats rejects these amendments , particularly as regards their indiscriminate extension of the family circle , which would include , for example , dependant family members outside the nuclear family .
In the same way , when we vote tomorrow , we should give a clear rebuff to the idea of deleting essential parts of the Regulation .
Let me repeat : the Commission proposal is realistic and balanced .
It offers an array of improvements in comparison with the Dublin Convention .
There are no grounds for trying to recast this draft in a form that will , at the end of the day , benefit neither the applicants for asylum nor the Member States .
Thank you for your cooperation .
Mr President , I would firstly like to congratulate the rapporteur on the content of his report and the way in which he has worked and established a dialogue with other groups in the House , which I believe has been positive , and I would also like to congratulate the Commission on its initial proposal .
We must remember that we are saying to refugees that only one country of the European Union is going to consider their application for asylum .
This is equivalent to saying that fourteen of the fifteen European countries are not going to appear on the relatively short list of democratic and prosperous countries in which a persecuted citizen can legitimately request asylum .
I believe that this gives the countries of the EU and the Union itself the serious responsibility to offer , in exchange , firm guarantees of security to these people in various respects , which must take the form of respect for them and their families , the rapid adoption of a decision which is favourable to asylum seekers , the prohibition of all forms of discrimination and guaranteed access to justice for those people , with a view to referring that decision to the State responsible in order that their case may be re-examined .
I also believe that this proposal is a necessary step , which requires others in order to make full sense .
I believe that we can state that this House must support this proposal so that progress can be made in the direction indicated previously .
We can see that the European Council has problems making progress with this harmonised and European asylum policy and that it finds it difficult to take these steps and I believe it is very important that tomorrow this House gives strong support to the proposal in the way I have indicated so that , amongst all of us , we can urge the Council to assume the responsibility it accepted in Tampere .
Therefore , as the rapporteur has said , my group and I are going to ask for this report to be approved with the amendments which have already been approved in committee and with a few of those that will be tabled in plenary .
Mr President , Commissioner , last week I visited Bosnia and Herzegovina and the Republika Serbska .
Ladies and gentlemen , it is only ten years since the atrocious killing and massacring of innocent people was begun in the middle of a Europe which we had all promised would never again see mass graves containing desecrated corpses .
That was not to be the case .
Mass graves are being found today and the remains of corpses identified .
I myself saw the remains of 500 people laid out in a line in industrial premises .
Mr President , never before have the EU 's shortcomings been more evident .
When the refugees began streaming in , the EU acted slowly and was completely powerless to act .
What was lacking was a common approach .
Mr Marinho 's report , like the Commission 's proposal , is therefore extremely important .
I want to praise the rapporteur for the work he has put in and for the sensitivity he has shown .
We in the Group of the European Liberal , Democrat and Reform Party accept the basic principle contained in the proposal , relating to the way in which asylum seekers are to be regarded , how the issue is to be dealt with and what exceptions there are .
However , we wish to make the rules more predictable and to increase the consideration given to the wishes of the individual .
A number of the proposals were also very properly accepted by the committee .
Allow me to mention a number of important points .
Increased account must be taken of individual wishes concerning the country of asylum .
These are people we are dealing with !
The rules determining which country is responsible must be characterised by the rule of law and by predictability .
In the case of an asylum seeker who is still a minor , a person other than a relative and who has close links with the minor must be able to obtain custody of the child if it is in the latter 's interests .
The country of asylum responsible can therefore be decided in terms of such factors .
It must be possible for asylum seekers who have family members in a particular Member State to have their applications examined in that country .
Appeals concerning which country is responsible for examining the application must have a delaying effect so that asylum seekers are not moved to another Member State during the waiting period .
It must only be possible to release personal data concerning asylum seekers to the Member States concerned and not to all the Member States , as proposed by the Commission .
Allow me to highlight especially Amendment No 12 , which Mrs Klamt also touched upon .
It is our view that partners and cohabitees , irrespective of gender , should be counted as family members in Member States which treat unmarried and married couples equally .
The Commission is unclear about this point , and clarification is needed in this area .
It is my hope that the House will be able to support this proposal tomorrow .
In conclusion , I want to put a direct question to Commissioner Vitorino .
In my view , the type of abuses that go on at Sangatte near the Channel Tunnel , with people shunted about and responsibility divided between different Member States , should be rendered impossible by the proposal you have produced .
What are you doing to ensure right now that there can be no repetition of the events at Sangatte ?
What are you doing , in conjunction with London and Paris , to ensure that this proposal can become a reality straight away ?
Mr President , part of the answer to that last question would be that , if there was a legal method of entering the UK to claim asylum , a lot of the problems would be solved at Sangatte .
In dealing with the Marinho report before us , however , my group has criticised the Dublin Convention for a very long time for a number of reasons , not least because to us it mixes immigration controls with the claiming of asylum , and the two things are not necessarily the same at all .
We are well aware that people choose a particular Member State as their country of destination for a large number of reasons .
It may be a country they have heard of .
They might have family links there .
There may already be a considerable community of people from their own region in the area .
The country might have a reputation for dealing fairly with asylum seekers rather than treating them as potential criminals and keeping them restricted .
It might offer work opportunities . It might be because of former colonial ties .
There might be a language link .
There are all sorts of reasons .
There is extensive research showing that asylum seekers settle better , enjoy better mental health , acquire the language of the country of residence more quickly - especially the children - if a number of the above conditions apply .
But we know that asylum seekers generally want to contribute to the societies that admit them and do not want to feel like unwanted jetsam condemned to live on charity and tolerance .
Positive motivation , then , is extremely important to a successful asylum policy .
For us , Dublin seemed to be based on the premise that the first ' safe ' country was good enough .
It was also based on the premise that the government then had a duty to deal with those asylum seekers and effectively keep them there .
We know that there have been all sorts of problems , both administratively and in terms of human rights , as a result of the Dublin Convention .
The new proposals at least recognise the importance of the family , even if the criteria for definition of ' family ' , does not go far enough ; my group has tabled amendments because we do not believe that the nuclear family is the only viable model .
However , the proposals are still based on the premise that a Member State is somehow answerable to all other Member States for their failures to control entry and borders .
Not surprisingly , countries with extensive sea or land borders close to countries of origin will be the major points of entry and are thus expected to bear the major responsibility for asylum seekers , bailed out presumably by the refugee fund .
My group does not agree with this approach which is why we have tabled amendments designed to de-link immigration controls from dealing with asylum applications .
If we are really fulfilling the duty that Mrs Terrón i Cusí spoke of and we are creating a high-standard , effective and fair common asylum policy - which sometimes I doubt - then the positive factors determining the country where the application is lodged can only act in an additional positive way .
If we are not creating that , then people should have the right to choose where they seek asylum .
Mr President , Commissioner , I welcome the Commission proposals and support the rapporteur and the report as it was voted on in the committee .
However , I find the amendments tabled by the Greens and others absolutely unacceptable and counterproductive .
If accepted , they would bring about the rejection of the whole report , and so I hope that it will be the original report that will be supported , with the Commission proposals .
I will also tell you why in a few points : You Greens want to extend the concept of the family as far as it will go , far beyond the nuclear family and to the point of including de facto family members and friends .
By doing this , you will only promote immigration .
What this is about is help for refugees .
You also want to introduce options for applicants for asylum , so that they will be able , as it were , to decide for themselves in which Member State the procedure is to be dealt with .
By this , you are offending against the principle that the first Member State with which the application is lodged is to be responsible for examining it and the principle that burdens should be shared , something that we can achieve indirectly , and you would end up exacerbating the situation in countries which are , in any case , already struggling with the greatest integration problems .
You also want to do away with the instruments provided by the Commission and the rapporteur to combat abuses in situations involving false or invalid documents , expired visas and so on .
In doing that , you would not only be accepting abuses , but even promoting them and , with that , promoting non-compliance with existing legal standards .
Under no circumstances could we accept that .
If , in addition to that , you make all appeals have suspensive effect , you would thereby be hindering speedy and sure decisions and good solutions .
In this House , as in the committee , I can definitely tell you once again that we in the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats support the Commission proposals and those made by the rapporteur .
If , though , your amendments get a majority , or if even just one of them does , we intend to vote down the whole report .
Mr President , I wish first to pay tribute to the work put in by our rapporteur , who has made very great efforts to live up to the ideal of optimising the EU 's asylum policy .
His guiding concern was , unmistakably , the creation of an area of freedom , security and justice .
He has taken very seriously the task enshrined in the Treaty of Amsterdam .
I only hope that we will all do likewise .
I think it right to speak at length about the Member States ' responsibility in receiving applications for asylum and about which Member State should process them .
All this not only benefits the EU 's citizens , but also the refugees , who then know exactly where they stand .
The increased threat of terror and the general rise in movements of refugees worldwide mean that we must at last give people a clear picture of what possibilities there are for them in the European Union .
It is therefore right that we should give careful thought in this draft Regulation to what is meant by families joining their head , and make this quite clear .
It is also very much the right thing to help bring families together , and it is important that this should be done .
Both these things contribute to a coherent policy on asylum .
We want every State to have the right to act in accordance with its national legislation , but this is not meant to stop anyone learning from other Member States .
We want to share in granting asylum and preventing abuses .
Not everything has to be the same from one State to another ; we should be learning from one another how to protect refugees and how abuses can be prevented .
Another reason for us now to be discussing the apportionment of responsibilities among Member States is that the first candidates for accession will be joining the EU in the foreseeable future .
One thing is clear , namely that the EU must , as far as possible , have its policies on internal affairs , asylum , and immigration well in hand before the new members join .
We cannot face the new members with an incomplete asylum policy .
Much in the accession process will be difficult enough for them .
It is now , even before the first new States join us , that we need to create rules across the EU on precisely what Member States ' responsibilities are towards refugees .
If we manage to get all the Member States to adhere to common rules , our work on this report will have given the project of an enlarged European Union and a common judicial area greater certainty and more success .
This proposal for a Council regulation gives us the chance to evaluate our experience of the Dublin Convention and let it have an influence on new legislation .
I hope we will all succeed in doing that .
Mr President , it is certainly necessary to improve the workings of the Dublin Convention and to transpose it into European Community law , with European Court and Parliament oversight .
We must stop the problem of refugees ' in orbit ' .
Asylum seekers are not parcels to be passed around : they are real human beings who may or may not be entitled to humanitarian protection but , in any case , need to be treated with respect and dignity .
Most will be exhausted , many disorientated , frightened or frail .
It bears repeating time after time that the chief responsibilities of Member States are to process asylum claims expeditiously , to rapidly integrate those who are accepted and to remove those who are not .
This does not mean cutting corners since cases decided sloppily or unfairly risk taking longer in the end because of appeals .
This is not , in turn , to challenge the right of claimants to make appeals .
One of my group 's amendments would make appeals have suspensive effect .
If they do not , and the claimant is transferred , they will not be able to keep in contact with the procedure or their lawyer , which is unfair .
My Group also aims to further strengthen the provisions on family unity .
One of our amendments would give greater rights of reunion to unmarried , including same-sex , couples .
We are also sympathetic to the amendment from the Green Group , although I fear that this has less chance than ours .
There must be further progress by a convergence of family law developments at national level , and EU immigration and free movement rules , in recognising unmarried partners as family , especially , but not only , those in registered partnerships .
I very much hope the Socialist Group will support the very reasonable ELDR position .
I understand the motivation of those wanting individual choice of the applicant to be the determinant of where an asylum claim is processed , rather than the State responsible for entry .
But , alas , it cannot be feasible until there is a fully functioning common asylum and immigration system in which there are no artificial distortions influencing that choice .
It also confuses asylum with immigration .
The asylum system is based on urgently needing protection .
If it is determined exclusively by choice of destination , we risk ultimately undermining its integrity .
This new proposal has a clause which would oblige a Member State to take responsibility where it had knowingly tolerated people illegally on its territory for at least two months .
This would cover the Sangatte Centre near Calais .
I urge the French Government to recognise the logic and imperative of this , though I understand they are resisting it in the Council .
We are going to have to face up sooner rather than later to the need to have an immigration route as well as an asylum route into the EU , as well as tackling the traffickers .
But the situation at Sangatte cannot be allowed to fester .
The Centre cannot be closed : that would be inhumane and just displace the problem .
But it is disruptive and dangerous and the UK needs to recognise that this is its problem too .
There must be a bilateral solution , urgently required , supported by the new Dublin II but reached through pragmatic bilateral agreement .
Mr President , we must be aware that this is a proposal for a directive which only establishes minimum application criteria .
That means that its greatest merit is certainly the great flexibility it gives the Member States in allowing them to apply part of their national legislation and part of the Community legislation .
However , it could be said that this directive is a case of shutting the door after the horse has bolted .
In many countries , particularly Italy , indeed , this type of action has been in use for a long time now in the face of what is in fact a genuine immigration crisis .
In this regard , I feel that , once again in a debate of this kind , not everyone has a clear understanding of the distinction between the three types of asylum application and therefore between the persons lodging the applications : in actual fact , there are political exiles , refugees fleeing emergency situations and the usual immigrants seeking work .
Clearly , these are three very different cases and the solutions needed to regulate these situations will therefore also be very different .
This directive also refers to ARGO and Odysseus : two programmes , father and son , with the same goal , programmes which combine - successfully I am glad to say - legality with a rigorous approach .
I have heard some decidedly excessive views expressed in this debate .
Someone even went so far as to say that we could move towards a police state .
Quite frankly , this is not so : I heard no such fear was expressed in the debate before that .
However , it must be said that if a rigorous approach means not a police state but , first and foremost , a guarantee of the proper implementation of procedures for granting asylum ; if being rigorous means first and foremost distinguishing between irregular immigrants and illegal immigrants and criminals , distinguishing between honest immigrants and drug smugglers and slave traders , well then , if this is the case , I welcome the rigorous approach , a carefully considered rigorous approach ; not least because the well-meaning people have nothing to fear from us being rigorous and asylum seekers will receive only a welcome , understanding and help .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the issue of asylum has come to occupy a prominent place on the political agenda of the European Union and of its Member States , especially following the entry into force of the Treaty of Amsterdam , which conferred new competences on the Community , opening up new possibilities for action on a European scale .
The proposal that we are debating here today is part of the dynamic of establishing a common European asylum system based on the full and broad application of the Geneva Convention , which is intended to create a clear , more simple and workable method , for determining which State is responsible for examining an application for asylum submitted in a Member State by a third-country national in the context of an asylum process that is intended to be fair and effective .
The proposal lays down innovative provisions that are designed to end a process that has proven to be extremely slow , by stipulating shorter deadlines for procedures and making them more effective by improving cooperation between Member States , attempting in this way to create a system that is fair and humane for asylum seekers , which is of the utmost importance , not only for asylum seekers but also for the Member States themselves . Also by creating a uniform set of regulations , directly applicable throughout the European Union , thereby guaranteeing that each and every request for asylum is actually examined , and at the same time preventing multiple applications being made in a number of States .
I welcome the efforts made by the rapporteur , Luís Marinho and by Eva Klamt , who have sought to produce a text that is balanced and which fulfils the stated objective .
What is needed now is for us all to work together to prevent woolly amendments being adopted that could negate the balance of the text reached in the Committee on Citizens ' Freedoms and Rights , Justice and Home Affairs .
Mr President , it is very easy to feel powerless faced with the asylum situation we have in Europe .
It is easy to feel powerless faced with the fact that so many people need this protection , but also faced with the inability we have in many quarters to integrate asylum seekers and immigrants into our Member States .
That is a very important question , and I therefore wish to begin by thanking my colleague , Mr Marinho , for all the work he has put into this report .
I also wish , of course , to thank the Commission for its proposal .
I want to emphasise what Mr Marinho said about how important it is for the Member States to take this issue seriously now and to exchange words for action .
The proposal concerning responsibility for asylum applications is a small , but very important , step in developing a common asylum policy in the EU .
In spite of the Schengen Agreement and the removal of borders within this area , there are big differences between the Member States when it comes to the ways in which refugees are received and to asylum seekers ' ability to obtain residence documents .
It is therefore especially important to asylum seekers themselves that there should be a shared approach to receiving refugees and to processing applications .
It is therefore gratifying that the EU can now go a step further than the Dublin Convention did .
Shorter processing times reduce the risk of lengthy waiting periods , with all that these entail in terms of uncertainty for asylum seekers .
The proposals for strengthening the rights of children when it comes to their own families are especially important .
Children who are left alone to flee from war and oppression must receive all the support we can give them .
An important contribution to this is the extended concept of the family which we now have the opportunity to take a decision on .
Finally , I want to point out that it is important that we have respect for the choices people make as to their family circumstances so that , in this area too , we try to put different forms of partnership and cohabiting on an equal footing .
Mr President , it is important that the excellent Dublin Convention , which is the basis of the proposal for a regulation , should be updated so that it corresponds with the Treaty of Amsterdam .
There may , however , be a danger that we will not be improving the situation , but destroying what has been achieved .
There have to be clear rules regarding which Member State is responsible for examining any given asylum application .
When dealing with applications it is important that the deadline is as short as possible .
The more efficient the European system is , the better for all concerned .
It is not right that genuine asylum seekers should have to wait around for a long time for their applications to be dealt with solely on account of bureaucracy .
Member States must be able to handle applications for asylum and requests for reception more efficiently .
One month is the absolute maximum in humane terms .
The custody of minors is not always a straightforward matter if the biological parents are unable to take charge themselves .
It is not necessarily a good thing for the child either if just any relative can volunteer to take charge of him or her .
This could also aid unlawful entry and thus also jeopardise the interests of genuine asylum seekers .
The concept of custody must be clearly defined .
There are great differences between the south and the north regarding the notion of family .
What is the nuclear family ?
Is it the parents and children , or all possible relatives extending as far as second cousins ?
The debate on the directive on family unity is still continuing ; it is therefore unreasonable to define what constitutes a family separately in each directive .
The directive on family unity must be swiftly implemented .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the proposal for a regulation to replace the Dublin Convention with an instrument of Community law is , as laid down by Article 63 of the Treaty , part of a series of measures requested at Tampere and which includes , in addition to this regulation , three proposals for directives on , respectively , common minimum standards on asylum procedures , common minimum conditions on the reception of asylum seekers , and the admission criteria to refugee status or on subsidiary forms of protection and the content of the refugee status .
Before these proposals were drawn up , broad consultation was carried out , on the basis of the working document issued by the Commission services , in conjunction with the Member States , the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees and non-governmental organisations .
Thanks to the excellent work of the rapporteur , Mr Marinho , whom I would like to congratulate , the European Parliament will also contribute to this dossier .
It is true that if we worked within the framework of a single , fully harmonised asylum system , the most practical solution would perhaps be to recognise the responsibility of the State in which the application was made .
However , we do not have this single system .
We are currently working within a framework where harmonisation is based on common minimum standards .
We must acknowledge the fact that since harmonisation is , at present , very limited , the most practical and most effective solution is to accept that the State responsible for the entry of refugees onto the European Union 's territory must be the State which has the final say on the asylum application , and this must be done in a spirit of solidarity and loyal cooperation .
The Commission 's proposal is therefore based on the same principle as the Dublin Convention .
The responsibility for examining an asylum application lies with the Member State which played the greatest part in the applicant 's entry into or residence on the territory of the European Union , subject to exceptions designed to protect family group unity .
We must acknowledge , however , that the Dublin Convention has not had the effects that we anticipated .
We must take on board the lessons of the past .
That is why the proposal includes a number of innovations , such as new provisions emphasising each Member State 's responsibility vis-à-vis all its partners in the Union when it allows illegal residents to remain on its territory ; much shorter procedural deadlines to ensure that applications for asylum are processed rapidly in the interests of genuine asylum seekers , and so that applicants will not have to wait too long before they receive a decision on their asylum application ; extended deadlines for implementing transfers of those concerned to the Member State responsible so as to allow for the practical difficulties arising in connection with such transfers and new provisions aimed at preserving the unity of asylum seekers ' families , in so far as this is compatible with the other objectives of asylum and immigration policy .
In answer to Mr Olle Schmidt 's question , first of all , this allows for the existence of clear rules on the responsibility of the Member State ; secondly , it gives clarification , which has been added to our proposal , on the standard of proof required for determining the State responsible , and finally , it stipulates rules on the subsidiary responsibility of the State which is negligent .
The Commission is aware that no system used for determining responsibility in asylum matters can claim to be perfect .
As Mrs Sbarbati points out in her report for the Committee on Petitions , we have attempted to find a balance , which is fairly difficult , I admit , between , firstly , the legitimate interests of the Member States in combating the phenomenon of ' asylum shopping ' and the same individual submitting multiple applications in order to remain on European Union territory for as long as possible and , secondly , the interests of asylum applicants to have their application examined within reasonable time limits and so that they are not kept apart from their family members for lengthy periods , when there is no real reason why their application should not be examined in the same Member State .
The Commission is able to accept the amendments which were proposed by the rapporteur and which , in our view , improve the text .
They also make the Commission 's intentions behind this text more effective . It will come as no surprise , I am sure , when I say that the Commission is not in favour of the amendments that were inspired by another logic , which , however respectable , mar the proposal and contradict the Commission 's clear intention to draft a practical , reasonable , effective text in the shortest time span possible .
The debate is closed .
The vote will be taken tomorrow at noon .
Approval of the Minutes of the previous sitting
The Minutes of yesterday 's sitting have been distributed .
Are there any comments ?
Mr President , the Minutes are correct but I should like to make a comment .
Yesterday I was present in Strasbourg , and from the moment I arrived I had meetings through till after 9 p.m.
I did not , therefore , sign the register in the plenary chamber , so when we look at the Minutes my name is not there .
Some organisations publish details of Members ' attendances ; however this is a classic example of how sometimes when they say that Members have not attended the plenary part-sessions it is simply that they have not signed in in the Chamber on that day .
I should like this put on record .
Members should bear this in mind when those records are published and it appears that the record of attendance does not correspond to the reality of the situation .
Thank you , Mr Wynn .
Your comment will , of course , be included in the Minutes .

Madam President , on a point of order , I should like to ask you to ask the President of Parliament to register our complaint to the French Government , to the Mayor of Strasbourg and indeed to Air France : some of us were unable to get to the start of the plenary session yesterday because Air France cancelled one of the only direct flights from the UK to Strasbourg .
That meant a lot of us had to fly via Nantes and did not arrive until 9 p.m.
We were the lucky ones .
I understand the President of Parliament was also affected .
If the French Government insists that we meet here for 12 sessions a year - and I have not been one of those complaining about it - please let us get to the plenary session and indeed get home from the plenary session after the votes at 6.30 on Thursday evening !
It is absolutely ridiculous that Members of the European Parliament cannot take part in debates .
I was due to speak in one of those debates yesterday , as I know other people were .
Would the President please contact the officials and ask them to do something about it ?
Mrs Lynn , I will , of course , pass on your complaint .
President Cox was also affected by this incident , as you know .
We shall notify the French Government .
Having said that , it appears that , rather than a single party being responsible for this problem , which we all condemn , several parties are to blame .
We shall therefore pass on your complaint to all those responsible for this incident to prevent it from happening again .
( The Minutes were approved )
Madam President , we can agree to this request for urgent procedure if this is dealt with at the second April part-session , when we will also know how the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market interprets the law .
Although we do not agree with changing the legal basis , we are prepared , subject to these conditions , to discuss this at the second April part-session .
Madam President , this proposal for a Regulation implements Resolution 1390 , adopted on 16 January of this year by the United Nations Security Council , pursuant to Chapter VII of the Charter of the United Nations .
With regard to the 30 days required for signatory States to adopt the measures that correspond to the implementation of the aforementioned United Nations Resolution , the Committee on Citizens ' Freedoms and Rights , Justice and Home Affairs yesterday voted in favour of the urgency procedure and for there to be a procedure without report , that is to say , that it should pass directly to plenary with time for amendments to be tabled by the political groups .
I would ask the Presidency to set a long deadline for the tabling of amendments to take account of these circumstances .
I would like to make two further observations .
The first is that , in order to implement Resolutions such as Resolution 1390 , the European Union should take two different types of action : one which corresponds to the second pillar , common foreign and security policy , and another within the framework of the EC Treaty .
Yesterday , the Commission almost unanimously came to the conclusion that Parliament should work on the development of instruments in the second pillar , in other words , the development of the common position that is being adopted at this time .
And , if Parliament is not involved , it should at very least be kept informed , for what is laid down in the Treaty is one issue , and common sense and the idea that this House is the true representative of citizens ' interests is quite another .
My second observation is that the Committee on Citizens ' Freedoms and Rights has expressed a great deal of concern in this regard and will formally request that the Council and those Member States that form part of the United Nations Security Council make use of those procedural mechanisms needed to correct possible non-justified inclusions of names of natural or legal persons in these lists .
This is currently the cause of much public concern in EU Member States .
Finally , we would ask the Commission not to force us to take this kind of action .
Parliament cannot seriously be expected to support this decision with only five days notice , for it is not really a question of issuing an opinion , but of supporting this United Nations Resolution , when the Resolution was passed on 19 January .
We would ask that in future we be more rapidly involved in the process of drawing up this type of Regulation in order that this Parliament can provide its support with full knowledge of the facts and not , as in this case , in a truly unbalanced effort .
Mrs Frahm , you asked to take the floor .
Are you speaking for or against the request for urgent procedure ?
Madam Palacio , I do not understand why you have let the Committee on Citizens ' Freedoms and Rights , Justice and Home Affairs accept this procedure .
I do not understand why the Committee on Citizens ' Freedoms and Rights , Justice and Home Affairs is to deal with a list of names without knowing how this list has been drawn up and without knowing how it can be altered .
If the Committee on Citizens ' Freedoms and Rights , Justice and Home Affairs had taken its tasks seriously , it would have refused to deal with such a matter until it knew how the list of names could be altered .
To win the respect of the Commission , it is not enough simply to agree to work at the Commission 's pace .
This is something that should have been rejected .
Is there a Member to speak in favour of the request for urgent procedure ?
Madam President , in support of the urgent procedure , and to specifically respond to this point , I would like to repeat that this is not a case of Parliament giving its opinion on a list .
The matter in hand here is whether Parliament should support a decision made by the United Nations Security Council .
This is an act adopted by the United Nations Security Council that the signatory States and the European Union - as representative regional power in some cases of signatory States - should support , but in which it cannot participate .
Chapter VII ( 40 and41 ) of the United Nations Charter makes reference to the fact that the Security Council can implement any measures it deems necessary and that the signatory States must - for this is a mandatory act - apply them .
Therefore , any amendment of these lists falls to the Security Council .
What the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market is asking - and we will implement it - is that the Council , as representative of the European Union , and the Member States that form part of the Security Council , keep an eye on the arbitration of procedures and mechanisms within the United Nations Security Council with the aim that , if there is any natural or legal person included in this list that should not be there , an exception can be made .
Madam President , I wish to begin by thanking the members of Committee on Budgetary Control for their kind cooperation with me in preparation of this report , both individually and by group .
I want also to thank Commissioner Schreyer for her regular attendance at our meetings and for the help and expertise that her staff provided .
I especially want to thank the staff of our own Committee on Budgetary Control who were most diligent and expert and generous with their time , despite being moved around a lot recently , which is not very helpful .
Nevertheless , I could not be more full of praise for them .
I also want to thank Mr Bourlanges , who laid out the strategy for this report .
We started out with 65 paragraphs and ended up with 95 .
I am not going to try to summarise the report because it would take far too long .
I am going to mention its principal features .
The main feature of this report on the budget for the financial year 2000 was the surplus of EUR 11 billion ( or 14 % ) .
That figure requires some explanation .
Firstly , more than EUR 2 billion came from revenue .
I do not think that any national government would apologise for having taken in too much revenue .
Another factor is the reserve of EUR 800 million .
Again , the reserve is there not to be spent if possible .
It should not be included in the surplus .
When other details are taken into consideration , we had a real surplus of around 9 % .
Of that 7.2 % could be said to come from the Structural Funds .
If the Structural Funds are taken out of the calculation , there was no problem with the rest of the budget .
On the Structural Funds , the regulations were completed in mid-1999 .
The new Commission came in at that time .
It was never a possibility , considering the detail and the complications of this regulation , that our objectives for spending in the year 2000 could be achieved .
This brings us to the point of the difficulty of these regulations .
Most member governments did not submit their framework plans until the year 2000 itself .
Some of them were not admissible at that time because of the difficulty of understanding the regulations .
So , there was a problem .
I would like to underline the fact that a German official told me that in the six-year programme ending in 1999 , there were 60 000 projects in Objective 1 areas of Germany alone .
That gives us some idea of the extent of the problem of administering these funds , and there are about 500 staff members in the relevant Commission Directorate-General .
The question of the Structural Funds has to be looked at in depth .
All the institutions of the Union have to apply themselves to simplifying the regulations by which we implement European regional policy before the new programme comes in and before enlargement in four years ' time .
My next point is the topical question of fraud and irregularity .
It is the duty of the Committee on Budgetary Control to identify failure in administration and propose solutions .
That is why the message from the Committee on Budgetary Control must always be critical and risk sounding rather negative .
The final responsibility for failure always rests with the European Commission , but the national governments spend most of the money .
When we talk about the failure of the Commission , we are talking about its failure to control the national governments and the regional authorities , which is not always an easy task .
The EU at all levels is a partnership with the national governments .
If the Commission can be blamed for anything it is for failing to do its own public relations work , to stand up for itself and to stand up to the national governments when they are in breach of the regulations .
In the discharge procedure we expect to make a political decision on the performance of the Commission .
We in the Committee on Budgetary Control do that on the basis of a report from the Court of Auditors and the Commission 's annual financial statement .
The Committee on Budgetary Control passed the discharge by a vote of something like 17 to 4 .
That is a resounding vote of confidence in the work that the Commission has done in the year 2000 .
However , we have not overlooked the weaknesses in the system and our motion for a resolution proposes changes and improvements both in planning and administration .
We are looking for better cooperation between the Court of Auditors , Parliament and the Commission in the implementation of European policies and more efficient spending of European money .
The last point I want to address is the failure of the Court of Auditors to give a statement of assurance .
We should point out that it gave a statement of assurance in relation to revenue and administration .
We have set out our solutions in paragraph 44 .
We would like to see figures for the rate of error .
We would like to see figures which would enable us to compare one year with another .
But we would like the statement of assurance of the Court of Auditors in relation to the revenue side of the budget and administration to be clearer .
The only information we have about the rate of fraud and error comes from the Commission 's statement for the year 2000 .
It would appear that the rate of fraud and error is about EUR 2 billion , or about 2.5 % of the entire budget .
Of this , about 10 % of traditional own resources seems to involve a serious problem .
If that is taken out of the calculation , the rate of fraud and error , as best we can make it out , is about 1 % .
I tried to establish how other States deal with this problem and I find the only comparable systems are in the United States and the Netherlands .
By the standards that they apply , I want to state categorically that the Commission would pass with first-class honours : our rate of fraud and error is below what is acceptable in those countries .
So while we have readjustments to make and recommendations for improvements , at the same time we do not want to overemphasise the negative aspects of our report .
Finally , I would like to see us aim for a situation where the Court of Auditors would present us with a statement which could be read in reasonable time by members of the Committee on Budgetary Control .
We could then prepare a statement that could be read and understood by Members of this Parliament , by members of national parliaments and students of European politics .
We have failed to do that so far .
I hope that my successors will achieve something that can be understood by European citizens .
Madam President , I should like to recommend that we give the Commission discharge for the Development Fund , and I should like to ask Mrs Schreyer to communicate this to Mr Nielson , as I can see that he is not here today during this important debate .
I threatened along the way to have the discharge decision postponed if the Commission could not supply any results .
In fact , it has done so .
There are still a few problems , but we shall have to look at those in a follow-up report .
I have focused in particular upon quality in the form of the number of follow-ups of audit results this year .
What concerns me is that the Commission has no overview of how many audits have been carried out , where and by whom .
One of my first questions to the Commission was : ' How many audits did you carry out in the year 2000 ? ' .
The first answer was twelve , and that - I think - was extremely few , considering that there are 70 ACP countries .
The Commission then found a few more reports .
The thought occurred to them that a number of reports had no doubt been produced out in the delegations , and Mr Nielson assured the committee that 73 audits had been carried out in 2000 .
I then asked for a list of these audits .
It proved to be a list containing very sparse information , which did not leave me much the wiser .
However , it provoked a lot of amusement - especially in the Court of Auditors - when it was seen what was being presented as audits .
Moreover , almost half of them were from Malawi , and it turned out that these were to be deducted from the number of audits , leaving 52 and not , as Mr Nielson had promised us in the committee , 73 .
It may well be that 52 audits are enough , but it is worrying that the Commission does not have a better overview of how many audits are carried out and by whom .
There are no central records , and there is no general view of the activities ' out in the field ' .
The Commission has nonetheless convinced me that it is not necessary for the audits to be carried out from the headquarters in Brussels .
I have therefore withdrawn my original demand for at least 50 audits .
However , the more financial responsibility that is farmed out to the delegations , the greater the demands that are made in terms of oversight and coordination to be exercised by headquarters .
I have also asked the Commission to give me a better explanation of why the remaining millions of euros mentioned in the Court of Auditors ' annual report have still not been claimed back .
It is two years since this was noted , and still nothing has happened .
I asked DG AIDCO 's director-general if , on the basis of the auditing system and the information received from the delegations , he could issue a statement to the effect that the EDF funds are used in accordance with the principles of ' sound management ' .
I have still not had an answer to this question .
I could have put the question to Commissioner Nielson if he had been here today .
However , it may of course be that Mrs Schreyer can help me .
There has been a lot of criticism of the way in which the ACP 's secretariat has operated .
Extremely critical audit reports have been prepared , and there have unfortunately also been some court cases in Belgium leading to convictions for not complying with legislation .
That is not , I think , something that we can live with in the EU .
New management is now in place , with which I have had some incredibly productive meetings .
I hope that matters are improving , which is why I have said that we are now waiting to see what the outcome of the Court of Auditors ' decisions will be , whereupon we shall have to address the issue again .
I also wish to make a couple of observations about Mr McCartin 's report on behalf of the Confederal Group of the European United Left / Nordic Green Left .
I think it is a splendid result , and I should like to commend him for having listened to my many amendments and for the fact that they have been incorporated .
That is one of the ways in which we can persist in following up the previous discharge decisions , and that is something extremely important to do .
There are , however , two important matters I have been left in ignorance of . When will the disciplinary proceedings taking place at the Stockholm office be concluded , including on the part of OLAF ?
And the same question applies to the IRELA case from Spain , which we have talked at such length about .
I should also like to say a couple of words about the discharge decision where Parliament is concerned .
Mr Virrankoski has carried out an outstanding piece of work that is both incisive and well balanced .
In connection with the discharge decision where Parliament is concerned , it is not easy to understand our asking for transparency .
Everyone here is on the ball , especially when it comes to their own money .
I should like to say that I am deeply disappointed at the secretary-general of the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats who has written round to all the other groups , saying that it would be a disaster if there were to be transparency in connection with our accounts .
We criticise the Commission for not being open but , when it comes to ourselves , we close our eyes .
I really do think that the PPE-DE Group 's Secretary-General should be deeply ashamed of ringing round and asking for there to be total secrecy concerning taxpayers ' money .
That is something we cannot live with .
I should also like to say that one of the things that strikes me is the desire to close down the Finance Inspectorate .
When the figures for 2000 are examined , it can be seen that there were errors in seven per cent of the documents .
I think this shows that it must be possible for the impending internal audit to be independent .
However , I would still say , forget about closing down the Finance Inspectorate .
With regard to the discharge decision where the Council is concerned , I should like to say that we stand by the committee 's observations and decision .
I cannot countenance some members of a group being made to toe the line , with the result that we have to change the decision we voted in favour of in the Committee on Budgetary Control .
All things considered , I am going to recommend , however , that we give discharge in all the areas .
Things are going well , in fact much better , and that is something we can only be pleased about .
Madam President , the work of the European Coal and Steel Community in recent years has been guided by the knowledge that it would cease functioning this summer .
It has been decided that the work of the ECSC should be discontinued : half a century is enough .
In its final years of operation the ECSC functioned like a bank .
It borrowed and lent money .
The Commission was responsible for administering its finances , and it is now the Commission 's task to discontinue the bank 's work , call in its loans and pay off its debts .
Its credit balance exceeds its debts .
It would appear that there will be a surplus of approximately 1.1 billion euros after the ECSC has been wound up .
In accordance with decisions taken earlier on , this surplus is to be invested profitably in the financial markets .
Some of the assets are to be used to set up a separate Coal and Steel Fund , out of which money will be allocated for research in these areas , in accordance with the principles proposed by the Commission and approved by the Council .
The yield from assets is intended to benefit the coal and steel sectors , which had to pay levies to the ECSC to fund its work .
That is only reasonable .
In this connection we have to remember that the money in the research fund was collected from the old Member States , and that it must first and foremost be used for research in these countries ' coal and steel sectors .
However , if we consider how very important these sectors are in the economies of many of the applicant countries , it is only reasonable to call on the Commission to initiate talks with the old Member States in order that the new members might also share in the information obtained from research in this way .
The Commission must invest the assets left over after the ECSC ceases to function to ensure it obtains the greatest possible return .
If choices have to be made between safe investments and taking risks , then risks should be avoided .
It is important to be able to predict what sort of return the Commission can expect on its investments .
For the first time , in connection with this year 's accounts , we can have information on yield from the investment of the ECSC 's assets .
In 2000 the average rate of yield was 4.72 % .
This sort of information is an important step in the right direction , but further steps have yet to be taken .
With regard to subsequent years there is every good reason to state a benchmark target rate of return , on the basis of which the auditors can assess how successfully the target has been achieved .
Similarly it will be important in the years to come to assess whether the ECSC 's old activities are being wound down in the way that was planned .
The Commission intends to keep on more than thirty officials to be specifically employed in the distribution of the ECSC 's estate .
That would seem to be a large number .
In the years to come Parliament must monitor the situation to ensure that the assets left over from the European Coal and Steel Community are not used to maintain needless bureaucracy on the part of the Commission .
The Court of Auditors has submitted a statement of assurance in which it recommends the granting of discharge .
Parliament can endorse their opinion .
Madam President , there was a very high level of implementation of the European Parliament 's budget for the financial year 2000 .
The utilisation rate was 99.28 % , and the ratio of payment appropriations to all commitments was 91.05 % .
The high degree of implementation was partly the result of the end-of-year mopping-up transfers , where funds were transferred to pay for Parliament 's buildings .
In this way we were able to reduce the future costs of renting .
In the future this sort of practice should be done away with and we should budget strictly for actual estimated expenditure .
Parliament 's accounts are abstruse , however .
For that reason , the report proposes that the way they are presented should be clarified and that , more specifically , there should be a clear breakdown of capital investment with regard to buildings .
The main points of focus in the budget for 2000 were the promotion of activity based management and better allocation of human resources .
Activity based budgeting and management has begun to improve , but , as the report states , the results are still modest .
Power of decision and responsibility must be delegated further downwards , and each member of staff 's personal responsibilities must be clarified .
We furthermore have to change to a form of administration in which it is the results of actions that are assessed and not so much the way the administration is organised .
Only in this way can we make the administration more efficient and make savings .
In this respect the recommendations of the Rome-PE report should be implemented and internal financial control improved .
We must be able to redeploy human resources more flexibly and put an end to functions that are unnecessary .
The current system is too rigid and set in its ways .
This is also linked to the question of inequality between women and men .
The European Parliament is still a very old-fashioned place to work in .
In the last eighteen months eighteen people have been appointed to posts in categories A1 - A3 .
Of them , just one was a woman and seventeen were men .
The report criticises this and calls for the introduction of quota arrangements until a normal state of affairs is reached .
Political groups are also connected with the matter of administration .
It is in accordance with the principles of activity based management that the groups ' internal autonomy should be developed .
For that reason the report requests that this special feature should be taken into account in one way or another when the Financial Regulation is amended .
The report insists that the groups should present their balance sheets and financial statements more clearly and that they should be published .
Furthermore , there must be improvements made to asset management and inventories .
In addition , the responsibility of the group as party to agreements in general and as employer in particular must be legally clarified so that the European Parliament is not always ultimately accountable .
Regarding Parliament 's two places of assembly we state that just the variable costs of meetings alone at Strasbourg are 33 % more than in Brussels .
In addition there are considerably higher costs mainly due to the fact that there is double the number of buildings in Strasbourg .
Shortening the length of a part-session produces savings of just 1 % .
This matter would perhaps be worth looking into by the Convention dealing with Treaty reform .
The biggest single problem is the cost of the Louise Weiss building in Strasbourg .
No agreement has been reached concerning the final investment costs with the project 's promoter , SERS .
The dispute concerns the completion date and that is to be decided by the Court of Justice of the European Communities .
In addition there are disputes over work , additional work and unnecessary work .
There are also disputes between the promoter and the subcontractors .
It may take as long as ten years to resolve the argument completely .
Considering that Parliament did not want two meeting places , but agrees to meet in Strasbourg under great pressure from France in particular , we must insist that the dispute over the construction costs of the Parliament are resolved immediately .
The city of Strasbourg and the Alsace Region have the controlling interest in SERS , owning 60 % of the shares in all . They must therefore wield their power .
Furthermore , France must take responsibility for seeing to it that the European Parliament does not need to be party to the disputes and can pay for its work premises immediately and acquire title accordingly .
It is unfair that Parliament should continually have to remain vigilant to ensure that it is not being billed for costs that are unjustified .
With these observations the report proposes granting discharge to the Secretary-General in respect of the implementation of the 2000 budget and to the Accounting Officer in respect of the accounts for 2000 .
. Madam President , with that long list you make it sound as though I have been extremely busy .
I would like to concentrate on those institutions that you have just mentioned .
The exercise , of course , considers the expenditure , and assesses the effective use of European taxpayers ' money relating to those institutions .
There is also reference in this report to the Council , which I will touch on later .
Generally speaking there were no great concerns relating to the Court of Justice although we will clearly be following up some of the requests we have made to it on more detailed issues .
We grant discharge to the Court of Justice .
The Court of Auditors seems still reluctant to name Member States found wanting , and I warn the Court again that we will not rest until this request is complied with .
More consumer-friendly reports would be welcome , as would a declaration of interests by the Court on the Internet , as is currently carried out by most of the other institutions .
The Court must never feel itself to be too grand to conform to the standards we have learned to expect from other high-profile public servants .
We grant discharge to the Court of Auditors , however .
The new Ombudsman budget is very small , so any money not spent will perhaps be disproportionally reflected in percentage figures , but it is something that the Budget Committee needs to keep an eye on when they are setting the Ombudsman 's budget .
We grant discharge to the Ombudsman .
The Committee of the Regions is also a relative newcomer to the European scene .
It is good to see some shared expenditure with the Economic and Social Committee although at times this does not go far enough .
A future report by the Committee on Budgetary Control may perhaps examine the value for money and impact assessment of this institution .
Both the Economic and Social Committee and the Committee of the Regions performed quite well in relation to the Belliard and Montoyer buildings and played quite a good game with the poor set of cards that were dealt to them unfairly by Parliament .
We grant discharge to the Committee of the Regions .
I turn now to the area where the report 's focus lies , and that is on the Economic and Social Committee : a committee which has been in existence since the beginning of this great project .
Whilst the report recognises the Economic and Social Committee can act as a forum for interest groups which would otherwise not be able to make their voices heard in the EU context , developments over recent years - including , for example , the social protocol - must now be considered .
Do we see some duplication here for example ?
We have concerns that the information does not filter down to the grass roots .
The massive costs of financing this institution , which will reach almost EUR 100 million after enlargement , also gives us great concerns .
Even amongst some trade unions , which are recognised by and which use the Institution , there is criticism .
One prominent British trade union was prepared to say ' that the Economic and Social Committee appears to be redundant ; we would be content for it to be abolished ' .
Another worrying aspect of the ESC came in their reaction to this report which claimed that the concept of value for money of a body established by the European Treaties is highly questionable and politically unjustifiable .
Try telling that to the taxpayers of Europe !
I think it is pretty obvious , when you see reactions like that , there is not much accountability going on within the Economic and Social Committee .
The Budgetary Control Committee is recommending that discharge be refused to the Economic and Social Committee for the years 1996 and 1997 .
This is a historic move and it is not taken lightly .
Only on two occasions before has the discharge been refused ; once of course which led to the forced resignation of the Commission in 1999 .
It may perhaps seem strange that we have waited until now to assess the accounts and expenditure for 1996 .
However , it has taken until now to receive objective clarification on irregularities relating to payments of members ' travel allowances .
The whole sequence of events from the fraud itself involving 59 members of the Economic and Social Committee amounting to over EUR 1 million , to the scandalously relaxed attitude of Economic and Social Committee managers and their efforts to cover up the problem , to the botched and unprofessional approach of OLAF , the European Fraud Office , all reeks of incompetence , procrastination and amateurism .
It has taken six years to get to the bottom of this fraud that occurred in 1996 .
This situation is a disgrace .
It has meant that there has been no chance of prosecuting those involved , as the Courts have said that too much time has elapsed .
There have been improvements since then however , which is why we do grant discharge to the Economic and Social Committee for 1998 , 1999 and 2000 .
It is important that the Convention on the Future of Europe should take heed of the message in this report .
I turn finally very briefly to the Council .
Traditionally we have lumped this together with the Commission expenditure .
This year , however , the Court of Auditors has prepared a critical report on the workings of the common foreign and security policy .
This again is a fairly new area for the Council .
The Committee on Budgetary Control has asked for answers and clarification on some of the issues on which the Court of Auditors has concerns .
The Council is discussing that this morning , so we are waiting for the results from the Council before we take a vote on this .
I hope you will bear that in mind when it comes to the vote .
I hope that the Economic and Social Committee will deal with the fact that we have not given them discharge with the gravity that this issue deserves .
Madam President , I should first of all like to echo the words of thanks to the members of the Committee on Budgetary Control and to Mrs Schreyer .
In my view , cooperation has been excellent this year .
I should also like to thank the two draftsmen of opinion of the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs and the Committee on Foreign Affairs , Human Rights , common security and defence policy , for their very pleasant and smooth cooperation .
Finally , of course , I should also like to extend a word of thanks to the representatives of the decentralised bodies to whom we can grant discharge today .
This discharge does in fact concern three bodies : the European Foundation for the Improvement of Living and Working Conditions in Dublin , the European Centre for the Development of Vocational Training ( CEDEFOP ) in Thessaloniki and the European Agency for Reconstruction in Kosovo , based in Thessalonica and Pristina .
The Court of Auditors has closely examined the financial accounts of these three bodies , and in all three cases it has reached the conclusion that the annual accounts for the financial year 2000 are reliable and that the underlying transactions are legal and regular .
As your rapporteur , I have been looking into what we said in the discharge report for 1999 .
In the first two cases , we recommended that an external evaluation be implemented and an Action Plan be submitted .
As far as the Foundation in Dublin is concerned , we enquired last year whether it would not be preferable to work more closely with the European Agency for Safety and Health at Work .
We asked CEDEFOP for verification of how cooperation with the European Training Foundation in Turin could be improved .
Now I have to inform you that the Foundation in Dublin has faced some delays in implementing this request .
The external evaluation has just been completed , the Action Plan has only recently been discussed , but the request has now been complied with , it has been presented for discussion and I , as rapporteur , will naturally remain in contact with the representatives of the Foundation in Dublin to ensure that the discharge report for 1999 is carefully observed .
As far as CEDEFOP is concerned , this exercise has been fully completed and I have good news on this front .
It is nice to have some good news on a discharge for a change .
CEDEFOP has indeed fully complied with our request and a cooperation agreement has now also been concluded with the Foundation in Turin .
In my view , it is partly thanks to the pressure exerted by our institution , the European Parliament , that considerable progress has also been made on behalf of the European taxpayer in this area .
Finally , I also have positive news about the European Agency for Reconstruction in Kosovo .
We must remind ourselves of what the situation was like .
The challenge in Kosovo after the war was enormous .
Not only due to the trail of material damage and human suffering left by the war in Kosovo , but mainly due to the damage which the Milosevic regime caused in Kosovo for more than a decade , which was typified by a chronic under-investment in resources and permanent violations of human rights .
And I should like to emphatically praise our people in the field , the people of the European Agency for Reconstruction , but also the people of the Kosovo task force who went out there immediately after the war .
The work they did there , sometimes under very difficult circumstances , was incredible .
The Court of Auditors and everyone who reads the annual reports and the three-monthly reports can see for themselves how incredibly efficient our management has been over there .
We have learnt from our mistakes in Bosnia-Herzegovina , of course , and this too is a positive message .
I was your rapporteur for a special Court of Auditors report about the actions taken by the EU in Bosnia-Herzegovina .
We made mistakes there , we learnt from these , and this is how we managed to take effective action in Kosovo .
I should like to finish off with a remark about the situation in Kosovo .
The energy sector is the most important area in which we are investing , yet it is also typified by an inherent paradox .
An incredible amount of money is being poured into the supply of energy , and yet electricity failures occur almost on a daily basis .
This is a paradox for the population , and in my report , I urge for more efforts to be made in order to make it clear to the people in Kosovo that energy-saving measures will need to be stepped up , and that energy will also need to be paid for in order to achieve a more sustainable policy .
Finally , I have received reports about misappropriations at the Kosovo Electricity company , but it is too early to draw any conclusions .
I have asked UNMIK to draft a report on this , as it is UNMIK that is ultimately responsible , and I think that we will have to incorporate the results of this report in our discharge report for 2001 .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , in the year 2000 , EUR 82 billion was spent via the European Budget , made up of hundreds of thousands of different cash movements - payments to researchers and research institutes , grants to students , premiums to farmers for cattle or for set-aside , food aid for refugees , payments for the provision of building materials in Kosovo or for the fight against Aids in Africa , subsidies for the extension of rail networks in the EU , for the building of business parks and so on .
I could keep on adding to the list for a long time .
This shows the heterogeneous and multifarious nature of the European Union 's tasks to which these financial resources go .
It shows , too , what varied demands are made on good budget management and proper monitoring .
One might add what Mr McCartin has emphatically underlined , namely that the Commission has central administrative responsibilities only for a small part of this and that in other respects , in the Member States , thousands of payment offices for agricultural expenditure , as well as hundreds of ministries and agencies , are responsible for implementation , that is , for receiving applications for funding , examining them and granting them .
Mr McCartin , your report on discharge in respect of the implementation of the Budget for the financial year 2000 reflects the wide range of the Commission 's activities , the risks and sources of error specific to each of them , the measures that need to be taken and also , of course , the deficiencies in the way the Budget was managed .
It is indeed very comprehensive , and the Commission is very grateful to you for the great balance that this report demonstrates .
Let me , too , thank you for your speech and for your committed involvement in the Committee on Budgetary Control .
The Commission welcomes the Committee on Budgetary Control 's recommendation , by such a large majority , that the Commission should be given discharge in respect of the 2000 Budget .
Notwithstanding that , the report and the resolution , indeed , do anything but quiet the Commission 's conscience .
The report makes 144 demands of the Commission , ranging from the demand that it should submit reports on administrative measures it has taken , to the demand that it should amend laws .
I cannot , of course , discuss all these demands now , but I would like to pick out a few of them .
I would like to start by thanking you , Mr Blak , on behalf of the Commission , for your work on the Development Fund and for the recommendation of discharge , which , in accordance with your own tradition - one that I greatly value - comes with numerous demands attached .
You , Mr Seppänen , have played a positively historic role as rapporteur for the European Coal and Steel Community budget , and I will also thank Mrs Morgan and Mr Virrankoski .
Even though your reports deal with the ways the other institutions implement their budgets , they are elements of the general European Budget .
Mr Staes , your report , which the Commission warmly welcomes , is one that I should like to return to later .
The Commission wishes to express its thanks to the Chairman of the Committee on Budgetary Control , Mrs Theato , for managing the whole discussion of the discharge so well , and , of course , the secretariat and the whole committee for their hard work .
One of the 2000 Budget year 's results that got a very critical reception from the Committee on Budgetary Control was the large Budget surplus of EUR 11.6 billion , which , however , was welcomed by the Finance Ministers of the Member States .
I have , in fact , nothing to add to Mr McCartin 's description of the positive development on the revenue side .
One should naturally welcome a situation in which growth rates are higher than first expected .
What should , in fact , be seen in a more critical light is the issue of how outgoings were less than estimated in the Budget .
We are not talking here about agricultural or administrative expenditure , where expenditure being lower than estimated really does mean that savings have been made .
In the case of the Structural Funds , though , outgoings have been deferred for a period of time .
Not all the regulations that were required could in fact be adopted in time , because it was so late in 1999 that decisions were taken on the agenda , as also described by Mr McCartin .
Even today , though , in 2002 , we have to record that the programme has been poorly implemented .
Conclusions must , then , be drawn from this for the next aid period , and even the present aid period cannot be untouched by change .
Mr Blak has drawn attention to the fact that the European Development Fund had , in real terms , a substantially greater turnover of resources in 2000 than in the preceding year , so this represents a positive development .
It is also clear , in view of the immense need in many ACP States that the underutilisation of resources is not about there being any lack of need , but often about a lack of definite projects .
The Commission has , then , in part , gone over to subsidising these countries ' budgets to a greater extent . On the one hand , this is right and proper , but , on the other , it does require new approaches to monitoring .
Let me again point out , with reference to the forwarding of information in the discharge procedure , that the Commission always immediately posts on the Internet evaluation reports on the various programmes and the different Budget items , and that the figures on the implementation of the current Budget are sent by electronic means to the Committee on Budgetary Control on a weekly basis .
The Commission is convinced that the agreement with Parliament on the forwarding of confidential information has proved its value .
I must reiterate , though , that both the Commission 's and OLAF 's reports are covered by the rules on data protection and the protection of the confidentiality of investigations .
The Commission has also , in response to a query from the Committee on Budgetary Control , produced a further breakdown of the reports from the Member States on errors and demands for repayment in connection with the Structural Funds .
Tighter controls have meant that these have been notified in greater numbers , although the Member States are often not yet monitoring to the extent prescribed .
Mr McCartin , you have made critical comments on this in your report .
Your criticism is one that I share .
It is though , very doubtful that those Member States with federal structures will be happy to be told , as is proposed in the report , that they must change the way their competences are allocated as regards the monitoring of European funds , as this is often enshrined in their constitutions .
This really does raise some very serious issues .
One significant topic in discussions during this discharge procedure has been - and still is - the methodology on the basis of which the European Court of Auditors decides whether or not to grant a Statement of Assurance .
The Commission welcomes the Court of Auditors ' willingness to discuss proposals for a changed approach to the creation of indicators for financial management that are capable of being checked and compared over a period of time .
Both the report on the Commission 's budget and Mrs Morgan 's report demand that enquiries be made into the incidence of errors in each Directorate-General .
The Court of Auditors has already made it clear that this is not in accordance with its present method of sampling , as it would require substantially more random samples than the Court of Auditors is able to carry out .
I would , though , point out that the reform of the Commission saw the introduction of new monitoring standards and that the annual reports on the activities of the Directorates-General have to contain details of which standards have been complied with and how this has been done .
We will be checking with the Court of Auditors what amounts can be derived from these reports and from the Directorate-General 's statements for the purpose of establishing indicators that can then be compared over time .
Mr Staes , in your report on the discharge of the Director of the European Agency for the Reconstruction of Kosovo , you express your agreement with the Court of Auditors ' favourable judgment .
I have several reasons for picking up on this .
One is that experience with the reconstruction agency has shown that decentralised responsibility , meaning more on-the-spot decisions , is the right way to go .
Another is because press reports have , in part , given the impression that accusations of mismanagement in energy supply had already been substantiated .
You have again made clear that this is not the case , but that the situation continues to be unsatisfactory , and have also shown how things stood in the year 2000 , when they were absolutely desolate with regard both to this power station and also to the fact that - like everywhere else in the former Eastern bloc - electricity bills were not being paid .
It is also of significance that the position with regard to ownership of the power station was unclear , which meant that it could not be privatised , and that it was of enormous importance in terms of safeguarding jobs .
That , too , had to be taken into account in a very thorny and politically unstable situation , in which there will , of course , have to be further developments .
I am very glad that the Court of Auditors has thoroughly audited the Agency for the Reconstruction of Kosovo , and done so at a very early juncture .
They were on the spot themselves .
The overall result of the audit by the Court is a very positive one , which is significant in so far as this work in the Balkans , and the work in Kosovo , will , in the years to come , be of great importance for policy not only on foreign affairs , but also specifically on the Budget .
I would like to touch briefly on the observation and demand you made concerning the agricultural sector , especially on agricultural export refunds .
Even while the discharge procedure was running its course , it was possible for some understanding on several points to be reached between the committee and my fellow-Commissioner Mr Fischler , something that also shows that the atmosphere between the Committee on Budgetary Control and the Commission has undergone positive change in the direction of directly critical , but constructive cooperation .
It is not only I , myself , but also , no doubt , most of our citizens , who welcome the way that Parliament is now demanding decisions on the reduction of live animal transports , which are indeed often carried on only to get export refunds .
I hope that this plenary sitting will see the completion of the discharge procedure for the 2000 Budget .
Work is simultaneously in progress on drawing up the 2003 Budget , which is expected to be the last Budget for an EU of fifteen Member States .
When the EU is enlarged , the Budget will once again become more complex and more multifaceted .
Until then , the Commission will use the time available to support the candidate states in their preparations for enlargement and for participation in the European funds , monitoring the introduction of the necessary measures , and itself further reforming its administrative procedures .
That will call for a degree of impetus from Parliament , but especially for cooperation between Parliament and the Commission .
I would like , on behalf of the Commission , to thank you for your cooperation in the past months and will conclude by alluding to an old saying from the world of football , to the effect that the Commission is very well aware that one discharge being over always means that you have another one to face .
Madam President , for the Committee on Foreign Affairs there are two key issues in this discharge : transparency and implementation .
On transparency , I had an interesting time when I asked Parliament 's officials if they could let me have a list of what the Commission had done on the 2000 budget in relation to those items to which Parliament had adopted amendments to the budget , in terms of both amounts of money and also remarks .
I was told that , even if it were possible , it would take several months to find this information .
That is totally ridiculous because , if Parliament adopts amendments to the budget , it is elementary that there should be a mechanism to follow up on those amendments to know exactly what has happened .
The fault lies in part with Parliament , because we do not scrutinise and follow up the budget as we should .
I do not blame the Committee on Budgetary Control but the individual committees which do not often take that responsibility .
The fault also lies with the Commission because we need greater clarity of information in order to analyse budget implementation .
There should be much better dialogue between Parliament and the Commission to identify very clearly what action has been taken on European Parliament priorities .
I suspect the Commission far too often simply ignores what Parliament amends in the budget .
We need to be able to indicate that .
On the common foreign and security policy , we need greater clarity : we are not clear on who does what .
That is why I support the idea of an interinstitutional agreement setting out exactly the Commission 's role in the CFSP .
On implementation , there was for the 2000 budget again a very high concentration of commitments at the end of the year for Latin America , Asia and so on .
The imbalance between commitments and payments continues to give cause for concern , as indeed do the remarks of the Court of the Auditors in relation to the TACIS programme .
I recognise the improvements the Commission has made - in particular the use of the website to provide information - but we have to focus on transparency and implementation .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , the report that I presented to the Committee on Citizens ' Freedoms and Rights , Justice and Home Affairs and which it unanimously adopted , begins by calling on the Court of Auditors to make specific mention of Title B5-8 on the area of freedom , security and justice in its annual report and to devote to this area a minimum of attention , which it has so far failed to do .
As far as the implementation of the 2000 Budget is concerned , we note that although the implementation rate is incredibly low - 50 % for commitment appropriations and 70 % for payment appropriations - this cannot be attributed to poor management or a lack of will on the part of the Commission . It is essentially due to the fact that the Council of Ministers adopted the legal bases too late , which means that a number of items given budgetary appropriations had to be postponed .
We noted with satisfaction that , during 2000 , the Justice and Home Affairs Directorate-General increased the number of audits completed on its services .
Sixty-four were performed in 2000 compared to 44 in 1999 .
We also noted that the amounts recoverable or reduced payments as a result of the audits has increased more than 10 % of the total value of contracts .
Which means that we believe that the Commission should step up its efforts , if necessary using contractual penalties to combat the improper use of subsidies or the overstatement of actual costs .
Lastly , we noted with satisfaction that the Court of Auditors stated in the report that the management of the European Monitoring Centre for Drugs and Drug Addiction ( EMCDDA ) and the European Monitoring Centre on Racism and Xenophobia has improved .
There are , however , some anomalies , particularly as regards , for example , the appropriations granted for staff recruitment .
The average cost of recruiting a member of staff at the Lisbon monitoring centre is EUR 2 780 compared with EUR 6 610 for the Vienna monitoring centre .
Having said this and all things considered , the Committee on Citizens ' Freedoms and Rights has no objection to granting discharge in the sector for which it is responsible .
Madam President , our committee covers 120 budget lines , some very large indeed , including the research programmes Tacis , Phare and Meda .
The implementation of those lines has been heavily criticised in the past .
My first point is about the expenditure in 2000 of the Synergy programme , which is a programme to further international cooperation in the energy sector , and one strongly supported by the European Parliament .
I am sure you can imagine , Commissioner , our astonishment and dismay when the Commission abandoned this programme in the year 2000 , cancelled a call for tenders already published , causing huge inconvenience , and proceeded to spend no money at all throughout the year 2000 .
I cannot emphasise strongly enough that this is unacceptable behaviour and that the relevant Commissioner is well aware of our views .
I am pleased to say that remedial action has been taken and we look forward to an enhanced programme in this very important sector .
I turn now to the Tacis programme on nuclear safety in the former Soviet Union .
This has regularly been severely - and rightly - criticised in the past .
It is work which is carried out in difficult conditions , in an area where slackness and inefficiency in the implementation of budgets was traditional .
We note with pleasure a marked improvement and look forward to reassurance about the safety of nuclear installations in the former Soviet Union .
I would like to thank colleagues from the Committee on Budgetary Control for their cooperation in helping us to undertake the very important work of scrutiny on which our committee , could spend all its time on if we wished to .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , as rapporteur for the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs , I would like to focus my attention on the agencies .
It is there that we urgently need more efficient and transparent monitoring and controls .
I say that not only because the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs has responsibility for four of the agencies , but also in view of the fact that the number of agencies is constantly increasing .
Today there are eleven agencies , but there will soon be 14 of them , for , as you will be aware , we will also have agencies for the safety of food , and for safety in travel by air and sea , once the issue is resolved of where they are to be based .
As already mentioned , our committee is responsible for four agencies , in Dublin , Bilbao , Thessaloniki and Turin , and we have , in principle , no problems with them , but this does not alter the fact that there is a fundamental problem with Parliament having only one discharge procedure for four agencies .
Yes , the agencies do now have their own rapporteur on the Committee on Budgets , and Mr Kuckelkorn has already achieved a great deal .
Nonetheless , though , we do need all the agencies to be treated on an equal basis , and so , today , I call on the Commission to draw up proposals to put all the agencies on an equal footing in the discharge procedure .
To do this we must , above all , make appropriate changes to their legal basis , without which the future will find us still incapable of auditing the agencies satisfactorily when the Budget comes round , and that cannot be in anybody 's interest .
Cooperation between the committees of this House also needs to be improved .
The guidelines for the agencies drawn up in 1998 should therefore be examined from four angles : with a view to ensuring appropriate control machinery in the specialised committees and transparency in the Budget procedure , reinforcing the requirement for mutual information and clear demarcation of competences between the committees involved .
Our committee will be drawing up proposals in relation to this .
Let me , in conclusion , again warmly thank Mr McCartin and Mr Staes for their support so far in this regard .
Madam President , first of all could I put on record my thanks to Mr Bowe who was the budget rapporteur for the Committee on the Environment for the first half of the mandate .
The general approach to the discharge procedure is to look at the percentage of the budget line that is spent .
If 95 % or more is spent then a tick is put beside that item .
If less than 80 % is spent there is a black mark .
But if we have the information at our disposal we should look more carefully at the achievement of goals with this money , rather than purely the fact that the money has been spent .
For example , on the fifth environment action plan only 70 % of the budget was spent .
The reason for this is that there were not sufficient good projects ; in fact some calls had no response at all .
We should not give money to bad projects .
However , there is one slight caveat to that : I hope our bidding systems are not becoming so bureaucratic that some potential bidders with good projects are put off from bidding at all .
I will mention public health budget line B3-4301 on combating cancer .
In 1999 there was a substantial under-spend on that and I am pleased to see that in 2000 it was almost fully committed including the overhang from 1999 .
It would be verging on the criminal not to deploy resources allocated for combating diseases such as cancer .
It is true that the environment budget of EUR 200 million - that is GBP 125 million - was only half spent in the year 2000 .
The reason for this was the Life projects , which make up half this budget , and which could not be spent in 2000 because the legal basis was not determined in conciliation until July 2000 .
I am pleased to see that the five-year project has been telescoped into a four-year project instead .
Despite the substantial under spending in the budget that is largely due to the Life III lines , and bearing in mind that the Court of Auditors have not voiced concerns , the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy recommends that discharge be granted in respect of the 2000 budget for the budget lines within its competence .
Madam President , on behalf of the Committee on Regional Policy , Transport and Tourism , I thank the rapporteur , Mr McCartin for his report and efforts and , in particular , for the way in which he highlighted the major concern of my committee , namely the slow rate of implementation of the Community 's structural funds .
As he so rightly highlighted , that is the bulk of the problem in terms of the surplus that this Parliament is addressing .
The question to which my committee failed to receive a satisfactory answer from the Commission , was why do we allow such a situation to develop in the first place ?
It was predictable that in the first year of the structural fund programmes rates of implementation would be very low .
Yet we were faced with wholly unrealistic budget forecast expectations and scenarios which , by definition , could not be fulfilled .
So we are dealing with a situation where , in many areas , there has been almost no expenditure whatsoever under certain budget lines for the Community 's structural funds .
We believe this makes it much more difficult for this Parliament and my committee to scrutinise the budget adequately and rigorously .
As a regular item on our committee agenda , we have now decided to focus on budget scrutiny and , at each discussion , we invite the Commission and the Council to participate with us in a thorough review of expenditure within the structural fund area .
But that job is made very difficult by these wholly unrealistic budgets .
The Commissioner must explain how we are expected properly to evaluate a budget which is in itself extremely questionable .
Our second concern really relates to the second point the rapporteur made in his opening remarks - the way in which the structural funds are currently managed .
We share his concern that the regulations are overly complex and make our job , as a Parliament , of scrutinising the budget very difficult .
So we have a double problem there .
Many organisations , individuals , groups , associations and communities that are eligible for structural funds fail to receive their fair share because of the over-complexity of the application process .
We , as a Parliament - and the other authorities charged with monitoring budgetary expenditure - have a problem in that we cannot adequately monitor expenditure to ensure value for money .
My final point concerns the trans-European networks .
We reiterate our view that the Commission is right to focus on fewer projects but we oppose the fact that the Commission is now planning to make a EUR 60 billion addition to the trans-European network transport budget line .
We invite the Commission to comment on how they can ensure value for money when they are planning such a massive increase in expenditure .
Madam President , I would firstly like to congratulate Mr Blak on having finally taken the decision to propose , in his report , the discharge to the Commission in respect of the implementation of the budget of the sixth , seventh and eighth European Development Funds for the 2000 financial year .

The Commission , and particularly Commissioner Nielson , have made a great effort to keep Parliament informed on expenditure from these funds . Developing countries that are beneficiaries of these funds deserve the adoption by Parliament of the discharge already approved by the Court of Auditors .
For this reason , the Socialist Group and the Committee on Development , for which I am rapporteur , support this discharge .
However , we would ask the Commission that in future more funds be earmarked for social development and that these be more clearly reflected , as proposed by the Committee on Development , in both the budget and the EDF .
We hope that next year we will be able to analyse the figures for EU aid in accordance with the OECD 's Development Aid Committee system , which will allow us to measure the impact of Community funds on the promotion of social development more accurately .
With regard to the amendments tabled by Mr Blak himself , we have to reject those which refer to access to documents and the revision of the interinstitutional framework agreement , not because of substantive issues , for the agreement is not actually proving to be very effective , but because we cannot question , in each report by the Committee on Budgetary Control , the validity of an agreement that has been negotiated , signed and voted on by this Parliament with the participation , let us not forget , of members from that very committee .
The Courts have also stated their opinion in this regard .
We therefore understand that that matter of access to documents should not be raised in a report .
On the other hand , we support the other amendments regarding audits and the management of the business development centre .
This exercise in the discharge of the EDF , which we ritually tackle each year , should serve as an illustration , once again , of the ridiculous situation where Parliament inspects the discharge of funds that do not figure in the Community budget , the amounts of which we are not consulted on and on whose expenditure we are only informed of a posteriori .
The EDF , implemented by the Commission and theoretically controlled by Parliament , should be included within the Community budget as a fundamental quantitative and qualitative element of development policy .
We believe that at this time of reform of the European Union , we have the perfect opportunity to remind ourselves of this fact and I would encourage all political groups to communicate this proposal , which Parliament has supported for many years , to the Convention .
Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , it is one of Parliament 's prime functions to scrutinise and control the EU 's Budget , and , in doing this , greater attention urgently needs to be given to how the equal opportunities policy is to be financed in the European Social Fund 's 2000-2006 programming period .
The Spanish President of the Council , in his presentation to the committee , expressed the intention of giving equal opportunities policy a fixed place as a mainstream function in the complex of employment and social affairs .
That has also become a necessity , as the figures show that only 6 % of the resources in the European Social Fund are allocated to special measures relating to equal opportunities , whereas Parliament had asked for 15 % .
The underutilisation of resources and the great extent to which resources have been transferred is a consequence of the problems accompanying the Structural Funds ' initial operations in the programming period 2000-2006 .
Procedures for structural measures had to be rationalised and simplified , as they are too complex at both Community and national level , and we must now work on preventing the recurrence of such difficulties when the new programmes are to be set up in the future .
The evaluation report on the Daphne programme became available only yesterday .
What particularly interests me in it is the reasons for the low take-up of the payment authorisations in the Budget year 2000 .
What is most important is that women play an important role in sustainable development , and gender issues should therefore be taken into account at every stage of planning , implementing and evaluating development cooperation .
I therefore request clarification as to how it is that payments for this accounted for only 59 % of resources .
The Committee on Women 's Rights and Equal Opportunities focuses on just a few Budget items , but they are all the more important for enabling the objectives of equal opportunities policy to continue to be pursued in the EU .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , the report Mr Blak has presented on discharge for the European Development Funds clearly shows the particular problems faced by European development policy .
There are manifest problems originating in the Commission 's system and in the way it works .
Hence it cannot be acceptable that there should be , at the end of 2000 , a sum of EUR 6 billion available and yet unused .
It cannot be the case , in view of the increasing destitution in many ACP countries , that the Commission is unable to manage to get the funds made available to those who are in need of them .
The Commission has made a start on changing the system in these areas .
It has , since the Cotonou agreement , been going further down the road of giving aid in the form of sectoral budget support programmes .
Put in simple terms , that means that the Commission has more faith in the recipient countries ' responsibility .
That is , in itself , a way of going about things that should be welcomed .
The only thing is that this trust must , of necessity , be counterbalanced , in the event of misuse , by a consistent demand for the money to be returned .
It is such consistency that is evidently lacking , as the Court of Auditors noted that , whilst the Commission carries out audits , and also spots abuses , not one cent of the EUR 14 million referred to by the Court of Auditors had been reclaimed or retrieved .
Here , the Commission must summon up the courage to state the reasons for this .
Either this is the fault of its own incompetent administration , or there are general political reasons for refraining from demanding the money back .
I take the view that this will prove to be the scratch test for the new system of finance .
If greater trust is placed in the recipient states , that presupposes that the recipients are fully answerable for any misuses .
Everything else strikes me as inconsequential and as not in the long-term interests of the recipients .
Here , the Commission must come to a definite decision and must not go down the road of least resistance , more comfortable though that would no doubt be .
We are left with criticism of a few of this EDF process 's anachronisms , with which we have long been acquainted and which ought to be done away with as quickly as possible .
If Parliament is to give discharge , then it is Parliament to which budgetary and legislative power over the EDF 's resources should be conceded .
The Statement of Assurance , too , which is given by the Court of Auditors in its report on the EDF , must , like the Statement of Assurance on the General Budget , involve a complete audit and must not stop at the point where the funds leave the Commission level .
Here , too , is the explanation of why there is a favourable Statement of Assurance relating to the EDF .
The existence of two different Statements of Assurance is not only confusing , but also deceptive .
I turn now to the discharge for Parliament 's budget , where Parliament must be especially careful to avoid the least whiff of the suggestion that it might treat its own funds with less rigour than it treats those of others .
I wish to expressly emphasise the demand in the chapter on personnel policy in Mr Virrankoski 's report that the meagre representation of women in positions of leadership should at last be ended and that there be a serious attempt at an equal opportunities policy .
Parliament 's Secretary-General bears personal responsibility for this .
Parliament must set an example if it does not want to lose its credibility .
It is something more than sad that the Secretary-General has not seized these opportunities throughout the long years he has been in office .
I also think that Parliament must play an exemplary role in creating an independent internal audit department , meaning that the auditors would not be subject to directions of any kind from the Directors-General and the Secretary-General .
We also welcome the right to make reports directly to the President of Parliament .
The report on the discharge of the Parliamentary Budget must neither cover up omissions and deficiencies , nor should it be misused in order to have internal problems dealt with elsewhere , which is what seems to be the objective of several amendments that have been reintroduced in the meantime .
In particular , the Financial Regulation is not suited to solving problems within Parliament .
These we have to sort out ourselves .
Transparency , regularity and responsibility for one 's colleagues are principles which , as Mr Blak said , are self-evident in the Parliamentary context .
They are not suited to the settlement of party-political disputes , and there should not , therefore , be constant and self-tormenting calls for them .
I will conclude by asking you to support my Amendment No 8 to Mr McCartin 's report . It instructs the President of Parliament even now to defend Parliament 's rights under Article 276 of the Treaty establishing the European Community before the European Court of Justice in the event of the Council again proceeding to restrict them .
Mr President , my predecessors on the floor having almost all exceeded their speaking time by at least a minute , I crave your indulgence if I have to do the same .
When this discharge procedure began last December with the Court of Auditors ' report , I pointed out that we were now entering a stage in which we are talking about the systematic problem of the European Union 's Budget policy and are less concerned with chasing after every potential or actual scandal .
Two aspects indicate this , namely the comparatively small number of amendments before us to all the reports and the broad majorities by which they have been adopted , likewise the way that the prospect of this debate on the discharge has made comparatively few waves in the press .
I would , though , like to say something very definite on the subject of Parliament .
I want to pick up a point mentioned by Mrs Stauner , who spoke immediately before me .
It is indeed true that it would be desirable for Parliament to be able to settle legally and entirely autonomously all the matters concerning the way it manages its budget .
It would be marvellous , and I would support it , but the one problem with it is that no separation of Parliament 's financial policies and the groups represented in Parliament is provided for in the European Union 's Financial Regulation .
It is , though , such a separation that we need .
I would remind you that , two years ago , on the occasion of the Court of Auditors ' report on the groups ' financial policies , we had a great debate in this House , in which certain dubious financial practices on the part of individual groups reflected on the institution of Parliament as a whole and all Members of this House were seen by those in the galleries and by the press as having to answer for things which were in fact the responsibility only of individual groups .
I would not wish to be made answerable for certain questionable financial practices that might well go on in other groups , and I likewise assume that , if something goes wrong in my group , Members belonging to other groups are not made answerable for them either .
Mr Virrankoski 's report now gives us the opportunity to take a significant step towards separating the responsibilities of Parliament 's authorities and of the groups .
It is a step that we must take .
I warn against standing up and saying : How did we come to this pass , where we let the Commission , in a legislative proposal on the rules for implementing the Financial Regulation , prescribe what we should and should not do ?
We would then be creating a tremendous sham conflict with the Commission , in which we would show off our wondrous strength , and one side-effect would be that the separation of the responsibilities of the House authorities and the groups would be deferred for ever and a day ; another side-effect - perhaps an agreeable one - would be that certain things that were done in the past , could be carried on with .
For example , if a group dismisses a member of its staff , he or she protests his or her innocence to the House authorities and takes Parliament to an industrial tribunal .
Or when accumulated and transferred leave entitlements of group staff amounting to astronomical sums have to be paid out of Parliament 's budget , whilst it is actually the groups who should accept responsibility for it .
So I warn against using sham conflicts to bring about such a situation in this House .
If this situation is to be avoided , we can provide a draft solution by tomorrow .
If , though , the situation really does arise at the end of the day in which the present state of affairs perpetuates itself , then we will call those who are responsible by the names they deserve .
Mr President , for the first time in many years , it looks as if this Parliament will once again be granting discharge to the Commission by 30 April , as prescribed .
This is to be welcomed , in my view , and this is why I should like to congratulate Mr McCartin - and the other rapporteurs too , in fact .
As far as the Commission 's attitude is concerned , I have the impression that the Commission has made every effort to accommodate the many questions asked by Parliament within a very short space of time .
What is most striking about this budget is that once again there is no positive statement of assurance .
And this is the first budget for which the new Commission is responsible .
We , the Liberal Group , as well as others , have said time and again that we need indicators to establish whether the situation has improved or not .
If we keep hearing every year that there is no positive statement of assurance , how should we explain this to the public if we subsequently keep on granting discharge ?
I should once again like to draw the Commission 's attention to this problem , and ask the Commission , if the Court of Auditors refuses to develop an indicator , which is what now seems to be the case , to come up with an indicator of its own which , for example , highlights the fact that a margin of error prevails in a Directorate-General , the extent of this margin , and the extent of this in other sectors .
The Court of Auditors can then verify subsequently whether the technique is sound .
This will give Parliament a tool to assess whether or not a situation is improving .
This seems to me to be a priority for the year to come .
Another point already mentioned by Mrs Jöns is that we have noticed a steady increase in the number of agencies .
Virtually every agency has its own financial rules accompanied by a complex discharge procedure .
This is difficult for the many agencies .
Would it not be possible for the Commission to develop a uniform model for all the agencies ?
This too would simplify inspection by Parliament .
Another point concerns the clearance of accounts .
We , as the Liberal Group , have tabled an amendment which extends the period which lapses before it becomes final from 24 to 36 months .
This allows us as Parliament to challenge the decisions by the Commission for a slightly longer period .
And in our view , it is perhaps necessary to increase the financial corrections once again .
The maximum is 100 % , but what is stopping us from applying more gradations , which would provide us with another way of measuring upward or downward trends ?
In addition , we take the view that the computerisation of customs offices in Europe should be prioritised , especially in the new countries .
What specific action is the Commission taking to reinforce Europe 's future external borders , and what can we as Parliament do to improve the situation on this score ?
Finally , I should like to bring up a topic which has already been mentioned by various speakers , namely the European Union 's new foreign and security policy .
Indeed , it looks as if an entirely new policy is being developed which could well escape Parliament 's attention .
This is unjustified in the opinion of the Liberal Group .
We think that an agreement must be concluded between the Commission , Parliament and the Council about a new interinstitutional accord , thus allowing the expenses made by the Council in this respect to be better monitored .
Mr President , I too would like , on behalf of my group , to thank all the rapporteurs for their good work on the discharge of the General Budget this year , and make just a few comments .
We greatly welcome , for example , the way that Mr McCartin 's report addressed the issue of export subsidies .
We will be giving that more of a cutting edge by means of an amendment , as it is our opinion that the subsidy of live animal transports still leaves too many openings for fraud involving subsidies that make no sense whatever to the EU 's taxpayers .
We consider this issue to be extremely important , and one where things need to be further tightened up .
We will be supporting Mrs Morgan in giving the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs discharge for the last few years but still not for 1996 and 1997 .
We consider it extremely important that our committee should strongly reiterate that these years saw mismanagement of travel expenses and , even more important , that the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs dragged its feet in clearing up this fraud , and that not enough was done to prepare the case for OLAF .
This must continue to receive critical attention , and we must strongly reiterate that rather than cloaking the issue in silence .
I would also like to express support for Mrs Morgan 's demand that the Council be given discharge in the area of foreign and security policy , and also in internal affairs policy , all of which increasingly result in operational expenditure .
I am , though , far from satisfied with the way in which the Council has dealt with these matters in the past , and I fear that it will still not give us a satisfactory answer .
We must , then , again press home our view that this discharge must be for real .
The ' gentlemen 's agreement ' no longer applies .
On this point , a definite decision has to be taken .
In conclusion , I wish to express my agreement with Mr Kuhne , who spoke before me .
If we are to criticise the Council in the course of the discharge procedure , we in this House must handle our own discharge very carefully .
The administrative and group budgets should have been separated a long time ago .
I wish , though , to urge the Council to at last come to some decisions on the parties , where we in Parliament are not competent to act .
We need the Council to at last decide on a party statute , which would be a practical response to public criticism on this point .
Mr President , I should like to begin by commending my colleagues in the Committee on Budgetary Control , together with the committee 's chairman , and also thanking those who participated in the committee and in the groups and who have carried out a very notable and thorough piece of work .
This splendid work has led the majority to recommend giving discharge .
Because of the little time available , I am unable to go into details concerning these many matters , just as others cannot either , but I would refer you to the excellent observations made by my colleagues , Mr Virrankoski , Mr Blak and Mrs Morgan .
I shall concentrate on Mr McCartin 's report on discharge to the Commission .
I should like to quote from two recitals . Recital L reads : ' whereas 2000 was marked by a significant increase in the volume of fraud and irregularities identified by Member States and OLAF ? .
Recital P reads : ' whereas , in considering budget implementation in 2000 , the fundamental question is to establish , firstly , the Community management features which should be the basis for effectiveness but are deficient , and , secondly , the components within the system which are conducive to fraud and irregularity ? .
There then follows a long list of incisive observations which , on being read , give the impression of our being concerned here with a South American banana republic .
The EU was not established just a couple of years ago . This system has been in place since 1957 , and it is wholly unsatisfactory that , year after year , we should write these reports , clearly and emphatically pointing out the errors , but that nothing improves .
Next year , we shall write something which , for a change , resembles what we are writing this year , and then still give discharge .
It should be noted that the criticism in Mr McCartin 's report is just as severe as that in the report on the 1996 accounts , which brought the previous Commission down .
Financial management and the legislation itself are unacceptably bad .
In my country , a government characterised by management of this kind would be overturned , and the officials responsible fired .
It is not good enough for so much of European taxpayers ' money to disappear due to fraud and irregularities .
People will simply not put up with it . This cannot be the price of cooperation in Europe .
The only logical conclusion is , of course , to vote against giving discharge to the Commission .
Mr President , the enormous budget surplus in 2000 to the tune of EUR 11.6 billion illustrates that budgetary management still leaves something to be desired .
In the Structural Funds , under spending is even starting to have structural implications .
In our view , unspent amounts should be returned to the Member States , at least after two years .
This could help these Member States reduce their national debt , for example .
We therefore support Amendment No 9 tabled by Mr Heaton-Harris .
The management of the Structural Funds requires substantial improvement .
The complex Community regulations must be simplified .
Coordination between the Commission and the Member States is well below par .
Financial inspection is riddled with loopholes , both ex-ante and ex-post .
The current financial correction system must also be changed as a matter of urgency , because it encourages Member States to cover up irregularities and fraud instead of reporting dirty tricks .
We have known this for years , but the Commission and the Member States are still doing much too little to improve the situation .
We are disappointed that the pre-accession aid programmes are not achieving their objectives by a long chalk .
The findings in the special report drawn up by the Court of Auditors are disturbing .
The fact that it is unlikely that the candidate countries will be able to implement the various aid programmes during this calendar year is unacceptable to us .
I would ask the Commission to inform us of the present state of affairs .
The reform of the European Commission which was initiated in 1999 is still not evident in terms of specific results in 2000 .
I trust that the Commissioner will now have some insight into the results achieved over the course of 2001 .
We would be interested to find out whether she would be prepared to share some of the information .
There is also considerable under spending in aid programmes for development cooperation .
Duplication with Member States ' policies may be partly to blame for this .
Would the Commission map this out for us soon ?
In our view , the subsidiarity principle should be taken seriously in EU development policy .
Finally , I have made the shocking discovery that each part-session in Strasbourg costs approximately EUR 11.5 million extra per week , quite apart from the environmental pollution they cause .
This Parliament is forced into this situation solely in order to honour the wish of one Member State .
It would therefore be fair if this Member State were to reimburse this House to the amount of the total estimated annual additional costs of EUR 138 million .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , it is customary for a speaker to congratulate the rapporteurs and this is something that I am very happy to do .
I would like to congratulate them all , with one exception .
I shall not name the person , since we are all friends and acquaintances here , but I cannot congratulate one rapporteur who has had his report adopted unanimously and who is tabling four amendments on behalf of his group .
I do not think that this is acceptable behaviour - and I shall say no more - because , when they see the name of the rapporteur , Members will think that he has made technical amendments to a text that received a unanimous vote .
I believe that a rapporteur should be honest with his fellow Members and with himself .
He drafts a report , which is unanimously adopted by the members of his committee - of which I am one - and then I notice that he has tabled , on behalf of his colleagues , some amendments that have a different aim .
I think that this behaviour is totally unacceptable and I now urge my fellow Members and the political groups to reject these amendments .
A Member cannot be both rapporteur and the author of amendments - he is either one or the other .
I agree with tabling amendments to other reports , but not to one 's own report .
That is why I regret that I am not able to congratulate this Member on his work .
With regard to the other reports , I would like to raise two further points .
The first point is to Mrs Eluned Morgan , a dear friend .
This is 2002 , the third millennium : the world is making progress , facts of law are often set in stone , so why persist in refusing the 1996-97 discharge to the smallest institution in the European Union ?
What will our citizens think when they find out that we have granted discharge to all the institutions , but we are delaying discharge from seven or eight years ago to the Economic and Social Committee ?
We have blamed and accused ECOSOC for the facts that came to light and enough is enough .
For goodness ' sake , spare us the embarrassment of being haunted by this scandal , because if we must be haunted by a scandal - I assure you , Eluned - we can all drag up past scandals all over again .
This is not the right approach .
Lastly , regarding the report by Mr McCartin - whom I would like to congratulate in particular - I want to stress that we can , of course , go over all the cases in all the Member States and highlight them , but we must not get hung up on specific cases .
I therefore call for paragraph 60 to be deleted immediately and I strongly urge the Members to amend the words in paragraph 60 which relate to a Member State that I hold in great esteem .
Mr President , I too should like to congratulate all the rapporteurs , especially Mr McCartin , who has taken a reasonable amount of flak from me .
I should also like to congratulate Mrs Morgan on her discharge report .
I was not in the Chamber when she made her comments about ECOSOC , but I am sure she is now with me in calling for this organisation not only not to get discharge but actually to be disbanded because it is a waste of money .
My primary job here on behalf of my group is to talk about the Staes and Seppänen discharges .
This is very easy because they are two very good reports written by two very good parliamentarians .
Regarding the McCartin report , I want to put on record , especially for people in the public gallery , some of the simple facts which we should be talking about .
There is still no positive statement of assurance from the Court of Auditors .
This is the seventh year running .
There probably never will be one because they have got themselves into a very tight corner now .
How can they give discharge to an organisation where 5 % or more of the budget is lost through fraud , mismanagement or waste and 14 % of the budget , at least , is running as a surplus ?
Nearly 20 % of the budget is not spent correctly , as we would like it to be .
This is not a record to be proud of .
The discharge report by Mr McCartin contains a number of quite scathing points and highlights ongoing problems within the Commission .
And yet Mr McCartin comes to the conclusion that he should recommend discharge .
Quite correctly , he notes that the majority of the EU 's budget is administered in the Member States .
However this does not absolve the Commission of final responsibility and accountability .
The buck stops with the Commission .
It is its responsibility , as stated in Article 274 , to implement and oversee the Community 's budget .
Once again this is a year in which it has failed to manage and control the Community 's budget properly .
My party 's representatives in this House were elected on a whole host of pledges , the main one being to sort out the accounts of the European Commission and other European institutions and make sure that the reform process that most people in this House are pleased to see going forward is actually driven through and achieves results .
As much money is now being lost through fraud and mismanagement of funds in the 2000 budget as when we made the pledge in 1999 to try and sort this out .
John Wiggins , a former member of the European Court of Auditors , is quoted in a British newspaper saying that the situation in the Commission is unchanged .
Things have got to change .
The European Parliament 's legal services wrote a note to the Budgetary Control Committee on 5 November 2001 giving an opinion on whether not granting discharge should lead to the fall of the Commission .
It states that undoubtedly refusal to grant discharge is the expression of serious political sanctioning of the Commission .
Its legal effect , however , is not such as to compel the Commission to resign .
That is covered by a special procedure laid down in Article 141 of the EC Treaty .
In voting not to give discharge to the Commission , we are actually making sure that the Commission knows firstly , that we do not want it to resign and , secondly , that we want it to sort the problems out .
If nothing has changed by this time next year , if there is still no positive statement of assurance , if there is still 5 % and more waste , mismanagement , fraud and disappearing money , and if there is still a huge budget surplus , then we will be getting to the stage where we will have to say to the people in the public gallery and the people who put us here that nothing has changed in the European Commission , the reform process is still ongoing - and is the slowest process ever - and we have failed in one of our core tasks which was to sort these problems out in the first place .
That is not a record to be proud of and not something I am prepared to stand before my constituents and say .
Mr President , I am sure it is no reflection on the quality of Mr Heaton-Harris ' speech that the public gallery emptied while he was speaking .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to start by congratulating all the rapporteurs involved for their work on this vast subject .
In my opinion , the discharge procedure is a fundamental part of our work and is one of the distinguishing powers of our institution : the power by virtue of which we verify , year after year , that the good intentions and resolves , and also the expectations of the citizens who elected us and for whom we are responsible first and foremost , are fulfilled .
This subject is both extremely technical and extremely political , and the consequences for both sectors of decisions taken in haste or under emotional stress can be - and , unfortunately , do often turn out to be - disastrous .
That is why I feel that we should ask ourselves before the vote , each year , not so much whether everything has been done perfectly but rather whether we are going in the right direction , whether we are setting ourselves the right priorities , whether , in the executive action of the Commission and - to a much lesser extent - all the other institutions , there is evidence of the intention to implement the will of the two arms of the budgetary authority as well as possible .
Concentrating especially on Mr McCartin 's report and , therefore , on the Commission 's budget , I feel that three points warrant particular emphasis ; indeed , the rapporteur himself has already stressed them .
Firstly , the financial year 2000 has been characterised by an exceptional level of overspending with regard to the budget , which shows that the budgetary forecasts were severely short of the mark .
Secondly , although 2000 marked the start of a new programming period for the Structural Funds and preacession aid which stretches until 2006 , this cannot have been very successful given that so many difficulties were encountered in implementation .
Lastly - and this point may well be more important than the previous two - the rapporteur was right to point out the need to establish , on the one hand , the features of Community management which should be the basis for effectiveness but are deficient , and , on the other , the components within the system which are conducive to fraud and irregularity
These are , in my opinion , the areas we must address if we are to achieve proper , sound implementation of the budget in the coming years .
Mr President , the EU 's institutions continue to provide opportunities for major irregularities in the conduct of financial affairs .
The reason for these is still the weak points in the legislation , cooperation between national authorities that is poor or utterly lacking in coordination , and excessive laxity in monitoring and in imposing penalties .
This is again confirmed in the reports before us on the discharge procedure for 2000 .
The Court , for example , did not name Member States that were negligent .
These Member States , whose lax monitoring undermines the combating of fraud , should not only be shown up , but should also make good the damage their laxity causes to the EU .
OLAF 's work in connection with the travel expenses affair was equally inadequate .
In order to stem fraud , though , we also need radical reform of Europe 's VAT system , for example , by abolishing the deduction of tax within the enterprise chain at national level as well , as it at present strongly favours VAT fraud .
Mr President , I would like to start my speech by thanking and congratulating the rapporteurs for the work they have carried out , with a particular mention to Mr McCartin , who has done some magnificent work in a very short time , the result of which is a good definition of the form the discharge in respect of the implementation of the general budget of the European Union for the financial year 2000 should take .
There are still some problems , however .
Generally speaking , there is a unanimous call for the modernisation of public authorities and for the process to be further simplified , which would give rise to greater transparency and better public understanding as a whole , whilst bringing this important process closer to the EU citizens .
Whilst we gave our support to the rest of the reports , I would like to make a particular reference to a report on which our group , the Group of the Europe People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats , abstained - the Morgan report .
With regard to this report , we do not agree with the rapporteur or with the committee outcome in several regards .
We understand all that has been said in this House with regard to the irregularities of the Economic and Social Committee in 1996 and 1997 .
This period , when there were some administrators who did not do their job properly , when many investigations were carried out , when documentary proof was requested and that which was available was surrendered seems like a long time ago .
It is true to say that today there are new administrators and new procedures ; there is now no problem , as demonstrated by the 1998 , 1999 and 2000 discharge .
We do not believe that we can accept this slur on an organisation which cooperates with the other institutions , such as the European Parliament , particularly when the current administrators have done all they can to clear up all of these irregularities .
We believe , however , that the best thing that we can do is to draw a line under this whole affair , put this case of poor administration behind us and to give the Economic and Social Committee a new opportunity to maintain a good relationship with Parliament in the future , a good relationship with Parliament and to properly represent all social administration - as it has up until now - and for it to be one of the most effective bodies in the European Union - one of the oldest , if not the oldest - of all those we are analysing today in this report .
This is a discrepancy that we therefore hope will be cleared up when we vote in plenary .
We also disagree with the rapporteur 's proposals with regard to the Council .
We believe that the Council discharge should be approved .
Foreign and defence policy are recent issues .
We have to look at things from a different perspective .
I believe that the rapporteur could take steps to facilitate a more appropriate solution by taking the opinions of the Group of the Europe People 's Party into account .
If this is not the case , we will have to vote against the report .
We hope that this matter is cleared up and that , if this is not the case , this part of the report can be sent back to the committee , in order to facilitate the development of the aforementioned foreign and defence policy for , as I say , we should not continue with the current approach , given that we have to achieve a better understanding and a better clarification of procedures carried out to date .
Mr President , Commissioner , I wish to congratulate all our rapporteurs on their excellent work and to offer my sincere thanks to the Commission for its cooperation .
I should like to emphasise the constructive and genuinely European attitude demonstrated by our fellow Member , Mr McCartin , and the support given by the staff of the Commission 's Directorate-General for Agriculture .
The McCartin report is an important part of the process of reforming the common policy .
I hope that the remaining European institutions take due account of this , preparing the necessary measures for the phasing out of refunds for farm exports and ensuring that these refunds are used instead for the purpose laid down by the Treaty , which is to ensure a reasonable standard of living for the rural population .
I should like to say , however , that where fraud in the food industry is concerned , we need to go considerably further .
Speaking of dairy products - a sector that is quite crucial to the Azores - I cannot accept a situation in which farmers live in a state of constant fear of being fined for overproduction while European criminal organisations are falsifying tens of thousands of tons of butter with the complicity of the major European dairy product groups and while the dairy industry is receiving subsidies for powdered milk , which is basically whey , while major dairy produce companies are selling the equivalent of hundreds of millions of litres of what purport to be dairy products , but are , in fact , counterfeit products that are not made from milk .
Nor can I accept that the Commission has had very little or nothing to say on this issue !
In addition , if we look at other fields , such as oil , wine , or even meat , the picture is not very different .
Fraud in the food industry , which is often perpetrated in order to obtain export or disposal refunds , is now one of the greatest problems facing the budgetary control of agriculture .
We therefore urge the Commission to rapidly establish an initiative in this field that will enable this state of affairs to be brought to an end .
Mr President , at the outset I feel I should refer to the news of further decommissioning of arms in Ireland .
I welcome this news , particularly in the present climate of political hostilities in various parts of the world .
It is a clear demonstration that the political process and the peace process are well under way .
Why do I link that with the budget debate ?
Well , in discussing the budget , it is important to note the important role that the European Union and the European Parliament have played in this peace process through the International Fund for Ireland , the establishment of the Peace and Reconciliation Fund , INTERREG and the removal , through the Single Act , of the economic border which affected the border region for many years .
So it is relevant to refer to this .
I would like in particular to commend my colleague , Mr McCartin , for his thorough and comprehensive work on the very important matter before us .
The power that we have in Parliament , which we share as the Union 's budgetary authority , is perhaps the greatest responsibility that we have .
We are talking of EUR 100 billion of public money .
We have a duty to subject this expenditure to the highest standards of scrutiny .
Parliament may have the final say in signing off the accounts , but it is important to recall that 84 % of the Community budget is managed within the Member States .
It is also important that a strong culture of openness and cooperation exists between the Commission , the national , regional and local authorities .
Of course , the largest part of the budget goes to the common agricultural policy , one of only a few truly common policies in the Union .
It has served us well and must be maintained and defended .
I am concerned at some suggestions that export refunds should be ended and I reject any notion that export refunds are somewhat inherently conducive to fraud .
I remain convinced that refunds constitute a fundamental element of the policy ; they play an important role in the management of agricultural markets and must be defended at WTO level .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I wish to start with the observation that we have six reports , all of which recommend discharge - with the exception of one part in Mrs Morgan 's report , which we have already discussed . I think that is something we have not seen for a long time .
I want to congratulate the rapporteurs most warmly , but would also like to mention that the highest levels of the Commission were represented in many of our meetings , and this made management easier - something mentioned by you , Mrs Schreyer .
To give or withhold discharge is actually the greatest power Parliament possesses , in which Parliament is superior to the Council , and that is why it is a highly political instrument .
Let me emphasise that again .
This time , the judgment on the way that the Budget was managed in 2000 was indeed lenient , especially , too , in the report on the Commission .
So I would just like to mention three points , and briefly .
One is the issue of the large surplus that remains .
I am less concerned about whether this money reverts to the Member States or is set off , than that it should not be used to achieve political objectives , especially in the areas of structural policy and enlargement , and that makes me very vigilant .
There is room for improvement here , and another surplus of this sort for 2001 will not be acceptable .
The second point is the Statement of Assurance that the Court of Auditors did not grant .
This instrument is evidently not that fully applicable .
It is very difficult for us , in the absence of percentages of errors , to judge whether errors have been committed , and how many .
The third issue I wish to address is that of monitoring , in which field the Commission , being responsible for the Member States and also , already now , for the candidate countries - one can take Chapter 28 as an example - must take great care that the European Union 's financial interests are effectively safeguarded .
I therefore see the Green Paper on the creation of a European public prosecutor as showing the way ahead .
Mr President , considering this first discharge procedure for the new Commission somewhat dispassionately , we observe two explosive things : firstly , a gigantic Budget surplus , a massive underutilisation that actually shakes budgetary truth to its very foundations .
One cannot but wonder for a moment why we spend months here on the Budget process if 14 % of a Budget is not utilised .
I know , as we all do , that the underutilisation in 2001 was even greater than it was in 2000 .
If , against that , we set the fact that the same year , 2000 , also saw a doubling of the irregularities and frauds that were recorded in this Budget , then , in Budget matters , the first year of Mr Prodi 's Commission seems not to have been much of a success .
But , Mr McCartin , this does not mean assigning the debt to the Member States !
Commissioner Schreyer has already referred to the desire to make use of the time for enlargement , in order to prepare these countries for it .
So I ask the same Commission what is happening about the implementation of pre-accession aid in the context of agricultural policy , which was demonstrably not implemented at all in 2000 and 2001 .
The same Commission proposes to the European Union that enlargement should take place in 2004 .
How , then , is that to be done ?
Either the countries desirous of joining are - to put it in plain language - too stupid to collect money they have been given , or the Commission is not in a position to devise pre-accession programmes that are , at the end of the day , capable of being implemented !
Today already , Commissioner , we can take it for granted , for example , that a programme such as IACS , that is , all the agricultural monitoring systems about which we have had so much to say , cannot be implemented for years on end if these countries are onboard , one of many reasons being that the Commission has overslept and missed the pre-accession programmes .
I think it highly important , Commissioner , that we should , in the years to come , not spend all our time speculating about who should hand over which documents to whom - if any at all - and estimates differ as to how great this agreement between Parliament and the Commission is .
What this is about is that you at last grasp that you are accountable to the European public for all of what you have utilised - or , in this instance , not utilised - right down to the last cent .
Then , it is to be hoped , we will enter the new culture of political management in Brussels that Mr Prodi has , admittedly , promised us , but which has not , to date , been discernible .
Mr President , I would like in the first instance to commend the rapporteur for his work .
His years of experience and expertise in this field make him eminently qualified to deal with such an important matter .
The largest part of the budget , of course , goes to fund the common agricultural policy , and this is an important community measure which must not be undermined .
This summer the Commission is due to publish its proposals for the mid-term review of the common agricultural policy .
This was agreed in Berlin .
It is very important that this review is not used in any way as a means of reforming the policy at this particular time .
This must be deferred until agreement is reached on agriculture at the world trade talks .
Suggestions , for example , that export refunds should be ended , would have disastrous consequences , particularly for Ireland where we export up to 90 percent of our entire agricultural production .
Mr President , the report on the implementation of Parliament 's budget is highly controversial .
Although I cannot deal with all its contradictions , I cannot but denounce the truly futile calculations it contains with reference to personnel and other costs at our various places of work .
All of these are intended to run Luxembourg and Strasbourg down as places of work , to glorify an unhealthy emphasis on the centrality of Brussels and to undermine the decisions under the Treaty which laid down Strasbourg and Luxembourg as places of work .
These were enshrined in the Treaty and cannot therefore be altered by Parliament , thank God !
Nor should they , of course , be eroded without further ado , be it by the administration , by the bureau , or by a small majority in Parliament using devious means and our calendar of part-sessions .
It strikes me as positively perverse for this report to welcome a reduction in the number of journeys on official business that our officials take from Luxembourg to Brussels and back , and for it to be boasted that , in 2000 , EUR 2.8 million was saved in this way , ignoring the fact that these figures conceal enforced transfers of lower and middle-stream officials from Luxembourg to Brussels , which their families find traumatic and socially and financially intolerable .
Someone has also forgotten to state what additional costs are incurred through sending hundreds of officials to Strasbourg from Brussels every month , instead of from Luxembourg , thus , of course , resulting in greater expense .
The intention which comes to light is a disconcerting one .
In the report , Strasbourg gets more of the same treatment when it is mentioned that the variable costs of the five-day part-sessions in Strasbourg are 33 % higher than for those in Brussels .
I would like to propose that creative accountant for the Guinness Book of Records !
What is certain is that Parliament 's nonsensical decision to cut the Strasbourg part-sessions down to four days led to the costs per day of the part-sessions now being substantially higher , quite apart from this plenary not having the time to deal properly with business , especially with legislative texts !
What is praised for being good value turns out , in the final analysis , to be substantially more expensive .
The ratio of price to quality is quite simply wrong , and that is what I wanted to take this opportunity to say loudly and clearly !
Mr President , first of all , I would like to echo my fellow Members ' comments and thank and congratulate Mr McCartin on his report .
Mr McCartin took on this report at short notice , as I myself was due to draft it , and he has worked on this task in a very able and rigorous manner .
His report is a balanced , reasonable and positive piece of work .
I would personally like to praise him and I sincerely hope that the report is adopted .
Mr McCartin is right to recommend the discharge .
The problems raised are not so much problems regarding the timing in the implementation as problems related to an increasing lack of realism , as has been said , between , on the one hand , the financial perspectives that were set in Berlin and the budgetary forecasts that the Commission sets on an annual basis , and , on the other hand , the genuine needs arising from the implementation of the budgets .
We must take steps to correct this imbalance .
As regards the Morgan report , I support Mrs Avilés Perea 's comments on the fact that we cannot support the refusal to discharge the Economic and Social Affairs Committee 's budget for the two consecutive financial years since this body made a considerable effort to improve the situation and because it is never a good idea to respond to the positive reform which has got underway by maintaining sanctions .
I therefore believe that the committee 's positive efforts call for a positive response on our behalf .
As regards the Virrankoski report , I support the comments Mrs Lulling made earlier on the problems raised by paragraphs 25 and 33 of the resolution .
We may well agree to have a single place of work for Parliament in Brussels , but , until the Treaty specifies otherwise , if the Treaty provides for several places of work , it is our duty to ensure that this work can be carried out in the appropriate conditions .
Paragraphs 25 and 33 , however , seem to insidiously call into question the provisions of the Treaty .
Mr Van Hulten told us that the Treaty was desired by one single Member State , so I leave you to draw your own conclusions from this .
The Treaty is the expression of a collective will , the expression of political balance and we must all respect this .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I would like , on behalf of the Commission , to thank you very briefly for your many contributions , observations and suggestions during this discussion .
I would like to suggest that the specific questions raised by the rapporteurs of the individual committees should also be discussed in those committees with my colleagues .
We have agreed a new procedure for working together on setting priorities for next year , in which context , during April and May , there are to be many bilateral discussions between the relevant committees and the Commissioners .
When talking about the priorities for the forthcoming year , one must also , of course , draw on the experience of past years .
The Commission will of course , in the coming months , be working on the other issues and demands raised in the reports and will give an account of this work in the follow-up report .
We have indeed seen that these discussions have , much more than in the past , focused on structural issues in budget management and implementation , and also on reliability testing .
These issues will no doubt leave their mark on joint discussions in the coming months .
As regards the methods used by the Court of Auditors to produce a Statement of Assurance , it goes without saying that we are prepared to look deeper into this concept and the idea of a single audit , in order to enhance and improve the coordination between the Court of Auditors and the checks carried out on the spot by the Internal Audit Service on behalf of the Commission .
Turning to enlargement , the admittedly great delay in the agricultural programme has shown that it is sometimes necessary to give priority to the requirements of monitoring .
This has necessitated great restructuring on the part of the candidate countries in which the individual paying agencies are now gradually being accredited .
We hope that this year will then see the start of disbursements to the farmers .
Let me again thank the rapporteur , Mr McCartin , the other rapporteurs , and the whole Committee on Budgetary Control for their work and for their recommendation that discharge be given .
Thank you , Commissioner .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , we find ourselves today at the second reading stage of a draft Regulation that I regard as being of great significance and which in particular makes one thing clear , namely that , particularly through the committed involvement of the responsible Commissioner , the lack of what should long ago have been a matter of fact in the field of air travel has , in recent months , at length been successfully made good . I refer to the fact that air travel should know no frontiers and regulations and safety measures affecting air travel should naturally , therefore , also be without borders , meaning , in this instance , that they should be organised , as is appropriate , on a uniform basis across Europe or at least throughout the Member States .
The regulation we are reading for the second time establishes an agency for aviation safety and ensures that assessments will in future be made uniformly as to which aircraft are to be built in accordance with which criteria before being licensed to enter service .
It is obvious that the uniform assessment of designs makes this step significant in terms of air safety , but it is in my view also self-evidently essential to the aircraft industry , which has hitherto had to apply for authorisation in each individual Member State , but will in future be in a position to sort these problems out with one authority and with one agency , and get the relevant certification from them .
The task of the Aviation Safety Agency will be to approve aircraft , certify them and oversee their operation .
At the same time , supervision of the flight crew , as also maintenance and other measures , all of which are factors in aviation safety , are in future to be regulated by law , something for which we clearly expressed a desire during discussions in committee and during preparations for second reading .
Let me repeat the clear message that this regulation 's principal objective is the creation of a uniformly high standard for aviation safety in Europe .
There are of course further objectives or knock-on effects associated with this , which can be described quite briefly .
These are , on the one hand , greater cost-effectiveness for the aircraft industry , and on the other , which I consider equally important , the fact that it will be guaranteed that relevant standards will be interpreted in a uniform way , thus promoting and enhancing the Community 's position in the world , that is , with especial reference to the American situation .
The committee 's concern was that the Aviation Safety Agency 's general political independence , for the issues involved are exclusively of a technical nature , in which decisions are to be taken by authoritative experts and specialists rather than by politicians in Parliament or the Council .
It was also important to guarantee the Agency 's autonomy , meaning that the Executive Director really is the head of the authority and , at the same time , that the Management Board is in a position to lay down appropriate guidelines for the Agency and influence the way in which it works .
I know that this puts us into a conflict situation with the Council and the Commission , but I believe that our numerous discussions have brought solutions which of course ensure that the Commission 's responsibility is made clear , that it will continue , so to speak , to supervise the Aviation Safety Agency , but that it is clear at the same time that the Aviation Safety Agency must also take responsibility for itself in its area of expertise .
I am confident that a conciliation procedure will be avoided , that we will be able to activate this regulation with the Council 's agreement , and that the Agency will indeed be able to start work twelve months after that .
We have , in my judgment , taken a great step forward in the area of aviation safety .
I will take this opportunity to thank all of those who set this legislative project in motion and supported it , especially my colleagues in the Committee on Regional Transport and Tourism .
I also thank the Commission and the Council for their willingness to seek compromises , and now hope that today 's vote will enable us to complete this report , and that we will then begin a new chapter in the history of aviation safety in Europe .
Mr President , I would like to begin by congratulating our rapporteur , Mr Schmitt , on his report which now brings a sensible compromise to the original Commission proposal .
It is fair to say that all of us in this House would have fully supported the creation of a pan-European body dealing specifically with the certification of aeronautical products , which is eminently sensible and which I fully support .
However , my own view was that the scope of the original Commission proposal was too broad and there were a considerable number of concerns regarding the issues of sovereignty , the regulatory framework and in particular the autonomy of the proposed agency .
It must be emphasised that , as with national civil aviation authorities which quite clearly deal solely with safety matters , this agency should not be drawn into dealing with other aspects , such as environmental and competition issues .
In addition , I would expect it to work along similar lines to those of national civil aviation authorities whose responsibilities are as independent regulators .
Although I received a comprehensive response from the Commission regarding the future of the national CAAs , their role still needs to be further clarified in terms of their future scope and remit .
It should also be emphasised that efforts should continue to be concentrated on achieving uniform applicability of ICAO , JAA and Eurocontrol standards that are already in existence .
The safety agency should not seek to parallel and create unwilling distortions of the current ICAO-based safety framework .
Finally , as we would expect independent experts to run this agency , it would not be in anyone 's interests should there be undue political or Commission interference , thereby potentially rendering the issue of safety a secondary factor .
My group believes that guaranteeing a high and uniform level of safety and environmental protection in civil aviation is the key objective in setting up the European Aviation Safety Agency and drafting attendant legislation .
This is a major and logical step on the way to a comprehensive European aviation policy .
Common rules create clarity and predictability , but can , at the same time , prevent duplication and thus save money .
Uniform European rules are in the interest of industry , but they must also enhance consumer safety , of course .
As far as we are concerned , the scope of the Agency may be broad , starting with certifying aircraft types , then extending the scope to include other elements , such as training .
Needless to say , we must make effective use of existing national capacities and build in a transitional period to move towards a fully-fledged Agency , although this period should remain limited .
We are not keen on a dual-track policy involving competing bodies .
So-called third countries must be persuaded to participate in improving safety agreements .
For this purpose , the European Union must develop a pro-active policy .
It should be reasonable , yet unyielding .
We must avoid leaks in the safety system due to a lack of sound agreements with countries that fall outside the scope of the proposed legislation and of the Agency .
In the Committee on Regional Policy , Transport and Tourism , we adopted the rapporteur 's compromise amendments .
We too would like to see this matter brought to a prompt conclusion .
So we are calling on the Council and the Commission to respond in the same cooperative spirit .
The PSE Group praises the rapporteur 's determination where the Agency 's independence is concerned .
This is a key point for us too .
Safety , not the request for competences , must be top of the list .
Independence does not mean that the Agency is not accountable for its actions , and the European Parliament wants to take an explicit part in this .
We will assume our responsibility , even today , in setting up the Agency , but we should also be allowed to carry out our task as the European Parliament in a well-informed manner .
Mr President , on behalf of my group , I would like to thank Mr Schmitt for the excellent work he has done in preparing this report .
The formulation of common rules for civil aviation traffic and the establishment of an Aviation Safety Agency are important steps forward in the area of improved air safety .
Other important goals are improved levels of environmental protection , and the promotion of fair competition and proper certification processes .
To achieve these goals the Aviation Safety Agency must function as independently as possible .
The necessary acts must be applied uniformly at both national and Agency level .
Commonly applied rules will lead to greater cost-effectiveness and a reduction in superfluous administration .
The longer transitional period contained in the common position is necessary to allow time for the Member States to replace the current complicated regulatory and certification procedures with certificates .
Most air traffic accidents are due to human factors .
As aviation becomes ever more technically complex the compilation of data and information exchange are of paramount importance in the improvement of civil aviation safety .
Although air traffic has always been a relatively safe form of transport , its growth , as well as airport and airspace congestion have increased the risk of accident .
Close cooperation between Member States for the purpose of raising levels of civil aviation safety will be an important precaution as air traffic grows .
The safety of European airspace is in the interests of everybody .
In my opinion we should move towards a compromise as quickly as possible and avoid conciliation .
Mr President , Commissioner , with the creation of the European Air Safety Agency , the European Union is proposing to achieve and maintain a high level of safety and environmental protection , which are of genuine importance to European society and also to European integration .
We do , of course , support this idea .
I should like , in any event , to say that safety and the protection of the environment are closely connected to the distribution of airports , which is suffering , in practical and serious ways , as a result of the trend to centralise airports that is prevailing in most European States and which is being promoted by central governments , which , for political reasons and reasons of power , are concentrating investment in capital cities , and by the so-called flagship companies , which , for the same reasons are centralising their flights and sending them into the same airports .
Consequently , most of Europe , just like my own country , Galicia , is suffering considerable hardship through being deprived of decent lines of air communication , traffic is becoming concentrated to an extraordinary degree in the air corridors that link the capitals , and the communities that live near to these central airports suffer the consequences of the noise and the bottlenecks .
All of this militates against the sustainable development that we must try to achieve from the points of view of both safety and economics and from the social and environmental angles .
I would say that we are , therefore , facing a serious problem , which we must start to resolve .
Mr President , Mrs de Palacio , ladies and gentlemen , transport safety is an area in which combined efforts on the part of the EU countries can save thousands of lives .
We in Europe enjoy high levels of air safety but the growth in traffic continually obliges us to take more effective action .
I would however say , regarding this , that it is incomprehensible and even disgraceful that this proposal has not been made until now and was not put forward ten years ago .
In fact nations have been going their own way and politicising at the expense of human life .
National pride must make way for rational cooperation .
An Aviation Safety Agency could also be an example of EU integration at its best , provided that the pitfalls of bureaucracy are avoided .
In this we should learn from the United States of America , where they trust in people .
The concentration of information and harmonisation of standards are essential for the prevention of accidents , but regulations should not normally be tightened up only after accidents have occurred ; instead , there should be a systematic analysis of present and future risks .
That , again , will not succeed unless all the Member States have the same tools at their disposal .
Our world is expanding at an ever-increasing rate , although this Chamber might not always be willing to admit it .
The Aviation Safety Agency should make decisions that apply to the world as a whole , whenever that is possible .
We should also support Article 2E proposed by the Council , as nothing good ever comes from enforced decisions .
Incidentally , I think that Parma would be a suitable location for the Aviation Safety Agency .
Parma 's excellent food , such as its ham , would guarantee the contentment of the authorities working there and , hopefully , some equally mature decisions for air safety and the private individual in Europe .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , today 's resolution on the Aviation Safety Agency is one of the first of many decisions that we have to take in the area of air transport .
A lot is moving in the skies above Europe .
The crisis in air transport following 11 September appears in the meantime to have been almost overcome .
Movements of aircraft are expected to double again by 2015 .
The restructuring of air transport is in full swing .
The political response to these challenges is represented primarily by the Single European Sky and the optimisation of capacities at airports .
The present time demands continuity in the midst of change .
Safety in the air must be the highest priority in air transport .
Previous strategies to harmonise technical regulations have not been able to keep up with the breakneck pace of developments in the air transport sector .
This is another reason why we need the European Aviation Safety Agency , which is to be the heart of a future unitary safety framework .
I am glad that we have found a European response in this sensitive area .
We can chalk it up as a success in our negotiations with the Council and the Commission that it will be only a year after the Regulation enters into force that requirements for the operation of aircraft and for the approval of aircrew are timetabled to be drawn up , and that these measures are also to be applied to aircraft from third countries .
Safety aspects of airports are also to be included .
Turning to the agency 's accountability , Parliament has succeeded in giving it greater independence , including from the Commission .
It has also been laid down that Member States are to make an appropriate contribution when external delegations of the Agency are set up on their territory - a contribution which I think Parliament will take to be financial in nature .
As a whole , discussion of the EASA shows that what we actually needed from the Commission is a framework directive on European agencies that would respond to the horizontal issues concerning a unitary structure for agencies .
It is still unsatisfactory that the problem of budgeting for agencies ' income could not be resolved as the Committee on Budgetary Control would wish .
The Aviation Safety Agency will be followed by others , dealing for example with the safety of railways and ships .
I consider this overall strategy to be suited to advance the integration of European transport markets .
Mr President , Madam Vice-President , ladies and gentlemen , Mr Schmitt 's excellent draft report puts us on the right track , but we are still not quite at our destination .
There must be safer air travel , at least within the EU , and its safety must know no frontiers .
That is our objective .
One of the key elements in achieving this objective is an Aviation Safety Agency that is capable of guaranteeing a uniform and high level of safety in the air on its own responsibility and with good organisation .
Well-organised , sole responsibility is the key word .
Parliament must continue to insist , whatever the Commission 's supervisory responsibilities might be , that they remain of a supervisory nature and that the Commission and others do not make themselves out to be co-designers of all the details .
It is not only in the well-known proverb , but also in this present instance , that too many cooks spoil the broth .
We MEPs must therefore continue to insist , and do so over and over again , on the agencies being as independent as possible , and , for example , on the Agency 's Executive Director having an important role internally and not just externally .
So we want other directors of the Agency to be appointed on the proposal of the Executive Director and hence on his responsibility .
There is something else that we want and need - legislation in force as soon as possible , so that the agency can take up its role in the service of greater safety in the skies of Europe with the minimum of delay .
We therefore hope that we will quickly agree on a common document with the Commission , but above all with the Council as well .
In its amendments , then , Parliament has been quite deliberately restrained where we believed that this common ground might be endangered , and we hope that the others will now join in too in search of this unity .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , first of all , I shall , like most of my fellow Members , praise the efficient work of the rapporteur , Mr Ingo Schmitt , who has worked in a constructive manner with the Council and the Commission .
As a result , we have a balanced compromise text and one which gives us every opportunity to avoid conciliation .
I would like to stress the quality of the amendments tabled by the rapporteur and the need to make up for lost time .
We have already waited too long .
In the area of transport , as in many other areas as well , it is our duty to ensure that a similar , high level of security is provided in the Member States .
It is also high time that the aeronautics industry benefited from a single certification for placing its products onto the market .
I hope that the European Aviation Safety Agency will be able to start work in the very near future and it must be able to provide a single certification for the Airbus A 380 .
This will represent the completion of many years of work by engineers , staff and employees and it is evidence of what Europeans can do , what they can achieve when they work together .
It is a powerful symbol .
The first test flight of the A 380 is planned for 2004 , the first commercial flight for 2006 - just around the corner , in other words .
In order to fulfil its tasks , the European Aviation Safety Agency must be independent and rely on skills and qualifications that can be found in the Member States .
As we know , the European Agency must not be used to coordinate the work of the existing national agencies .
We must firstly strive to be efficient , and , in this respect , it is easy to understand that for certification work , the European Agency must work in conjunction with the major European design and manufacturing companies .
I think that the regional agencies would be a good way to enable this to happen .
Ladies and gentlemen , Europe must offer practical advantages to its citizens .
To do this , we must provide the same level of security , for a single sky , and a single certification in a single market .
The text before us today is an important step in this direction .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I would firstly also like to thank the rapporteur , Mr Schmitt , on his work in full cooperation with the Commission and the Council .
This cooperation will allow us - we hope - to approve this text for the establishment of the Agency , foregoing the need to go to conciliation .
The main objective of the common rules in the field of civil aviation and the establishment of a European Aviation Safety Agency is to maintain a uniformly high level of safety throughout the European Union , and to better protect the environment , as mentioned by the last speaker a few moments ago .
Using this system , we will also be able to simplify the current procedures for aircraft certification , which will stimulate the internal market and the competitiveness of European products , as several speakers have pointed out .
The main instrument of the new system will be a common European certificate that will provide access to the whole European market and serve as a basis for recognition agreements .
As you are well aware , as this point has been highlighted throughout this debate , European industry is hoping that this Agency will be able to issue a certificate for its next star product : the Airbus 380 .
The proposal therefore constitutes a considerable step forward , given the objectives it pursues .
Furthermore , this is also a true innovation in the field of Community integration , if we take into account the fact that up until now the civil aviation sector has been principally characterised by State sovereignty and intergovernmental cooperation .
Ladies and gentlemen , you approved the Commission proposal at first reading with several amendments . Many of these amendments have been accepted by the Commission and integrated into the Council 's common position .
At this second reading , the rapporteur , Mr Schmitt , wanted to insist on certain issues that had not been included in the common position .
The contacts established between the three institutions , which all want the European Aviation Safety Agency to be successfully established as soon as possible , mean that we have now reached a solution which is acceptable to all .
Therefore , I hope that today Parliament as a whole will be able to confirm its support for this text so that the approval of the Regulation can take place next June , with the establishment of the Agency from Summer 2003 .
With regard to the amendments , I would like to point out that the new amendment , Amendment No 29 , could compromise the fragile balance we have been able to achieve , as well as the expected timetable .
Consequently , the Commission cannot accept this amendment .
I would like to point out that Amendments Nos 1 and 4 have caused us many problems . These amendments are proof of the European Parliament 's will to rapidly extend the Agency 's areas of responsibility to all sectors relating to safety , particularly with regard to licences for personnel and air operations .
With regard to the fundamental issue at hand , the Commission is of the same opinion as Parliament , but , on behalf of the College of Commissioners , I would like to say for the record that the Commission has several reservations with regard to any wording that could interfere with its right of initiative , as set out in the Treaty .
Therefore , the acceptance of Amendment Nos 1 and 4 can in no event be taken to imply any restriction of this right of initiative , inasmuch as these measures were already set out in our own work programme .
In the specific context of this issue , the Commission therefore accepts the amendments and confirms its will to put forward these proposals , whilst underlining the fact that this was already set out in our own timetable and pointing out that in no way can this be considered as any kind of restriction of our right of initiative , as set out in the Treaties .
The Commission can fully support the other amendments .
Many of these improve the text of the common position or clarify its content .
The Commission can also unreservedly support those amendments which increase the powers of the executive director and the provisions that aim to facilitate his or her appointment .
We can accept the amendments that aim to strengthen the Agency 's autonomy , specifically Amendments Nos 9 and 11 , and it seems completely reasonable that the Commission , not having the necessary technical knowledge , should not change the content of technical standards without the prior cooperation of the Agency .
These amendments have been written in such a way that Commission 's right of initiative is preserved , for which I would like to thank Parliament .
Parliament , exercising its role as the budgetary authority , wanted to introduce an amendment , No 2 , in which it calls for the establishment of common rules with regard to financial or other contributions that States often contribute in order that agencies may be set up in their own territories .
The Commission does not object to this .
Finally , Parliament also wanted to send a clear political signal by means of Amendment No 16 , whose objective is to limit the period during which both Community and National certification systems can function .
The Commission considers that Parliament 's arguments are justified , and for this reason , we can accept this amendment .
Lastly , with regard to Amendment No 15 , Recital D , the Commission , like the Council and the rapporteur , understands - and I would like to stress this issue - that access to these locations must be strictly necessary and not indiscriminate .
I believe that with this in mind this issue can be settled .
Developments on this issue mean that we can expect the Regulation to be quickly approved and I would once again like to congratulate the rapporteur on his excellent work and Parliament as a whole for its approval , like the Council , foregoing the need to resort to conciliation .
Thank you , Commissioner .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place in a few minutes , at 12 noon .
The sitting is adjourned until Question Time .
This morning in London the funeral takes place of Queen Elizabeth , the Queen Mother , a woman whose century of service to Britain during Europe 's most turbulent century has won for her a very special affection in the hearts of the British people .
I ask you , colleagues , as a mark of respect for the deceased Queen Mother , to observe one minute 's silence .
( Members rose and observed one minute 's silence )
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I take the floor only in order to point out a small textual error that has crept in during the proceedings .
It is in Amendment No 15 ( 1 ) ( d ) .
The word ' relevant ' needs to be inserted before the word ' premises ' .
There are different versions of the text ; in some of them the word is completely absent , whilst in others it has become ' any ' .
I therefore ask for it to be corrected to read : ' relevant premises , land , or means of transport . '
Would the linguistic services please correct the text as requested by the rapporteur .
I now call upon the Commission to inform us of its position on the amendments .
Mr President , I thank the rapporteur for his clarification , which I had also indicated in my speech .
In other words , we accept all of the amendments except for No 29 .
In this way we hope to maintain the interinstitutional agreement , which will therefore allow us to approve the European Aviation Safety Agency .
Mr President , before we vote on this particular report , I think that it is important that Members are aware of the legal advice given by our own legal services , which was not available when we voted in committee .
This makes it quite clear that certain aspects of this report fall outside the scope of the Community 's responsibilities referred to in Article 175 .
The good news is that voting for Amendment 28 will solve all those problems .
Mr President , I should like to draw your attention to the following . In the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy , the amendments adopted today - with thanks to the plenary - have been adopted by the European Commission .
Yesterday , at the end of the debate , the European Commission said that it refused to be responsible for five or six amendments .
The way in which this was done at the end of yesterday 's debate is objectionable in my view .
Why ?
Because only the rapporteur is informed about the reasons why legally correct amendments are not adopted after all .
I therefore take the view that the Commission should justify its behaviour .
We cannot tolerate things being done one way one day and a different way the next for no apparent reason .
Additionally , the Commission should , in my view , reconsider the amendments that have now been adopted in a letter , and all my fellow MEPs should receive a copy of what should actually have been said in the debate .
Thank you very much .
A representative of the Commission is here and has heard your speech , Mrs Oomen-Ruijten .
I hope she will be able to respond to your comments .
Report ( A5-0047 / 2002 ) by Mr Deprez , on behalf of the Committee on Citizens ' Freedoms and Rights , Justice and Home Affairs , on the d raft Council decision concerning security in connection with football matches with an international dimension [ 12175 / 1 / 2001 - C5-0067 / 2002 - 2001 / 0824 ( CNS ) ]
( Parliament adopted the legislative resolution )
Report ( A5-0036 / 2002 ) by Mr Kirkhope , on behalf of the Committee on Citizens ' Freedoms and Rights , Justice and Home Affairs , on the i nitiative of the Kingdom of the Netherlands with a view to the adoption of a Council decision setting up a European network of contact points in respect of persons responsible for genocide , crimes against humanity and war crimes [ 11658 / 2001 - C5-0499 / 2001 - 2001 / 0826 ( CNS ) ]
( Parliament adopted the legislative resolution )
Report ( A5-0082 / 2002 ) by Mr Coelho , on behalf of the Committee on Citizens ' Freedoms and Rights , Justice and Home Affairs , on the p roposal for a Council decision establishing a framework programme on the basis of Title VI of the Treaty on European Union - Police and judicial cooperation in criminal matters [ COM ( 2001 ) 646 - C5-0694 / 2001 - 2001 / 0262 ( CNS ) ]
( Parliament adopted the legislative resolution )
Report ( A5-0080 / 2002 ) by Mr Di Lello Finuoli , on behalf of the Committee on Citizens ' Freedoms and Rights , Justice and Home Affairs , on the d raft Framework decision on the protection of the environment through criminal law [ 15525 / 2001 - C5-0022 / 2002 - 2000 / 0801 ( CNS ) ]
( Parliament adopted the legislative resolution )
Report ( A5-0085 / 2002 ) by Mr Oostlander , on behalf of the Committee on Citizens ' Freedoms and Rights , Justice and Home Affairs , on the p roposal for a Council decision adopting an action programme for administrative cooperation in the fields of external borders , visas , asylum and immigration ( ARGO ) [ COM ( 2001 ) 567 - C5-0553 / 2001 - 2001 / 0230 ( CNS ) ]
( Parliament adopted the legislative resolution )
Report ( A5-0081 / 2002 ) by Mr Marinho , on behalf of the Committee on Citizens ' Freedoms and Rights , Justice and Home Affairs , on the p roposal for a Council regulation establishing the criteria and mechanisms for determining the Member State responsible for examining an asylum application lodged in one of the Member States by a third-country national [ COM ( 2001 ) 447 - C5-0403 / 2001 - 2001 / 0182 ( CNS ) ]
( Parliament adopted the legislative resolution )
Report ( A5-0078 / 2002 ) by Mr von Boetticher , on behalf of the Committee on Citizens ' Freedoms and Rights , Justice and Home Affairs , on the initiative of the Kingdom of Belgium , the Kingdom of Spain and the French Republic with a view to the adoption by the Council of a Decision amending Article 40 ( 1 ) and ( 7 ) of the Convention implementing the Schengen Agreement of 14 June 1985 on the gradual abolition of checks at the common borders [ 11896 / 2001 - C5-0563 / 2001 - 2001 / 0828 ( CNS ) ]
( Parliament adopted the legislative resolution )
EXPLANATIONS OF VOTE
Schmitt report ( A5-0093 / 2002 )
Ebner ( PPE-DE ) .
( IT ) Mr President , I voted for the Schmitt report because I consider it to be an extremely important report .
Indeed , both security and environmental protection are issues which should be taken even more seriously and supported for they are of paramount importance .
I have , on many occasions in the past , asked questions and spoken about both imposing a tax on kerosene and a single air space control system .
I hope that these initiatives , supported by other Members too , will have more impact on the Commission 's work and the contribution made by the Members of Parliament and the responsible committees .
I hope that this road we have taken will be pursued with all speed .
Mr President , last night I was in Strasbourg , as many of us were .
I was with a Member of Parliament , whom I will not mention by name - it starts with an S - and two beautiful European Parliament officials , whom I will not name either - V and T - one blond and the other brunette , and we gazed at the starry sky of Strasbourg and tried to pick out the constellations .
You will not believe this , Mr President , but at one point , the Member who was with me said : ' What a beautiful starry sky !
How can we bear not to protect the environment through criminal law too and preserve the beauty of nature for ever ?
Tomorrow , therefore , we must vote for this document . '
President .
Thank you , Mr Fatuzzo , for your indirect quotation of the great Kant .
Mr President , I voted in favour of Mrs Oomen-Ruijten 's report , although Austria was originally opposed to a directive .
I really would like to thank the rapporteur .
I welcome her work , by means of which a most effective option has been put in our hands , partly through Article 2 's listing of all offences .
Another reason for me to vote in favour of it was that the Commission had declared in its document , albeit without binding itself , that it would consider preparing legislation that provided for sanctions under criminal law on illicit activities in connection with nuclear materials .
If there is any real threat not only to the environment but also to human beings , it is that posed by atomic waste .
I think it simply ridiculous that we have a whole list of offences without a single sanction being provided under criminal law for deliberate or even negligent acts and damage in the nuclear domain .
I strongly urge the Commission , which is now no longer present , to submit a directive on this as soon as possible , and I will be repeating this call in a question .
Mr President , dear friends , I believe that Mrs Oomen-Ruijten 's thoughts about the directive are correct , but I must vote against certain points in the report because they deal far too carelessly with the principle of subsidiarity .
The most serious objection is to Amendments Nos 19 and 27 , which the Commission too is unable to accept .
I believe that all actions which are to be criminalised should be mentioned specifically .
To approve the directive without stating explicitly which actions are to be punishable is incompatible with the principle of legality to which my political group and myself subscribe .
We must be more careful with the principle of legality where this matter is concerned .
Not even the environment can justify carelessness in deciding what is or is not criminal behaviour .
Otherwise , the report is excellent .
We Swedish Social Democrats abstained in the vote on the modified proposal and the legislative resolution .
We believe there is a need to create a common penal platform when it comes to the fight against environmental crime , and we are sympathetic to framework decisions in this area .
However , we have doubts about issuing a directive in this area , for there is no legal basis for imposing upon the Member States an obligation , within the framework of the first pillar , to introduce penal sanctions for breaches of environmental legislation .
As matters stand , there are no provisions in the Treaty establishing the European Community which confer such powers upon the Community .
I voted against the Oomen-Ruijten report which supports the Commission 's ambition to include , in the list of Community responsibilities in the area of environmental protection , the definition of the principle of criminal sanctions against offenders .
As I said in yesterday 's debate , we must instead support the Danish Presidency 's wise initiative which urges Member States to impose stiffer penalties in this area . The initiative allows us to remain within an intergovernmental framework and this aspect of criminal law will remain one of the national responsibilities .
In fact , the Oomen-Ruitjen report and the Commission 's proposal that it supports demonstrate how , through a short-sighted approach , where each stage seems to be the natural consequence of the previous one , but where the whole picture is not taken into account , Europe is gradually sliding towards a model that seeks to make everything increasingly uniform .
In reality , no one desires the ultimate consequences of this model , in which the nations would cease to exist .
In each specific matter and in each small step that we must take , however , the solution advocating uniformity is always put forward as the most rational .
This is how practical Europe is gradually diverging from the Europe of intentions , making people more uneasy .
- ( DA ) It is a sad fact that , to the detriment of the environment , environmental legislation is not satisfactorily complied with in the Member States .
The sanctions applied at present are inadequate and should therefore be extended .
If we have nonetheless voted today against the two reports on protection of the environment through criminal law , it is because we want this extension of sanctions and environmental protection to take place through an approximation of the penal regulations under the third pillar .
We wish to support the Danish initiative in the Council and to reject the Commission 's proposal for a directive , together with the ' unionisation ' of criminal law under the first pillar .
. I fully support the move to deal more effectively with the outstanding problem of pollution .
Indeed , calls to allow Member States to equate breaches of EU environmental law with a criminal offence will give a strong and positive signal that the EU is a serious player in the environmental domain .
By listing environmental crimes and a corresponding list of sanctions , the Commission draft directive provides a concrete means by which Member States will be able to enforce environmental law in symmetry , since at present , EU environmental policy is implemented in an ad hoc and asymmetric fashion .
Lastly , by adopting this directive , the EU will reinforce and bolster the explicit signal that it gave when signing up to the Kyoto protocol : that it is a responsible and key world player in the environmental domain .
Security in connection with football matches with an international dimension : my support for this report is so great - and how could it be otherwise - that , to promote it , I am organising a football match between unmarried Members of the European Parliament and married Members ; the referee will , of course , be Mr Gérard Deprez .
Moreover , in the interests of male-female equality , I am also going to organise a football match between female married and single Members of the European Parliament .
I propose that Mrs Lulling should be the referee and that you , Mr President , should kick off .
All those who wish to participate , please contact me at this email address : CFatuzzo @ europarl.eu.int.
If you give me the ball to kick off , I am sure I will not stop until I score a goal !
Mr President , I proposed two amendments to this report .
One - Amendment No 20 - unfortunately failed to get through . I am pleased that Amendment No 21 did .
The first amendment was to make sure that national information centres or relevant authorities or police forces , if offered information , would agree to their use in legal proceedings in the Member State where the football fan was arrested .
I tabled this because Mark Forrester , my constituent , was convicted in Belgium after the Euro 2000 match , even though the British Intelligence Service offered video evidence to the Belgian authorities showing him walking away from the problems and the violence .
That is why I tabled this amendment and indeed voted for it .
Unfortunately the Belgian authorities refused to use that .
I was hoping that this report would lay down a marker to say that the authorities ought to be able to use information given by national information centres to other Member States .
That would allow us to clamp down on real football hooligans ; football fans who are innocent would not be caught in a trap .
. Due to the incompetence of Air France , I did not arrive in Strasbourg in time to speak as scheduled in the debate on international football issues last night and am grateful to my colleague Neil MacCormick for stepping in at short notice .
The scourge of violence - often organised violence - has plagued international football for years .
Initiatives aimed at increasing cooperation between authorities in different Member States are to be welcomed as a vital tool in the battle against hooliganism .
I voted for amendments initiated by the European Free Alliance Members , drawing attention to the fact that in at least one Member State there exists more than one national football team .
My own country , for example , is represented by an international team despite the fact that Scotland is not yet an independent Member State , and Scotland 's supporters have for years had an unparalleled reputation for their good behaviour and good humour .
My Group 's amendments give recognition to the distinctive footballing histories of Scotland , Wales , Northern Ireland and England , and simply recognise the reality that the UK has no single ' national ' team .
The Deprez report is supposedly intended to deal with the problem of violence at international football matches .
And we say supposedly because the only proposal which either the report or the European Union Council has to make is that the Member States should be required to set up national football information points , that is , ' information points of a police nature ' , responsible for collecting , storing , processing , analysing and exchanging information on types of fans , both dangerous fans and fans in general .
This attempt to deal with the problem by using the police to suppress violence at football matches is merely an excuse for trampling the personal and democratic rights and freedoms of the citizens of the ? U underfoot .
The increase in violent clashes at national and international sporting events is not due to a lack of information networks or adequate suppression mechanisms ; it is due to the commercialisation of sport , the huge financial interests tied up in it , the misleading fanatical ' sports ' culture being fostered ( hooliganism ) and the increase in violent behaviour , especially among the young .
In other words , it is caused by situations which derive from the very nature of the capitalist system and neither the Council nor the European Parliament texts under debate makes any reference whatsoever to these serious issues .
That is why the MEPs of the Communist Party of Greece voted against the report .
. I fully support the move to create a European network of permanent national football information points .
Such a common-sense and workable solution to the problems of football crime and disorder is long overdue .
Until recently , Member States have had to contend with and fight against such problems in virtual isolation .
Co-operation in this domain is a positive way to limit the negative effects that a few hooligans have on the game .
In order that co-operation is as close as possible , there must be an exchange of personal data of those few who pose a threat to security .
This does not pose a threat to individual privacy , but it does represent a boost to enhanced security at football matches .
We are discussing the report on the European network of contact points in respect of persons responsible for genocide , crimes against humanity and war crimes .
On Friday afternoon and Saturday morning last , I was invited to take part , and duly did so , in the Congress of the Transnational Radical Party in Geneva .
Moreover , I have also applied to join this party and been accepted as a member .
Since the principal , most important aim of this inter-party organisation is to combat all forms of violence in the style of Ghandi , in a non-violent manner , I thought it advisable to ask Mr Cappato , Mr Dupuis and Mr Dell 'Alba , who were also at the Congress as leaders of this Transnational Radical Party , for advice on how to vote regarding this directive combating violence .

They assured me that I should vote for the motion , and I have therefore done so with pleasure .
Mr President , this speech is very revealing : it indicates , first and foremost , the Transnational Radical Party 's capacity for expansion , its strength in being able to make its voice heard in plenary too at a time when , as you know , we are fighting for the rights of the Unattached Members .
Well then , it is good to hear a voice raised in the explanations of vote on behalf of the Radical Party too .
Secondly , to mark the entrance of Mr Fatuzzo into the party , he and I agreed during a meeting in which various different subjects were covered , although no recommendations were made regarding votes - for each person has the right to vote as he thinks best , of course - to vote for this resolution .
This was done in a totally democratic way and no attempt was made to bind Mr Fatuzzo to voting recommendations made by the party .
Of our own free will , therefore , we all voted for this major text which represents a step forward towards the impending creation of the International Criminal Court , to be announced in two days ' time by the UN Secretary General , Mr Kofi Annan , in Rome itself .
. Within the 15 Member States of the EU a new framework has been put in place to fight organised crime following the entry into force of the Treaty of Amsterdam .
This provides a mechanism for developing closer co-operation in the fields of police and judicial activities in the areas of criminal law .
Equally , it remains the preserve of the 15 Member States of the EU to maintain law and order within their own countries while safeguarding their internal security .
Parallel to the endorsement of the Amsterdam Treaty , the European Council has also launched two individual programmes to combat organised crime aimed at overcoming disparities in national procedures and establishing more efficient judicial co-operation .
The conclusions of the Tampere European Council certainly present strong political support for reaffirming the Union 's wish to overcome difficulties with regard to prosecuting all forms of cross-border crime .
I fully support the prosecution of such crime while ensuring that the freedoms and legal rights of individuals are protected .
Certainly one of the key results of this new broader EU policy has been the broadening of powers to Europol .
Europol has become fully operational since July 1999 , and since 1 January 2002 Europol can deal now with combating broad-ranging types of serious international crime .
This includes areas such as drug-trafficking , crimes involving illegal immigration networks , illicit vehicle trafficking , the traffic in human beings , forgery of monies , the illicit trafficking in radioactive nuclear substances , anti-terrorism measures and illegal money laundering activities .
( Abbreviated pursuant to Rule 137 of the Rules of Procedure )

I congratulate Mr Di Lello Finuoli on his report , which he has infused with his expertise as a leading lawyer to provide useful recommendations regarding the Council framework decision , which , once again , is on the protection of the environment through criminal law .
Although I voted for the motion , I do personally feel that more tangible results might be achieved in the fight against environmental crime and against the harm done to the environment by fining those huge industrial companies which do so much damage to our environment in many parts of the European Union thousands or many millions of euro rather than imposing short jail sentences - which might even be quite happy , pleasant experiences .
The conflict between the Commission 's directive and the Council 's framework decision over ' penalising ' Article 174 of the Treaty gives rise to the question : who does what in Europe ?
While the Convention is examining the division of competences between the EU and the Member States , this draft text requires Community law to be extended beyond the letter of the Treaties .
Until 2004 , we should apply a precautionary principle in institutional matters .
Do we need to make environmental crime part of the Community acquis , declaring that we have a better chance of achieving this objective at Union level ?
Within the framework of the Treaty of Amsterdam , this issue falls under the third pillar ( judicial cooperation in criminal matters ) .
To aim to punish all violations of environmental legislation is an unrealistic objective intended to meet the demands expressed by a few ecological lobbies which are powerful but are not representative .
Furthermore , I do not support the option advocated in the report by Mr Di Lello Finuoli , when he urges the Council to refrain from taking any action on environmental criminal law before the draft Directive on the protection of the environment is adopted .
Each Member State must be able , under its domestic legislation , to define those violations that are set out in the framework decision as criminal violations .
It is appropriate to punish some violations , provided that only the most serious are punished and that they are cross-border in nature .
This battle must , in the main , be fought at international level .
( Explanation of vote cut short pursuant to Rule 137 ( 1 ) of the Rules of Procedure )
- ( DA ) It is a sad fact that , to the detriment of the environment , environmental legislation is not satisfactorily complied with in the Member States .
The sanctions at present applied are inadequate and should therefore be extended .
If we have nonetheless voted today against the two reports on protection of the environment through criminal law , it is because we want this extension of sanctions and environmental protection to take place through an approximation of the penal regulations under the third pillar .
We wish to support the Danish initiative in the Council and to reject the Commission 's proposal for a directive , together with the ' unionisation ' of criminal law under the first pillar .
In her minority opinion , Mrs Ilka Schröder exclaims : ' Tear down the barricades at the frontiers ! Support refugees !
Support total freedom of movement for all ! ' , calling , in essence , for borders to be opened to all .
I do not agree with this , Mr President , and I have to say that , while I was thinking about this report last night , I dreamt of Mrs Schröder : her father would leave the house after drawing his salary and , meeting many poor people who certainly needed his help , would give to one , then to another and then to a third , all the salary he had earned through a month 's work .
However , when he got home , his family had absolutely nothing to eat and nothing to live on for a whole week .
Then , still in my dream , Mrs Schröder - like Mrs Roth-Behrendt in another famous dream of mine - said to me : ' Vote against my recommendations ; in other words , vote for this report .
It is certainly right to think of others , but the others include ourselves ! '
The ARGO programme is a good programme , which is designed to promote cooperation between the national administrations in the implementation of common regulations in monitoring external borders , visas , asylum and immigration .
It does not focus on the definition of this policy - a subject on which we could voice a great deal of criticism - but instead focuses solely on training the national administrations to carry out efficient , objective and , of course , entirely desirable work .
We have two reservations , however , which led us to vote against the Oostlander report .
The ARGO programme is organised by means of a partnership between the Commission and the Member States , but this partnership does not seem to be balanced .
For example , although the actions to be taken are proposed by the national administrations , the Commission alone has the right to choose which actions are retained , after having simply consulted a committee made up of national representatives .
The European Parliament 's amendments have further strengthened the prerogatives of the Commission , more than the Commission itself wanted .
An amendment was adopted which calls for refugee status to be granted to people who have been subject to ' both state and non-state persecution ' .
This extremely vague wording would open the asylum door to a whole crowd of new immigrants .
We must , of course , reject this type of irresponsible measure , which , moreover , bears no relation to the original subject of the report .
- ( DA ) I have today in the European Parliament voted in favour of the European Parliament 's report on an action programme for administrative cooperation in the fields of external borders , visas , asylum and immigration .
I am nonetheless aware of the fact that the proposal concerns an area covered by Title IV of the Treaty establishing the European Community and does not apply to Denmark , cf. the Protocol on Denmark 's position .
Mr Marinho has drawn up a report on a regulation on the examination of asylum applications lodged in a Member State by a citizen of a third country .
This report is extremely important - and I support it , for this is Europe - but I would like these documents to be examined more carefully and the reasons why so many third-country citizens want to enter the European Union to be ascertained too , for it can happen that some of them are not , so to speak , quite appropriate .
For example , I seem to remember that , in African countries , in developing countries of the Far East and also in countries near to us , preparations are being made to send elderly people to apply to enter Italy because there they will receive a million lire per month , providing they are over 65 years old , once their asylum application has been accepted .
I am certainly in favour of helping all citizens throughout the world , but I do feel that we need to examine the reasons motivating people to come to our States , in other words to ascertain whether they come to exploit laws which are particularly favourable to them or to seek work , thereby increasing our States ' production .
When it came to Mr Marinho 's report on rules for determining the Member State responsible for examining an asylum application , we Swedish Social Democrats voted against Amendment No 13 and abstained from voting where Amendments Nos 14 , 15 and 24 were concerned .
Amendment No 13 from the Group of the European Liberal , Democrat and Reform Party proposes that asylum seekers should have their applications examined in those countries in which their family members have already sought asylum or been granted residence permits .
We wish to state that we advocate family reunification and believe that asylum seekers from the same family should be allowed to come to the same Member State .
However , to extend this principle - as in Amendment No 13 , as we understand it - to include family members who are already in the country for other reasons could have far-reaching consequences , for it could cover all kinds of lawful reasons for having been granted a residence permit , for example in connection with studying .
Such a system would also militate against harmonisation of the ways in which refugees are received .
Contrary to the proposals by the Commission and by the Committee on Citizens ' Freedoms and Rights , Justice and Home Affairs , Amendments Nos 14 , 15 and 24 propose that appeals against decisions concerning which country should examine an asylum application should have a suspensive effect on the transfer of refugees from one Member State to another .
We believe that a suspensive effect is only acceptable in special cases .
We therefore abstained from voting where these amendments were concerned .
We are today examining a proposal for a Council regulation establishing the criteria and mechanisms for determining the Member State responsible for examining an asylum application .
The regulation takes over the existing provisions of the Dublin Convention and improves upon them .
This receives our approval , because it is the result of a rigorous approach , where the Commission worked in close collaboration with national experts .
The fundamental principle has been maintained , whereby the Member State of first entry is responsible for processing the asylum application , but an additional principle has been added : each Member State is answerable to all the others for its actions concerning the entry and residence of third-country nationals and should , in a spirit of solidarity and responsibility , assume the consequences thereof .
For example , when illegal immigrants apply for asylum in a Member State although they have previously stayed illegally in another , the latter must process the asylum application and it cannot shirk from this responsibility .
These provisions will obviously be applied in the case of France , which is allowing illegal immigrants to gather in Sangatte and the surrounding area , immigrants who then attempt to apply for asylum in Great Britain .
Several amendments to this proposal for a regulation were tabled by the highly active group of pro-immigration MEPs of the extreme Left .
The majority was fortunately rejected .
Some questionable amendments were adopted however , which explains why we had reservations with regard to the Marinho report .
. My Labour colleagues and I have voted for Amendments Nos 13 and 24 to Article 20 and Amendment No 15 to Article 21 of the Marinho report .
These amendments ensure that decisions on transfers of asylum seekers will have suspensive effect .
Without this right , asylum seekers could be shuffled between Member States whilst the outcome of their appeal is pending .
.
Earlier today I voted against Mr Marinho 's report on the proposal for a Council regulation to determine which Member State will be responsible for processing asylum applications lodged by third-country nationals .
I believe strongly that the UK , as an island , occupies a unique position within the EU .
We have always been responsible for our own policy decision-making on asylum applications and illegal immigrants and we should continue to do so .
Flaunting of the Geneva Convention , as we see on a daily basis at present , is shameful .
As and when this Council regulation is imposed , will it improve the situation or will France continue to play wing three-quarters with its illegal immigrants ?
- ( DA ) I have today in the European Parliament voted in favour of the European Parliament 's report on examining an asylum application .
I am nonetheless aware of the fact that the proposal concerns an area covered by Title IV of the Treaty establishing the European Community and does not apply to Denmark , cf. the Protocol on Denmark 's position .
We have abstained from voting on Amendment No 16 in order to support Amendment No 12 from our own group instead .
We support the idea that registered partners should also be counted as family members but believe that this is provided for within the concept of ' unmarried partners ' .
We should also like to see more Member States change their legislation so that it recognises registered partnerships for homosexuals and the circumstances in which they cohabit .
In applying the definition of family members , it is important however that the principle of subsidiarity should prevail .
It is not appropriate for the European Parliament and the Council to change the Member States ' family legislation by means of a directive concerning asylum policy .
In Amendment No 12 , we have therefore proposed that partners of the same sex should be recognised as family members if legislation or practice in the Member State that receives them entails unmarried couples , same-sex couples and married couples being treated in the same way .
The proposal for a regulation will suffer from the same weaknesses as the Dublin Convention since the basic principles are , fundamentally , identical .
The greatest burden is now placed upon the countries of the east and south , which must receive the highest numbers of people applying for asylum .
The report makes some progress , however , and puts forward some positive points that must not be dismissed and that is why we voted in its favour .
A single Member State is responsible for the asylum application , the concern for family unity is given greater importance , and the personal details of asylum applicants and the members of their families are still relatively protected .
Replacing the Convention with a regulation is therefore subject to interpretation by the Court of Justice and monitoring by the Court and by the Commission , is a further step towards achieving an area of freedom , security and justice .
Mr President , with the phasing-out of controls at common borders , this report includes provisions which will make it easier for citizens to be followed by the police when they cross the Union 's internal borders .
I therefore intended to vote for the motion but I was assailed by a doubt .
Still last night , I dreamt that I was in Paris at the Lido , having dinner with a beautiful women , the woman of my dreams , and while I was watching the Bluebells dance , I saw two strangely hairy legs waving about : they were so hairy - they belonged to Mr von Boetticher - that I had quite a shock and I realised that he was a policeman following me , hired by my wife to find out whether I was here at the European Parliament or in Paris at the Lido watching the Folies Bergères or the Bluebells dance .
Well then , in the end , Mr President , I decided to abstain in the vote , to avoid such situations , which are probably beyond the objectives of the report .
We abstained from voting on the von Boetticher report on the changes to the cross-border surveillance procedure ( Article 40 of the Convention implementing the Schengen Agreement of 14 June 1985 ) as it has a tendency , as I said in yesterday 's debate , to transform the right of pursuit in the area of surveillance into a more extensive right to intervene , which may mean that responsibilities become more confused in a Europe that has no internal borders .
Furthermore , the text also has a tendency to transform cross-border surveillance into a sort of isolated stopgap measure to compensate for the shortcomings of the police in some Member States , on whose territory their neighbours could intervene more easily .
The European Parliament 's explanatory statement contains some surprising comments published by the German Ministry of the Interior and I quote , word for word : ' One neighbouring Member State continues frequently to insist on the handover of surveillance at the border .
Problems arise because , by virtue of restrictive national provisions on working hours , after a certain period of surveillance the surveillance units halt the surveillance and / or do not resume it the following day because of manpower shortages ' .
I hope that the name of this mysterious Member State neighbouring Germany does not begin with the letter ' F ' .
Whatever the case , the problem cannot be resolved by greater police intervention in the Member States .
- ( SV ) We have voted in favour of the report on checks at the common borders but have certain reservations concerning Amendment No 4 through which the police would , in certain circumstances , be given the ability to carry out identity checks and provisionally arrest people in the territory of another Member State .
We also wish to highlight Amendment No 1 , which would give the police from another Member State the right to continue surveillance if the receiving Member State were not in a position to do the same .
The national police force 's monopoly on the use of force is a basic rule in a democratic society .
As is also stated in the Schengen Convention , police should only have the power to take action in another Member State in very special circumstances .
Giving foreign police the right to take over surveillance or make arrests in another Member State obviously means that the work concerned can be done more efficiently .
At the same time , it is important to point out that , when it comes to action taken by foreign police , the legislation of the receiving Member State reigns supreme .
The regulations and traditions of the Member States vary , especially where procedures for identity checks and arrests are concerned , and they should not be subject to harmonisation .
It must be ensured that the right of the police to carry out surveillance of suspected criminals outside the police 's own Member State is not abused and that local legislation and regulations are fully complied with .
There must also be guarantees that all the requirements of the Schengen Convention are observed in their entirety before foreign police take action in another Member State .
That concludes voting time .
Mr President , this House has this morning approved the Minutes of yesterday 's sitting .
There is a contradiction between what was approved this morning and the verbatim report of proceedings for yesterday .
In the Minutes we approved this morning , in the part concerning my words yesterday , at the end of the paragraph it says that " the President cut him off , pointing out that this matter had already been raised " .
In the first place , what I mentioned was not raised by the President .
But in the verbatim report there is no mention of how I was interrupted .
I would like the verbatim report to include the words : " The President cut him off " .
This is not a minor point .
The President stopped me exercising my right of free speech .
He was nervous when I mentioned that one man was killed by the Guardia Civil .
I was trying to explain what had happened .
I was not able to do that .
For the future , I expect and hope that this House will respect the right of every MEP to free speech and that situations such as yesterday 's will never happen again .
I would ask Vice-President Dimitrakopoulos to accept that he acts in an indelicate and partisan manner as a Member of the PPE Group of this Parliament .
Mr Gorostiaga Atxalandabaso , I have just two things to say .
Firstly , I consider that my fellow Member , Mr Dimitrakopoulos behaved entirely correctly , clearly respecting all the Rules of Procedure .
Secondly , we will , of course , endeavour to make the text of the Minutes consistent with the verbatim report so that both say exactly the same thing .
( The sitting was suspended at 1 p.m. and resumed at 3.05 p.m. )

The next item is the joint debate on the Council statement on defence policy , including EU / NATO relations and the following two oral questions :
O-0089 / 01 - B5-0012 / 02 to the Council by Elmar Brok , on behalf of the Committee on Foreign Affairs , Human Rights , Common Security and Defence Policy , on European armaments policy ;
O-0090 / 01 - B5-0013 / 02 to the Commission by Elmar Brok , on behalf of the Committee on Foreign Affairs , Human Rights , Common Security and Defence Policy , on European defence-related industry .
I am very pleased this afternoon that we are joined by a Defence Minister from the presidency .
In plenary session that represents a precedent .
This is the first time in the European Parliament that the emerging policy and politics of European security and defence has had a debate led by a Defence Minister .
That is an important contribution .
I want to thank the Minister of the Council .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I would like firstly to express my enormous personal satisfaction and that of the Spanish Government at this first appearance , as has been highlighted by the President , which , furthermore , if you will allow me , is for me a re-acquaintance with the parliamentary world .
I had the honour of presiding over the Spanish Parliament - the Spanish Cortes Generales - during the last legislature as President of Congress and my true and definitive political vocation is a parliamentary one .
Consequently , it has also been an honour for me to have the opportunity to receive the Chairmen of the Defence Committees of the Parliaments of the fifteen countries of Europe , together with the representatives of the European Parliament and the Parliamentary Assembly of the WEU , in order to deal , quite rightly , with the objectives of the Spanish Presidency of the Union during this six-month period , which I also explained in this Parliament 's Committee on External Affairs , Human Rights , Common Security and Defence Policy on 18 February .
I would like to start by describing the form my speech will take : I would firstly like to briefly point out the precedents and principles which inspire the European security and defence policy and then move on to an analysis of the objectives of the Spanish Presidency in the three areas into which these objectives have been grouped .
The operational dimension , the institutional dimension , and equally importantly , the dimension relating to all the issues of concern to public opinion , both national and European .
To start with the precedents , I must point out that our real mandate , following the Saint-Malo meeting , started in December 1999 in Helsinki when it was decided to create a European rapid reaction force , which would consist of at least 60 000 troops deployable within two months and for at least one year and including logistical support and air , sea and land resources for carrying out the missions we have christened ' Petersberg tasks ' , in a reference to the famous palace near Bonn where they were analysed , and which are basically the maintenance or enforcement of peace and rescue and humanitarian missions , which will have to be created by 2003 .
Therefore , since the beginning of 2000 , in just two years , we have largely been able to implement this main objective in such a way that , following the Portuguese and French Presidencies , bodies were created which were initially transitional and which are now permanent , and a catalogue of military capabilities has been created , which has since been updated and to which the contributions of six aspiring countries have been incorporated and which was revised by the previous Belgian Presidency , whose work I am grateful for .
The military objective slowed down somewhat during the Swedish Presidency , although that Presidency did make good use of its time to develop civil crisis procedures and management bodies .
As you know , the Laeken European Council declared this rapid reaction force operable , but I must say frankly that this operability is for the moment more virtual than real , and this means that the Spanish Presidency 's mandate is even more urgent following the events of 11 September .
I would now like to briefly indicate the principles and firstly point out , as this House knows very well , the intergovernmental nature of the area we are dealing with from which , furthermore , stems the principle of voluntarism , the direct link to the European Council and the sui generis organisation of this area , which includes the High Commissioner and the Secretary-General , who will subsequently have the opportunity to speak to this House concerning another area , the PSC , the Military Committee and the European Military Staff .
The second principle is that of mission speciality .
Ladies and gentlemen , I believe that this principle of speciality must be understood as a principle of evaluation , and I therefore repeat that we are talking exclusively about military missions for the carrying out of Petersberg tasks , humanitarian peace enforcement or peacekeeping missions , or rescue missions .
Hence one of the difficulties , Mr President , in including the contribution of European military capabilities to defending against external terrorism , when necessary , which is connected to the main priority of the Spanish Presidency , which is the fight against terrorism and which , nevertheless , in the current state of development of our missions as a result of the principle of evaluation , we cannot undertake without a prior Council declaration which I will refer to later if there is time .
The third principle is that of subsidiarity , obviously not in the traditional sense understood by this House and by all European law , the former Community law , but simply in the sense that our tasks as Europeans in the Europe of the security and defence policy are subsidiary to national defence , which corresponds - since it still forms part of that core , previously a hard core , of sovereignty - to national governments .
It is undoubtedly also subsidiary to collective defence , which for the majority of the countries of the Union is attributed to the Atlantic Alliance , so that our missions , in turn , are in this respect subsidiary to the collective defence which falls to the Atlantic Alliance , but are no less autonomous for that .
Therefore the fourth principle is the principle of complementarity , so that , by appropriately combining the structures of the Atlantic Alliance with those of the European Union , we can maintain those principles , which common sense suggests are absolutely essential in order that there be no duplication or redundancy of structures , planning or expenditure .
At the end of the day investments in defence are like the two sides of the same coin , as in the case of our common currency .
Please allow me now to refer , before listing the objectives of the Spanish Presidency , to the slogan chosen by this Presidency for this six-month period : as you know , ' more Europe ' , which applies both internally and externally .
More Europe internally means , in terms of the European security and defence policy , that the European citizens should acquire a greater awareness of the need for a common foreign and security policy .
More Europe externally means no more and no less than confronting an essential need .
Ladies and gentlemen , please believe me that I am expressing not only a personal opinion but also that of the Spanish Government when I say that the European security and defence policy is an essential need for the European Union .
If Europe wants to have a united presence in the world it is essential that it has a common security and defence policy .
The European Union cannot have credibility in the world without having its own united voice in the field of security and without that voice being accompanied and supported by military capabilities .
We have had the opportunity to witness this shortcoming .
I also believe , ladies and gentlemen , that neither is it feasible in the long term to have a common monetary policy if there is no European common foreign and security policy to support that currency .
As I said earlier , Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , we can group the objectives for these six months of the Spanish Presidency into the following three areas : operative or operational objectives , institutional objectives and objectives relating to public opinion .
Beginning with the operative objectives , which are clearly the most technical , I must tell Parliament that they were the main focus of the informal meeting I held with the my colleagues , the Defence Ministers of the Union , on 22 and 23 March in Zaragoza .
We have all decided to make the Headline Goal and its military capabilities our main priority .
And in this respect I must firstly point out that we are working on determining the immediate response elements for the possible carrying out of the Petersberg tasks agreed in Helsinki .
This need to determine the elements for immediate response also stems from the recently proven need to choose certain capabilities for the Headline Goal - its catalogue - so that there may be procedures to allow it to be mobilised immediately in the event of crisis .
We have not simply tried to construct a mini Headline Goal , nor to create a parallel Headline Goal , but to determine the procedures for selecting capabilities that would be available in the initial moments in order to confront a crisis more rapidly .
Secondly , we are promoting progress in the designation of a general operational headquarters .
To put it clearly , with the informality which is normal in a parliamentary debate , the Laeken Declaration on Operational Capability does not for the moment tell us where the general operational headquarters to lead a force commissioned to carry out a Petersberg task in a situation of crisis would be .
We still do not know , but neither do we know what the elements of that force which would have to be deployed in the initial moments would be .
Therefore , these two objectives are essential to making the Declaration on Operational Capability effective .
There are sufficient offers of general headquarters to determine what the immediate future of those general headquarters may be .
We need to ensure - and we have established the requirements - the corresponding multinationality of its structures and the harmonisation of its procedures and operation .
The Presidency will continue to promote lines of action for the work on this issue : developing normalised operational procedures which will govern the operation of future general headquarters and , secondly , also participating in the general headquarters panel which has been created within the European Action Plan that I will now refer to .
In fact , Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the Laeken Council approved a Belgian proposal , sponsored by the Netherlands , for an action plan for European military capabilities .
It is simply the working method for indicating the shortcomings of our catalogue and for providing the means to resolve that lack of capability .
By mobilising the Chiefs of Defence Staff of each of the Member States , the Spanish Presidency sought to determine what they saw as the most significant shortcomings in capability in the catalogue .
An answer was given in record time and seventeen panels of experts have been created and are now operating , and they are working on analysing solutions for the twenty-three priorities or shortcomings considered the most important .
For our part , we are making a cooperative effort to head four of these panels , which , by way of example , relate to attack helicopters , in-flight refuelling , air carrier capability and field hospitals .
We are also participating in eight other panels .
In Zaragoza , we held a preliminary exchange of views on the direction to take for the provision and funding of the new capabilities that are necessary as a result of the studies under way and original ideas for common funding have been put on the table , which we are studying and which perhaps I will also be able to explain in detail later on .
Furthermore , and in accordance with the permanent objective of transparency in our actions with regard to the Atlantic Alliance , the European Union group of experts known as the Headline Task Force is already operating and carrying out studies and is meeting frequently during our Presidency together with NATO experts , who will continue to support this process with full cooperation and transparency with the work of the Atlantic Alliance in order to develop its defence capability initiative .
In this field I must also mention the need for us to create a mechanism for developing capabilities which can clearly indicate at any time our situation in terms of European capabilities or lack thereof .
It must naturally be an autonomous European Union mechanism but at the same time , for our own benefit , it must draw on the positive experiences of the Atlantic Alliance .
There is no doubt that the greatest difficulty lies in the relationship with planning procedures of the Alliance forces in aspects such as the appropriate form and the tasks of the group of capabilities .
That no doubt brings us to an important , if not decisive , aspect , not just of our Presidency , but of the development of the European security and defence policy , which is the relationship between the European Union and the Atlantic Alliance , the development of the so-called Berlin Plus agreement , particularly in the chapter relating to the permanent access of the European Union during crisis management processes to NATO 's capabilities .
The Barcelona European Council stressed the importance of reaching and concluding permanent agreements between the European Union and NATO as soon as possible and has charged the Presidency and the Secretary-General , the High Representative , with making the necessary high-level contacts in order to make the negotiations a success .
Our Heads of State and Government have simply stated that we cannot go on delaying the creation of a permanent framework for cooperation with NATO and that ad hoc or case-by-case solutions could lead to situations of stalemate similar to those we have already seen and would harm the Union at the least appropriate time , at the point of implementing , for the first time , a crisis management operation , seriously jeopardising its present and future prestige .
Mr President , I will leave , in case there is greater interest on the part of the honourable Members , the examination of the assumption by the European Union of the leadership of certain missions , both in relation to the Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia , the continuation of the Amber Fox operation , and the assumption of certain responsibilities in Bosnia and Herzegovina , and it remains for me in this field to mention the importance of the CME 02 exercise , which will test our capacity for organisation by means of crisis management procedures in May .
It is going to take place during the Spanish Presidency and I can guarantee , ladies and gentlemen , that the difficulties which initially seemed insoluble are being overcome and also confirm to you that we will carry out this exercise not only on the date set but - I am sure - with success , giving an appropriate role to the various European Union institutions , such as the Military Committee , the Political and Security Committee , the Secretary-General , the High Representative , and the Chiefs of Staff .
I referred to a second area , Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , which is the institutional field .
In this regard I must point out that Spain , together with certain other countries , has promoted the need to create and formalise a Council of Defence Ministers .
Please understand , ladies and gentlemen , that this is not just a question of adding another Council to the European institutional galaxy ; it is simply a question of those of us who hold this responsibility being able to fulfil it , being able to work .
We neither want to replace nor interfere with the competences of the Foreign Ministers ; we simply want to do our work , to be able to deal with the problems I have referred to : the effectiveness of the Headline Goal and the possible deployment of Petersberg tasks .
To this end , the Council is of essential importance .
We have taken a first big step , because it has enjoyed full consensus , which is the meeting , under the umbrella of the General Affairs Council , of the Council of Defence Ministers , consisting solely of Defence Ministers , during May in Brussels .
Secondly , and within the institutional objectives , I will move on to discussing the bases for a European arms policy , which will also provide an answer to the questions and concerns of Mr Brok .
In reality , although very briefly mentioned in the Helsinki declaration , there had so far been no attempt to implement - or at least to establish the bases , to pave the way to - a European arms policy .
And we wanted to take this step in a decisive manner .
It is in no way a question of interfering with the European arms industry , which would not fall within our competence , but it is a question of setting the bases , the elemental principles , of a European arms policy .
Earlier I said that the European security and defence policy is absolutely essential to the Union , and an arms policy is also essential to any defence policy .
We have therefore prepared a kind of decalogue - the number of principles is of minimal importance at the end of the day - which achieves consensus on the broad principles that would govern a European arms policy .
This list is based on the notion that the European arms industry must be at the service of the CFSP and not the other way round - which may seem an obvious principle , but in reality quite the opposite is usually true - and that it must be based on the principles of voluntarism , transparency and coordination with other organisations .
Amongst the concrete measures envisaged we also incorporate the harmonisation of operative requirements , the common use of capabilities , the possible acquisition of those capabilities via a European arms agency , which unifies or at least coordinates the existing ones , the study of an accounting system more suited to reality , which facilitates the long-term funding of certain systems and also the search - as I said before - for new common funding formulas .
The need to define a methodology to deal in the medium and long term with the lack of capability identified in the Helsinki catalogue brings us to these principles of a European arms policy , which will be examined by the national arms directors of the various countries at a meeting organised by the Presidency for 29 April .
Finally , Mr President , I am coming to the end of the time available to me and , in trying to sum up aspects which are no less important but which are clearly not the essential priority , the operational aspects , please allow me to refer , in the seconds remaining to me , to those aspects which relate to the creation of an awareness of European defence amongst public opinion and to aspects connected to that awareness .
Ladies and gentlemen , we have witnessed events which require us to construct a legal acquis of humanitarian law for Petersberg tasks in the future .
When Spain made this proposal the events of 11 September had not yet taken place .
After 11 September , some months afterwards , certain events have demonstrated that it is absolutely essential for us to clarify the law applicable to crisis situations .
I am clearly referring to the treatment given to prisoners , the treatment of the civil population , the treatment of private property and the relationship with civil authorities in the implementation of these tasks .
We thought that this could be a road which starts in Salamanca , European Capital of Culture during these months , where many years ago , in the sixteenth century , the ius ad bellum and the ius in bello were born , and to that end we have also called a meeting in Salamanca in May , to which the representatives of all the countries of the Union and also third countries are of course invited , as well as the International Committee of the Red Cross .
Finally , Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the Spanish Presidency could not ignore the Mediterranean dimension of the CFSP .
As you know , a meeting has been scheduled for 22 and 23 April in Valencia , which is very timely .
We did not want the CFSP to be left out of this Mediterranean dimension and , to that end , we have also scheduled a seminar in Barcelona for 20 and 21 April on the Mediterranean dimension within our common security and defence policy .
It is simply a question of letting the southern Mediterranean countries know that the Headline Goal is not a threat , even less against them : it is a question of establishing stable contacts with their armed forces , with their governments , which enrich the Mediterranean as an area of security and prosperity .
And finally , also with this objective , there will be a meeting in Cartagena , following a Belgian initiative , of the people responsible for public opinion within the various defence departments , together with specialists from various media , in order to give new impetus to the understanding and communication of our message to the European citizens .
If I may be allowed to abuse your patience , Mr President , I would like to make a final brief comment , which I believe to be important , on terrorism .
Ladies and gentlemen , I have already pointed out that the Spanish Presidency - and President Aznar was able to say this in this House - treats the fight against terrorism as its main priority .
In these circumstances , there is no need to stress why Spain is morally obliged to place the fight against terrorism at the forefront of its Presidency .
We have given the subject much consideration together with our defence colleagues in the European Union and we agree that the fight against terrorism should not fall within the Petersberg tasks , as I previously anticipated .
We also agree that the fight against internal terrorism in the Union should correspond to the Rule of Law by means of its normal procedures , by means of courts of law and State security forces , but we could not remain passive in terms of the defence of our citizens in the face of possible terrorist attacks from outside the Union , which would undoubtedly require these common military capabilities we are trying to create .
I am referring to our capabilities to tackle arms of mass destruction , NBC - nuclear , bacteriological or chemical - and also to our intelligence capabilities , the ability of our forces to protect themselves during missions and , finally , our capability to protect what has come to be known as the common space or European single sky .
These capabilities , these tasks , make up the considerations and the basic approaches of a document being prepared by the Spanish Presidency to submit to the Seville European Council , where we hope it will be approved and for which we would also like the support , as for everything I have mentioned , of this Parliament .
Thank you very much , Mr President .
Mr President , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , Commissioners , I would like to express my heartfelt thanks for this debate , especially as we are also celebrating a premiere in the debate being opened by the Defence Minister of the Spanish Presidency .
I think this is a positive message , one that we receive as such and for which we are grateful .
Mr President-in-Office , I also think you were right in what you said at the end about terrorism and what Spain is quite rightly trying to do about it .
Looking , though , at the post-11 September political landscape , I feel that here too we may have taken a lot of decisions and discussed a lot of things , but that a lot of momentum has been lost in the national ministerial machinery as regards the actual implementation of this campaign against terrorism and the clarification of the issues on the interface between external and internal security .
In this very week just past , the European Mission in the Middle East has shown us how little political influence we have .
One reason for our lack of influence is that , alongside our great efforts on the foreign aid front - the European Union gives three times as much in overseas aid as the United States of America - and despite our growing involvement in the field of civil crisis management , we are still not in a position to give real security guarantees because our military capacity is still far from sufficiently developed .
The decisions we have made in recent years , ranging from the Treaty of Amsterdam by way of Cologne to the present day , were outstanding , but their implementation is still , in many areas , deplorable in the extreme .
Following as I do the debates in some of our Member States on the A 400 M cargo aircraft , they indicate to me that the objective may well be in view and figures are perhaps provided , but the actual implementation and equipment are inadequate and too slow ; hence we play a small role because we are not taken seriously , because we cannot really deliver , and because things are not being implemented as they should be .
This brings us , of necessity , to the institutional issues .
Mr President-in-Office of the Council , I disagree with your statement that this is an exclusively intergovernmental function .
Overseas aid and civil crisis management are to a large extent a matter for the first pillar and their financing should be handled via the Budget .
It is not solely and exclusively an intergovernmental function , but a combined one , and , seeing that its weaknesses are on the intergovernmental side , we therefore think that the Convention must make improvements and come to final decisions notwithstanding the need to allow for issues of national sovereignty , which play a role in this issue .
We cannot , with Brussels , come to majority decisions to the effect that the soldiers of every EU country are to go to war .
The national parliaments have important things to say about this .
Yet we must , for example , get the idea of enhanced cooperation accepted , in order to bring into being a coalition of the willing .
In Nice , we achieved this everywhere except in the area of defence policy , just where we needed it most .
In Nice , this was , alas , prevented ; we must make the decisive breakthrough now .
We want , clearly , to do this jointly with our partners in NATO , which is indispensable to collective security .
We also have to organise European security and defence policy in such a way that those NATO states that are not in the EU do not feel themselves excluded .
An intensive dialogue must take place , and hence I also think it right that we should find a solution with Turkey so that there is a proper process of consultation if something happens in Turkey 's vicinity .
In this sense , it is to be hoped that the agreements , which we have unfortunately not had officially submitted to us , represent steps in the right direction .
The Council , though , must take up a clear position , so that the European Union 's autonomous right of decision as such is not thereby jeopardised .
Perhaps this will be supplied in the course of this debate , and we will thereby become more secure in our position on this issue .
We must recognise that we agree on many things , but not on how they are to be implemented .
This is true also of arms policy .
We see how there is an ever-growing technological gap between Europeans and the USA , and that we are no longer able to really wage war together , because the technological differences have become so massive .
This has catastrophic consequences , not only for our defence policy capacity , but also in terms of industrial policy , which makes it also an issue for Europe 's internal market .
I am glad to see Commissioner Liikanen here with Commissioner Patten .
I can well imagine that this interface with industrial and arms policy will mean that the European Research Framework Programme for Joint Projects could increasingly be used in the field of military research .
Perhaps consideration could be given to how this might be done and to how resources can be pooled in acquiring equipment .
There are certain things that we can acquire jointly - transport capacity is one example - in order to synergise on that basis in maintenance , acquisitions and much else , thus achieving more reasonable costs .
We spend 60 % of what the United States does on military requirements , but with 10 % of the outcome that they achieve .
This obviously has to do with us being organised in the wrong way .
This means , if our budget resources really are tight even at a European and national level , that it must surely be possible for us to organise ourselves in such a way - that is , on Community lines - as to do what has to be done and achieve the desired effects in our common interest .
This naturally involves the arms exports issue and the clarification of European competences in order to remove the lack of uniformity in the code of conduct .
The European Union must get better at protecting its interests , including the military ones , and also in order to secure peace .
Mr President-in-Office of the Council , I agree with you , and believe that the example you have given is a very good one , that a community with a common currency also has common interests in security policy .
This is a reason why we must reach the point where , in a European Union with an internal common market , a common currency and a common legal system , we no longer have areas with a lower standard of security .
We must enforce a common standard of security .
I wish to express my gratitude for our being permitted to advance this in a cooperative process .
Mr President , Minister , let me first thank Parliament for giving the Commission this opportunity to debate the vital matters covered by these motions , and let me also thank the Council presidency for the contribution it has just made through the Spanish Minister of Defence , who made an extremely interesting and important speech .
I particularly endorse all that he said in his closing remarks about terrorism and the importance of giving terrorism the priority which it deserves to be given by pluralist democracies .
Some Member States have a particular concern about defeating terrorism in all its manifestations .
As you said , Mr President , my colleague Mr Liikanen will intervene in a moment on defence trade and production issues but let me say something about the Commission 's overall approach to security and defence .
I start from the extremely strong conviction that it is not possible to divide foreign policy neatly into civil matters on the one hand , and military and defence issues on the other , as if they were unrelated and as if they could be handled without reference to one another .
The European Security and Defence Policy is an integral part of the common foreign and security policy .
The Treaty requires that the Commission should be fully associated with that policy .
The Commission has no direct role in military aspects , which are themselves limited by the Treaty to the so-called Petersberg tasks .
But in practice our full association with the common foreign and security policy means that we are closely involved in the policy as a whole .
That is as it should be - because a coherent overall European security , conflict prevention and crisis management policy is bound to embrace both civil and military matters , and this is a point to which I want to return at the end of my remarks .
The European Union has international relationships and programmes in many fields covering , for example , energy , environment , economic cooperation , human rights , justice and home affairs , external assistance programmes and so on .
It may be that , in a crisis , initiatives are taken which also involve military deployments , or have other defence implications .
But in that case the military element is one strand in what must be a seamless and integrated European policy towards the country or region in question .
Take the example of the Western Balkans which we have debated so often in this Chamber .
After a long period of bloodshed and inter-ethnic strife culminating in the successful military campaign to halt ethnic cleansing in Kosovo , the European Union launched a concerted effort to restore stability and to bring about thoroughgoing political and economic reform in the region .
We have created a framework of Stabilisation and Association Agreements to encourage regional integration and to give these countries a long-term political perspective of European Union membership .
We are managing a key part of the UN Mission in Kosovo .
We also took initiatives such as the Energy for Democracy programme in Serbia , which had explicitly political , as well as economic and humanitarian objectives .
All these have been elements - and important elements - of an integrated European security and conflict prevention policy in the region .
The European Commission continues to play a central part in the conception and execution of that policy .
But the EU 's policy in the region has also involved military deployments - for example in the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia , where NATO deployed overwhelmingly European forces in support of a political settlement at a time of rising inter-ethnic tension and violence .
The deployment had to be closely co-ordinated with what the European Union was already doing .
Mr Solana and I were directly involved in mediation at the time the force went in , as Parliament knows .
The Commission supported the political purposes of the military deployment through its Rapid Reaction Mechanism , helping to restore confidence in the region and to reduce inter-ethnic tension through an emergency house-reconstruction programme and through other measures .
Now , at the European Council in Barcelona , heads of government have expressed the European Union 's availability to take responsibility for a follow-on military operation , if certain conditions can be fulfilled , including permanent arrangements on European Union-NATO cooperation .
The Commission is not directly involved in that decision , which touches upon the physical security of national military personnel deployed in the region - nor do we seek direct involvement .
But , again , we must be associated in so far as this will add value to the European Union 's overall effort .
We need to be able to make our voice heard because , as I have said , military decisions also have implications for the European Union 's comprehensive security policy in the wider sense , as I have described it .
The linkages between defence and military aspects of CFSP , and the more traditional areas of Community concern , are complex and often politically sensitive .
The European Commission stands ready to play its part in using the potential of the Treaty to help to develop a strong , efficient and viable European armaments industry .
It is clear from the motions before us today that this is as the European Parliament would wish .
Most Members of this House , for example , would support the Commission 's initiative to launch the Advisory Group on Aerospace - or STAR 21 as it is known - to consider the strategic challenges faced by the European Union in that crucial sector .
We welcome the participation in that Group of Carlos Westendorp , Chairman of the Committee on Industry , External Trade , Research and Energy , and of Karl von Wogau .
We are ready to play our part as I say .
But we need to proceed in such matters in close cooperation with Member States who retain national responsibility for many of the policies involved .
The linkages between civil and military concerns , and between European Union and national responsibilities , in the conduct of an integrated security and crisis management policy are still being thought through .
Yet the necessary institutional machinery is starting to take shape - in the Political and Security Committee , for example , and in the bodies that advise it , including the Military Committee , the Politico-Military Group and the Committee for Civilian Aspects of Crisis Management .
I am working with Mr Solana to define the potential and the limits of our respective roles and responsibilities .
It is not always easy .
There are unresolved questions , for example , about the financing of the common foreign and security policy , whether for actions funded out of the Community budget , or for expenditure with military or defence implications , which must always be charged to Member States .
The European Union needs mechanisms that will give it greater budgetary flexibility in the conduct of foreign policy , and will enable it to deploy funds more quickly in times of crisis .
We have put forward some Community budget proposals to that end .
But in the search for greater flexibility we must not create parallel structures in the common foreign and security policy which escape proper parliamentary scrutiny and financial control through the Court of Auditors - or which encroach upon matters of Community competence .
These problems are not insoluble .
We have agreed arrangements for the EU Policing Mission in Bosnia , for example , which tread a careful path between the competing concerns .
But we must continue to proceed with sensitivity - and that applies as well in the area of defence-related industries which my colleague , Mr Liikanen , is about to address .
I should like to make one final point and I am provoked - or encouraged - to do so by the interesting remarks made by Mr Brok .
Mr Brok quite understandably said that we needed to be able to demonstrate how serious we are about Europe 's security .
He spoke about expenditure on defence and expenditure on defence equipment .
These are extremely dangerous waters - shark-filled waters - for a Commissioner to seek to swim in .
The Commission is not a 16th Member State ; it does not have its own taxpayers responsible for electing it or discharging it .
I read about the important debate as to whether Europe should spend more on precision-guided missiles , on special forces , on air-lift capacity , on military telecommunications .
It seems to me that a very strong intellectual and political case is made that unless we are prepared to spend more in these areas , the consequences on the trans-Atlantic alliance in terms of the difference in technological capacity are bound , in due course , to be destabilising .
But I do not want to enter any further into that debate , I just want to make one very important , realistic point .
The President of the United States has just asked for a 14 % increase in defence spending - an increase of USD 48 billion in the United States defence budget .
I would like to know whether there is anybody in this Parliament who is a member of a political party which would be able to get elected , advocating in Europe a 14 % increase in defence spending , while at the same time health and education spending are cut .
Hands up !
I just want to make the point that we should be realistic .
We should not allow the gap between our rhetoric and what we are actually prepared to argue for as politicians to open up too widely .
And we should recognise the extremely important contribution we make to all those other aspects of security which , for example , we were talking about at Monterrey a few weeks ago under the aegis of the United Nations .
It is not irrelevant to security to engage at the moment in what some people rather sneeringly call social work in Afghanistan .
If social work in Afghanistan makes it unnecessary for us to be militarily involved in Afghanistan again in five or ten years ' time , then that seems to be to be a very good investment in the security of the European Union and the region and the world .
I hope we can be realistic in our assessments of security and realistic about the best ways in which Europe can actually contribute to greater security around the world , with the wholehearted endorsement of those who vote for you , if not for me .
I have the impression , Commissioner , that you could swim well with sharks if you had to .
Mr President , as mentioned in the question put by Mr Brok , the Commission communication of December 1997 , ' implementing the strategy of the Union 's defence-related industries ' , regulated an ambitious overall approach .
It contained a draft Council common position relating to the development of a European armaments policy and an action plan of 14 points for the defence-related industries .
Among the 14 items of the action plan , some of these measures require legislation , while others can be carried out using instruments already available to the Union .
A good deal of progress has been made with regard to most of the actions , in fact with 11 out of a total of 14 .
However , until recently , Council discussions have generally been characterised by differences of opinion between the Member States preventing the adoption of a common position on the framing of a European armaments policy .
This made progress especially difficult with regard to measures requiring legislative action such as the action plan items on customs duties and intra-Community transfers .
I would like to underline today , however , that the Commission has begun infringement proceedings against 10 Member States on the question of the proper application of the Common Customs Tariff on military and non-military goods .
This action may serve to reactivate discussions on the issue .
Furthermore , as regards the intra-Community transfers of these goods , work on trying to find appropriate technical solutions continues and some progress has been made .
Despite the difficulties in moving forward on some of these critical issues as rapidly as we had hoped , I would like to stress that the analysis advocating a need for re-structuring the European defence industry and for creating a single market for defence products is as valid as ever .
It is even more pertinent for at least two reasons .
They are : firstly , the development of the European security policy and defence policy and secondly , the constitution of trans-national defence companies .
The competitiveness of the European defence industry is vital to the credibility of the nascent European security and defence policy .
Thus , the Commission expects that governments increasingly recognise the urgency for a change in attitudes in order to end policies and practices that prevent European defence companies from working together more efficiently .
Such a change in the position of the Member States might allow the Commission to contribute more effectively to the creation of the European defence equipment market through exercising its competence , and to Community policies such as the creation of the single market in defence , external trade etc .
Thus , the Commission intends - and that was the question to which I replied positively , Mr Brok - to re-examine and update the action plan in order to take into account any new developments .
In addition the Commission is pursuing the objective of promoting the greater competitiveness of Europe 's defence industry in close cooperation with national authorities and industry representatives .
Mr Brok also mentioned the question of standardisation .
An important initiative in this context is our efforts aimed at promoting awareness of the importance of standardisation issues for the efficiency and the competitiveness of the European defence industries , and of investigating options and possible start-up actions for defence standards reform .
On this occasion , the European standardisation organisation CEN was identified as the ideal forum to implement this effort in the form of a handbook of defence standards and procedures which , when in place , will offer more transparency , improving inter-operability , harmonisation requirements and cost-efficiency in procurement .
In the foreseeable future , two ongoing processes make us feel confident that efficient solutions may finally be within reach .
They are : progress on ESDP paving the way for harmonising the demand in Europe for defence equipment and , in parallel , the gradual recognition of the need to harmonise the rules and regulations which affect the competitiveness of the industries once restructured .
As Commissioner Patten mentioned , these developments are acknowledged in the STAR 21 initiative : the strategic aerospace review for 21st century currently in progress .
STAR 21 aims to broaden the understanding of aerospace-related issues in Europe and trigger the action which will ensure that Europe 's aerospace industry can play a full part in Europe 's future .
This initiative brings together senior representatives from industry with the Commission , the Council and also with the European Parliament as was mentioned here today , with the participation of Mr von Wogau and of Mr Westendorp y Cabeza , Chairman of the Committee on Industry .
I hope that this report , which we will present in July , will give a further push to our efforts to have a strong competitive European defence industry .
Mr President , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , Commissioners , ladies and gentlemen , I believe that in the field of defence policy we have reasons to be satisfied : we have a catalogue of capabilities , a military committee , a Defence Staff and we are seeking complementarity with NATO . There are also grounds , however , to believe that much remains to be done .
In this respect , I believe the United States is enjoying an unprecedented political and military hegemony .
If we consider that today the United States represents about 4 % of the world 's population - and I say this with admiration - and are capable of producing 30 % of goods and services ; that China , with five times the area and with a much larger population is only capable of producing 3 % ; if we consider that Russia 's production levels have fallen below those of Switzerland and if we remember the military budget figures given here , we can see clearly that all this is highly disproportionate .
Mr President-in-Office of the Council , representatives of the Commission , I would like to ask a question which refers rather more to the future .
I would like to know whether , if this Convention , which is working on the future of Europe , eventually creates a constitutional treaty , what place would defence policy have in that treaty and , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , whether it would be political fiction to imagine a security and defence policy - as Commissioner Patten said a moment ago - incorporated into the first pillar , which went further than conflict prevention and crisis management and could lead to Europe having more influence on the international stage in line with its economic , financial and industrial power .
The President-in-Office of the Council has referred to the fight against terrorism and it is clear that when freedom was attacked with the barbarity of 11 September it was perfectly demonstrated that in today 's globalised landscape concepts of security , defence , diplomacy , trade , culture and religion are all interrelated and that this should be translated into a common awareness that , since the phenomenon of terrorism affects all of us equally , there must be a response that comes from all of us equally .
I therefore believe that it is essential that we accept the views expressed here on the normal elements of the Rule of Law in the fight against terrorism and the need to coordinate the information instruments we have as well as the instruments for fighting the threat of the NBC warfare .
A final word , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , with regard to the observations which have been made here and which have been brilliantly laid out by Mr Patten , because , when we move from the demands of humanism to figures , it is rather as if we were moving on from the Beatitudes to the accounts books .
I believe we must realise that , if we want a defence policy , we have to pay for it and that it is important to reconcile , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , the desire of public opinion for the European Union to be present on the international stage with the need not to take on too much expenditure , which is apparently not very popular amongst our public opinion .
It is therefore important - and I will end here , Mr President - not to confuse the adjective with the noun and the peripheral with the fundamental .
Mr President , the EU 's common foreign and security policy is slowly starting to take shape .
Good intentions are being translated into increasingly concrete activities , and the development of the rapid reaction force is progressing at a steady pace .
Hopefully it will be possible to deploy this force for the first time in Macedonia .
Despite everything , however , even the bringing together of a force of approximately 2 000 troops remains an arduous task which the European Union cannot yet achieve without NATO , something which brings with it the necessary problems .
In itself , cooperation with NATO is to be welcomed , because it allows us to be operational more quickly , but it is also a complicating factor , as is evident from the talks with Turkey .
In the longer term , the European Union must strive towards total autonomy where the deployment of the rapid reaction force is concerned .
The so far non-existent military capacity must therefore be developed as a matter of urgency .
The European Union is not NATO , and NATO is not the United Nations .
We must not switch roles .
It is not the EU 's ambition to be a collective defence organisation .
The EU is not a military superpower , and puts the emphasis first and foremost on a multilateral approach to international problems via the UN and other international organisations .
Recently , striking discrepancies between the European Union and the US have come to light .
These are mainly due to differing views on security .
The common foreign and security policy is , in fact , the manifestation of Europe 's history over the past 100 years .
The cooperation model is paramount .
Far less emphasis is placed on the military instrument than is the case in the United States , and this is not simply due to the lack of military superpower status .
We have recognised the relative value of the instrument , and are therefore placing far more emphasis on the use of civil means , including diplomacy and economic cooperation .
Not for nothing have conflict prevention and conflict solution become mainstays of our policy .
The enlargement of the European Union , but also the Balkans policy , are illustrations of this .
However , it also explains the renewed focus on fighting poverty , and not simply as a result of 11 September .
Such policy is inherently multilateral and also explains why we react to Sharon 's military approach with such horror .
We know from personal , painful experience that problems only escalate as a result .
The US sees things differently in many cases .
Having military power and its possible use are paramount .
If necessary , we will go it alone , we hear them say .
This is illustrated by the US ' views on arms control , or the threatening language in the direction of Iraq .
Needless to say , we support the desire to stop the distribution of weapons of mass destruction , first of all in Iraq .
This is what we have the United Nations for , and the EU must help make a policy possible .
We should certainly not exclude force , but violence is not the obvious choice .
A kind of artificial distribution of tasks has taken place between the European Union and the United States .
They use their military power , and often determine policy in this way , while the European Union often ends up picking up the pieces ; at least , this is often how it appears .
This is untenable in the long run .
To us , civil power is more important than military power , and this should become the core of the transatlantic dialogue .
Europe can only play a leading role on the world stage if it is prepared to pay a high price for doing so .
Unfortunately , this is still not the case .
Its own inability leads to frustration and even to open humiliation , as we have seen in the recent mission to Israel , for example .
The political price that has to be paid for more effective policy is a reduction in the amount of say that individual nations have for the sake of greater European unity .
Decisive foreign policy cannot only be based on economic clout and generosity with euros .
The Middle East conflict proves how limited the influence of Israel 's key trading partner and the largest provider of aid to the Palestinians actually is .
Without the development of credible European defence , Europe remains a yapping puppy that is allowed to frolic alongside the American bulldog .
In this context , the rapid reaction force is a necessary precondition , but it is not meeting the mark by a long shot with regard to all the Petersberg tasks and the fight against terrorism .
Europe continues to lag behind in comparison with American military power , and we will not be able to catch up without a substantial increase in defence expenditure .
And if we do not want this for political reasons , then fine , we should also accept the consequences .
It is high time the rapid reaction force became operational .
As it happens , a sound draft about cooperation between the European Union and NATO , which Turkey can endorse , is ready in Macedonia .
Unfortunately , Greece continues to throw spanners in the works .
In any event , Europe will remain autonomous in its decision-making .
Unless we standardise and rationalise our resources , a European defence will never get off the ground .
National egotism and commercial interests have for too long got in the way of creating a defence industry .
If Europe is not prepared to pay the political and financial price for credible defence , it should stop complaining about its trivial role in the world , otherwise we will continue to yap without being heard .
Allow me to start by underscoring a remark made by Commissioner Patten when he alerted us to the crucial role of the civil dimension of security .
We in Parliament have now got used to the presence of an ex-general , namely our fellow MEP Mr Morillon , but to my knowledge this is the first time that we in this House are addressing true generals - high-ranking military , I assume .
Gentlemen , a warm welcome to you .
However , I should like to emphasise that security for the European Union is not only - not even primarily - military security .
The civil aspects of security - the Commissioner was right to make reference to this - have once again secured victory for the European Union in Macedonia .
This had nothing to do with military strength - or even yapping , Mr Van den Bos .
It was about a good mix of civil and military elements .
This explains the European Union 's success in Macedonia , and I should like to continue on that path .
Talking of Macedonia , we all know that the European Union would like to undertake its first major action in that country .
This receives my unqualified support , but we also realise that there are still major problems with regard to the necessary cooperation , this time between the European Union and NATO .
We know that a deal has been struck between the United Kingdom and Turkey , albeit not the most elegant of deals , while Greece is currently the only country to be obstructive .
I should therefore like to make an urgent appeal to the Council , the President-in-Office of the Council , to make every effort in the foreseeable future to ensure that a first practice run does not end in a first major disaster .
I repeat , the agreement that has been struck is not the most elegant of settlements , but the Greeks must be persuaded to sign up , because it would indeed be a disaster if internal division prevented us from taking our first action .
My final remark concerns the importance of common European plans where defence investments are concerned .
At the moment , we in the Netherlands are facing the problems that arise when an individual Member State needs to make large investments in new military equipment .
In the case of the Netherlands , these investments concern the successor of the F16 .
It is turning out to be almost impossible to make a well-considered decision in this area .
And I am not referring to the American and European preference of aircraft .
Cooperation is needed at European level , otherwise we will be investing in equipment which we have had for a long time , and when the chips are down we will have insufficient funding to invest in equipment that we really need .
Thank you .
Mr President , I thank Mr Trillo and the Commissioners for their valuable contributions , which have been very illuminating .
I believe that , when building Europe as a hopeful and exciting project , it is essential to recognise the need for a security and defence dimension .
However , there are three aspects which I do not agree with and which may be crucial :
Firstly , I believe we should move towards a concept of defence based on shared security : for example , it is true that we have to respond to terrorism , but a military response is not sufficient unless it is based on law - in this case , international law - and on the elimination of the causes of barbaric acts such as the events of 11 September .
It is therefore essential that the concept of shared security is a fundamental element in this proposal .
Secondly , I believe it is a mistake to focus our attention on treating NATO as an umbrella to protect us , and also on the special cooperation with the United States .
I believe that that approach hinders and slows down our ability to develop the autonomous , independent and effective security and defence policy that Europe needs .
There is a third aspect : the role to be played , now and in the future , by the European Union in terms of defence and security , which should be the promotion of peace , the promotion of different relations in the world , and therefore the consideration of the United Nations and international law as the only references for the actions of the European Union .
In fact , this aspect has either been ignored or not taken sufficiently into account by the President-in-Office of the Council and I believe that it should be taken up , since I believe it would be a mistake for us not to base our actions on international law and legality .
This is precisely one of the most necessary aspects at the current time in order to introduce sanity , rationality and a notion of solidarity into the situation in the Middle East .
In this respect , in view of the instruments we would need , the concept of the OSCE should be recovered in order to guarantee security in Europe and we should focus all our attention on what Commissioner Patten and other speakers have mentioned : the need to remove the current budgetary ceiling , because it is impossible to make sufficient progress in relation to the defence industry and coordination and cooperation with the miserly budgets laid down by the Union .
Finally , I would like to mention the importance of parliamentary democratic control , both by the European Parliament and by the various national parliaments .
. ( PT ) Mr President , in this debate , having heard the statements by the Council and the Commission , whom I thank for the quality and relevance of their contributions , it would seem appropriate to point out that the European Union 's Treaties still contain neither a clause for mutual military assistance , similar to the clause that exists in NATO or in the WEU , nor specific provisions on cooperation in the field of arms .
Where Europe is concerned , these matters are , as we all know , regulated by the revised Treaty of Brussels under the so-called ' left-over ' functions of the Western European Union .
It should be added that , since 11 September , we have all been more keenly aware that a new definition of defence is needed , one which combines internal and external security .
We must now find a way of dealing with enemies who , despite not having armies , manage to threaten the security of countries and of citizens and against the attacks of which traditional armies are insufficient defence .
Indeed , in the globalised world in which we live , politics , diplomacy , information , internal security and defence complement one another to respond to these new types of threat .
Security has become a global and indivisible concept , quite different from traditional concepts .
The obligation of the European Union and its Member States is , therefore , to rationalise their military and arms production capacities and to strengthen their resources for diplomatic cooperation , information services and also judicial and police cooperation in a genuine synergy of national and transnational policies .
Where relations with the Atlantic alliance are concerned , we feel that efforts to develop a common security and defence policy must be viewed in terms of our partnership with NATO .
The strength of European security and defence policy lies precisely in its cooperation with NATO and not in the dangerous and pointless temptation to compete with that organisation in any way .
Finally , a word on the parliamentary monitoring of the CFSP , which , as is well-known , is performed at two levels : the European level , which is overseen by the European Parliament , which deals with the prevention and civilian management of crises , and the national level , which deals with military crisis management . This type of monitoring is carried out by national parliaments .
This issue was the subject of a recent debate and statement in this House .
It is , therefore , entirely appropriate to call for the establishment of closer relations and for a greater exchange of information between the European Parliament and the national parliaments on issues involving the CFSP as a means of enabling the various parliamentary bodies to undertake democratic monitoring in a more appropriate and more suitable way .
Mr President , a nation has resources such as a police force , its own currency and an army .
There are no practical reasons to justify the EU 's now wanting to have these resources at its disposal .
Cross-border crime could be combated through Interpol .
Instead , Europol is to be the launch pad for a European FBI .
The essence of currency union is not a common coinage for international trade , but the ban on national currencies which will lead to common economic government .
Moreover , the purpose of the Rapid Reaction Force is not just that of peace-keeping , for that can be done through the UN and the OSCE .
The ill-concealed agenda is the desire for a common EU military which in time will be able to supersede NATO .
The EU is to be a state with a common police force , currency and military .
My group has another vision for Europe .
We want a Europe of democracies in which independent countries cooperate on everything we cannot manage individually , but we do not want to see the EU developed into a new superpower with a superpower-style military .
The EU is the world 's strongest trading block .
It includes powerful countries which have been colonial powers in the past .
It is not certain that people elsewhere in the world see us in terms as peaceful as those in which we see ourselves .
For the sake of peace too , it is better that we be satisfied with the UN , the OSCE and NATO instead of constructing a new military power .
Mr President-in-Office of the Council , Mr President , Commissioners , we must stop talking and take action .
The sad fact that we must face is that , despite some positive signs , such as the decisions to establish the GALILEO satellite navigation system and to build the A 400 M military transport aircraft by 2008 , following prolonged and arduous negotiations , we are not succeeding in providing European defence policy with a definite structure and we usually fail to get beyond semantics or comitology .
The reason why European defence policy is not going well is because we are not clearly applying the method of variable geometry , which would enable the Member States that are determined to take action to define some common strategic interests and thus identify the resources to use .
Since we are using the wrong method , we still do not have the essential elements to meet our common defence needs .
We still do not have a European armaments agency .
At the very time when combat air fleets are due to be replaced throughout the world , we in Europe are going to tackle this crucial problem in difficult conditions and in a disorganised fashion , unlike our determined and innovative American rivals .
We have no anti-missile defence programme : we should be developing a European policy in this area instead of condemning the American project .
Lastly , defence expenditure is falling throughout Europe , with the exception of the United Kingdom .
Over the last ten years , most of our governments have used defence budgets as an adjustment variable , and the decline in both the amounts and the proportions spent is astonishing .
The shock of the events of 11 September and the realisation of having to engage in a now ongoing battle against terrorism have not provoked European leaders into taking the necessary action - which is strange , as we are all exposed to the same level of risk .
It is high time , however , that we stopped using , once and for all , the misleading rhetoric of peace dividends .
In order to respond to these new threats , our countries must make a substantial increase in their defence spending .
The task will be even more difficult because we in Europe have become used to certain facilities ; we need courageous politicians to fulfil this task .
It may be worthwhile to stress this at a time when election campaigns are underway in many of our Member States .
Mr President , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , over the last ten years , European public opinion has gradually become aware of the fact that the European Union needs to have its own defence system in order to enable it to have influence , political influence on world affairs , which should be acquired from its moral authority and its economic power .
The European Union , which did not play a part in resolving the crisis in the former Yugoslavia , was incapable of speaking with a single voice on this matter and engaged in a war in Kosovo which proved that it could not manage without American resources in a number of essential areas , is now absent from the international stage in Afghanistan and in the Middle East . This is because it was unable , in such a short timescale , to overcome its major shortcomings and , above all , did not have the necessary will to provide itself with the resources required .
Commissioner Patten , we shall not be asking for a 14 % increase in spending , but it has already been two years since Parliament adopted the own-initiative report on defence by our fellow Member , Mrs Lalumière , and since it approved a crucial paragraph urging the Member States ' governments not to rule out , a priori , the possibility of increasing budgetary appropriations , given the need for such a measure to ensure the credibility of the Union .
We must recognise that this request is a dead letter and that , with the notable exception of the United Kingdom , European leaders have imperturbably continued to decrease defence spending on a regular basis , thus stripping their declared will of all credibility .
In the light of the considerable effort made by the United States following the shocking events of 11 September , the European Union is now faced with its responsibilities : either it agrees to let its American counterpart deal with the military problems on its own and takes upon itself to continue to manage the peace problems , more or less in conjunction with the US , thus playing , Mr Wiersma , Mr Lagendijk and Mr Bonde , the role of the Athenians in ancient Rome .
Or it decides , at last , not only to spend better by making a joint effort instead of the dispersed efforts made so far , but yes , Commissioner Patten , to spend more .
By again proposing this difficult decision , I think it is worthwhile to reiterate that defence technologies developed today still have two purposes and that they will , therefore , have an impact on all the civilian and military capabilities of the European industry .
Yes , we must prioritise the construction of a legitimate European defence industry which should , initially , as you said , Commissioner and Mr President-in-Office of the Council , be given a single European budget dedicated solely to research and development .
What do you think , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , of the proposal put forward by Mr Bayrou , who is a candidate in the French presidential elections , of making contributions to this budget which are limited to 0.5 % of the GNP of each Member State , with immediate effect ?
Mr President , Commissioner Patten challenged us to justify to our electorate a demand for an increase in defence expenditure .
He is right to suggest that it would not be very popular .
However , what we can have is much more efficient and effective defence expenditure .
In Kosovo we learned that while we spend 60 % of what the Americans spend , we only get 10 % of their power projection .
I , as a taxpayer , would like to know what are we spending our money on in that case .
The answer to that is : waste , inefficiency and duplication , and that is the issue we have to address .
It is the Commission 's job to drive that forward .
In the 1996 and 1997 communications the Commission seemed to be willing to do that .
But where the Santer Commission was prepared to go where angels feared to tread , this Commission has been cowering behind its barricades , frightened to take on the Member States on this issue and , in so doing , failing in its responsibilities to defend the Treaties .
Could Commissioner Liikanen confirm for me that the Court of Justice decisions C-70 / 94 and C-83 / 94 give the Commission the power to challenge Member States on their interpretation of Article 296 , which they have taken as a carte blanche , which is not what the Treaty of Rome intends ?
We want the Commission to move forward .
I welcome what Commissioner Liikanen has said , but I want to see more rapid progress .
We cannot send our troops into action unless we have the capability to support them .
As George Robertson has said , being ready for battle is like pregnancy : you either are or you are not !
You cannot proceed on the basis , as the Spanish Defence Minister has said , that we are addressing a third of our capability requirements .
Why only a third ?
We have to address them all if we are serious about a European defence identity .
So I want to see this agenda being driven forward .
We need somebody with responsibility .
In football terms , we need a Roy Keane to move this agenda forward to ensure that we have the capabilities we need .
Mr President , I thank the minister for his extremely interesting speech and for his support for the setting up of a Council of Ministers within a defence formation .
What puzzles me is what exactly is the status of the draft agreement brokered between Britain , the US and Turkey , between the European Union and the non-European Union NATO European members ?
Despite the fact that the draft agreement remains fairly secretive , I read it with great care .
It seems to me that it represents faithfully the conclusions of the Nice European Council , that the security interests not only of the European Union but also of Turkey should be guaranteed by the operation of the rapid reaction force .
The draft agreement allows for the Council to decide to invite Turkey to play a part where NATO facilities are not required .
That does not seem to me to represent a threat to the autonomy of the European Union .
I should be most grateful for a clear explanation of precisely what the problem is inside the Council .
Mr President , I would like to raise an issue arising from the two policies that are the subject of this afternoon 's debate , namely the problem related to the use of depleted uranium weapons and munitions .
On 15 January 2001 , the European Parliament adopted a resolution calling for a moratorium on the use of these weapons and munitions .
More recently , on 27 March 2002 , the United Nations Environment Programme published the results of a study on six sites in Serbia and Montenegro that had been affected by the use of depleted uranium munitions during the Balkans War of 1999 .
The study confirmed that five of the six sites concerned were contaminated ; in two of the sites , particles of depleted uranium were detected in the region 's air .
The results of the measures show that dust particles of depleted uranium have been widely dispersed in the environment as a result of the impact from these munitions .
Although the United Nations Environment Programme considers the level of radioactive pollution to be low , the fact remains that this pollution confirms the risks of using depleted uranium arms and munitions for soldiers , of course , but also for the civilian population and certainly for several future generations .
Today , although there is no official information to confirm this , there are many elements to support the theory that a large part of Afghanistan , which was heavily bombed , has been contaminated by depleted uranium . These include the statement issued by the US Secretary of State , Donald Rumsfeld , which mentions a contaminated site , the concern expressed by scientists in Pakistan and , more importantly , the confirmation of the use of guided missiles with extremely dense metal warheads , which are most likely made of depleted uranium .
According to the information at our disposal , the United Nations Environment Programme is due to begin a study on the impact of war on the environment in the coming weeks .
I still have some questions , however , that I would like to put to the Council . Does the Council envisage taking any particular measures to protect troops and humanitarian missions on the ground in Afghanistan ?
What is the Council 's view of the long-term use of these weapons and arms , when it is aware that these weapons are used indiscriminately and affect both the civilian population and soldiers ?
Mr President , a common defence and security policy and the question of closer collaboration between the European Union and ? ? ? ? are back on the agenda , even though the powers that be have yet to define the enemy which cannot be defeated unless we introduce the proposed structure and increase military resources .
It is clear to the Communist Party of Greece and other peace-loving forces in Greece that this policy does not foster peace .
It is a policy of mainly military intervention at the expense of the people on any pretext : yesterday it was human rights , today it is terrorism , even the terrorism caused or supported by the intervening powers , and it always serves the interests of big business , the objective being to redistribute the markets among the most powerful .
And let us be honest , the terrorist attack on 11 September is being used to serve this purpose , and to such a degree that one cannot but wonder exactly who was really behind it .
That is why this policy does not have our support , the support of peace-loving forces with visions of a different world , diametrically opposed to today 's world which , unfortunately , relies more and more on the law of the jungle .
Mr President , the fact the EU 's defence policy and the defence industry are being discussed together speaks volumes .
Two separate resolutions may be before us , but the link that is being sustained between them is an artificial one .
I should like to see both topics separated from one another .
Sensible things can be said about the defence policy in the context of the European Union .
The coordination of national defence efforts , preferably within the larger framework of NATO , can do no harm .
Member States do remain ultimately responsible , though .
However , European defence policy is subject to agreement on a strategic concept .
And in my view , this is not about setting headline goals and outlining vague scenarios .
What does Europe actually want from its defence policy ?
What are the concrete threats and how do we give an appropriate response ?
To this day , the Council has failed to come up with a unanimous answer .
It does not seem judicious to me to conclude agreements about the defence industry at European level .
The argument that this would benefit European security and defence policy cuts no ice .
It seems as if this is purely about the interests of large industries .
In practice , defence material is often produced by joint ventures which transcend European borders .
Moreover , European industry is hardly unanimous at the moment .
The interests of the individual Member States weigh heavily .
In general , European projects do not run smoothly .
The question therefore arises as to what would ultimately be of more benefit to our - currently very limited - military capacity : European materiel or other materiel ?
Mr President , dividing the world into good and evil is not a very helpful definition when it comes to an active peace policy , especially if good and evil are defined in a one-sided way to suit particular interests .
Every military conflict has a history .
For example , we should not forget that the Taliban regime in Afghanistan was supported and promoted by multinational oil interests , which is no secret .
Back at that stage the dangers that could result from support of that kind should have been pointed out .
The United States is now threatening to attack Iraq and possibly even other states such as Iran and North Korea ; that is an incredibly dangerous game to play , and one that can easily get out of control .
The European Union needs to play a stronger role than it has up to now as the guardian of international law , something that requires us to have a high degree of independence and the courage of our convictions .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , it is important that this debate today is also touching on industrial aspects of European defence policy .
We should remind ourselves that the founding fathers of the European Union did not create it because they wanted economic cooperation , but because its prime task was to ensure peace , so that there was a plan for a European defence policy as far back as the period between 1952 and 1954 .
It is a good thing that we are picking up where we left off then .
Commissioner Patten has presented us with a challenge .
He has asked us this question : would we be willing to demand that 14 % should be spent on defence , as is the case in the United States ?
However , I would first like to make another demand , and that is the demand that the money we are already spending on defence should be spent more sensibly , instead of having 15 different policies in this area . We need to take advantage of the synergy that can be achieved if we work together in this field .
Part of this is that the rules of Europe 's internal market need to be applied more in this field .
There are some sensible exceptions here , but these exceptions are applied too widely , and we therefore need to make sure that these rules are applied more fully .
For 15 different nations finally to work together implies a certain standardisation in this area , as otherwise there will be enormous problems of incompatibility .
We have already developed standardisation procedures in the civilian world that could be helpful here , especially as regards dual use .
Lastly , we should not lose sight of the fact that the most important pilot project in this field is the crisis management force agreed upon in Helsinki .
The question is this : should the European Union actually take over the leading role in Macedonia in the foreseeable future ?
I believe that we need to consider that very carefully .
We should not put the cart before the horse here .
We should not let ourselves get into a situation in which we can be blackmailed by either side , because this first European intervention will be of the utmost importance for us .
Mr President , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , Commissioners , first of all , Minister , I would like to say how pleased I am that you could be here .
It is now customary , with each presidency , for the Defence Minister to attend a parliamentary sitting . This marks real progress .
I would also like to congratulate you on your effort to apply your slogan ' More Europe ' to the ESDP .
In this respect , I would reiterate that the ESDP is very popular , since , according to the Eurobarometer surveys , more than 70 % of European public opinion is demanding a European security and defence policy , on the condition that it is credible .
I would also like to congratulate you on being ready to work on developing a Mediterranean dimension of the ESDP .
Along with these positive points , I would like to ask you two questions , the first of which is what is the Spanish Presidency doing to speed up the negotiations between the European Union and NATO , in order to overcome the resistance of some countries ?
You touched on this point , Minister .
Could you elaborate on exactly what you have achieved so far ?
Equally , have you given any thought so far as to the future of NATO or as to what the effect of changes within NATO might be for our European security and defence policy , given the positions adopted recently by our American counterparts , the calls made by Russia and events since 11 September ?
I should like to put my second question to both the Minister and the Commissioner .
It relates to the consequences of 11 September , which concern both the civilian resources of the Commission and the military resources which are the Council 's responsibility .
Minister , you mentioned the fight against terrorism , but you did not tackle the question whether our ESDP , as defined since Cologne and Helsinki , is adapted to this new fight .
Can we count on our ESDP , not only to fulfil the Petersberg tasks , but also to combat terrorism ?
Should we not rethink our system , or at least certain aspects of our system and , if so , which ones ?
Is the Spanish Presidency prepared to consider this once more ?
It seems to me that this needs to be done .
Mr President , the principle of European cooperation in defence procurement is well established .
I have witnessed many projects in my own region , such as the Tornado , Eurofighter , even Airbus and its derivatives .
Indeed , for a time , I was minister responsible for Aerospace and therefore for Airbus , so I am one of those who is very keen that the A400M flies as soon as possible .
The north-west of England has many deep and longstanding commitments in all its industry to working alongside skilled and professional colleagues throughout the European Union .
They have hopes of participating in the future , for example , in the Galileo Project , whether or not it has a defence role .
The defence industrial base is hugely important to the Union .
For strategic military reasons of course but also for the advanced technology which can often be put to civilian use and for the contribution to local communities in terms of jobs , infrastructure and profit .
But there is wastage .
There are cost over-runs , gold-plating , extra-contractual obligations - bribes , in English - and a lot more .
To use military jargon : there should be a C3 for defence industries : cooperation , coordination and cost control .
I and many of my colleagues in the British Conservative Group have concerns about the EDSP in principle .
For example , what is the control and restraint on arms exports going to do to the sovereign rights of Member States ?
What exactly is the European Armament Agency going to do ?
Why should absolute priority be given to fulfilling the capabilities requirement of the EDSP ?
But generally these objectives are to be welcomed and , with a little finessing , I am sure can work .
I support those broad objectives .
Mr President , Mr President-in-Office , ladies and gentlemen , Commissioner Patten said that we should not underestimate the non-military aspects of the common foreign and security policy .
Quite right !
On the other hand , it is quite right to say , as Elmar Brok and Gary Titley have done , that our military expenditure is marked by a high level of inefficiency , particularly from a European point of view .
At present , procurement policy in many EU Member States has descended into a state of uncertainty and chaos . That is an open secret .
We need the Council and the Commission jointly to appoint a person responsible for defence , and in particular for military procurement .
He or she would be accountable both to the High Representative for the common foreign and security policy , Mr Solana , and also to Commissioners Patten and Liikanen , and would be charged with developing a common defence and procurement plan .
Commissioner Patten , the main issue here is not increased expenditure for military equipment , it is the question of a mutually acceptable procurement policy in the EU Member States that is above all appropriate for European defence .
That is what security , efficiency and thrift dictate .
Mr President , it has often been said that the European Union is a kind of economic giant , but a military and political dwarf .
It was difficult for the outside world to take this in at the time .
The wars in Yugoslavia ultimately proved this quite emphatically for everyone to see .
High-ranking military representing more or less the entire European arm of NATO commented on television that the Yugoslav National Army , in a state of collapse , would prove invincible for us .
This gave an extremely depressing insight into the extent of our capabilities as the European Union and as NATO 's European arm .
Fortunately , we have learnt from experience .
We have learnt to be ashamed of what has happened , and progress has quite clearly been made .
We even have the courage to assume certain tasks ourselves and to take over certain tasks from the Americans .
Mention is being made of Macedonia and a specific role for the European Union , specifically in Bosnia .
So progress is being made .
The courage to promote military expenditure , however , is still lacking .
As Mr Patten stated a moment ago , there may be widespread support in this Parliament for an increase in the defence budgets , but one has to be extremely good at reading between the lines to establish that this is the case .
Even more important is , in fact , the lack of return on our efforts .
It was demonstrated a moment ago why that is .
Many factors come into play : different lines of reasoning , national arguments of a less rational nature , the reputation of the speaker , the economic industrial benefits and all kinds of other arguments which play a role when we talk about defence efforts and procurement .
We have , in fact , a great need for European policy based on a clear vision .
And this is very obvious to the population , as was evident from the figures brought by Mrs Lalumière , but as we heard a moment ago , this message is not all that popular yet in many regions .
In my view , we must continue to drive the message home .
National sovereignty is to be welcomed , provided that it serves public security .
And if this is not possible with a pure and simple disregard for national sovereignty , we should learn to take a broader view .
Mr President , Mr President-in-Office , Commissioners , ladies and gentlemen , one specific but important aspect of the common security and defence policy concerns relations between the nascent European powers and NATO .
One aspect of these relations is that ? ? ? ? is the collective security organisation on which Europe depends for its defence .
European defence is not intended - nor is it able - to supplant ? ? ? ? in this role .
That goes without saying .
Another aspect is that the European forces have no reason to acquire resources already supplied by ? ? ? ? , because we have no reason to duplicate costs .
I am not sure if this second point has quite the same merit as the first .
This view presupposes that there is a complete correlation and concurrence of opinion between the administration of European policy and the administration of NATO policy .
We have no guarantee of any such complete concurrence . Of course , no one is contemplating opposition or hostility towards ? ? ? ? , but it only needs a minor disagreement for NATO to refuse its resources to the European forces .
A permanent agreement on the use of NATO resources by the European powers would of course be a step forward , but we all know that NATO itself is facing serious difficulties which we hope it will be able to overcome .
One speaker has said that Greece has to accept certain things .
I am not sure what .
The question of an independent European defence policy is not a local Greek problem and it would be ridiculous to assume that it is .
There is much more at stake here ; the credibility of this policy is at stake here and we all have a duty to defend it .
Mr President , I would like to congratulate the President-in-Office of the Council on having given significant impetus to the launch of the European security and defence policy with the scheduling of a specific Defence Council .
I believe that today 's debate may be a great help to the policy which the President-in-Office of the Council intends to pursue , because there is a slight discrepancy between his views and those of many of the participants : the President-in-Office of the Council has insisted on the intergovernmental nature of the defence policy and here - on the one hand Mr Brok and , on the other , various other Members such as Mr Titley , Mr Marset , Mr Morillon , etc . , and Commissioners Patten and Liikanen - have indicated that there are elements for a European policy in the field of the arms industry .



Article 296 is a locked door which can be unlocked .
There is a key ; there is the possibility of implementing it : we already have case-law from the Court of Justice which opens up this possibility and I hope that the Council will consider the possibility of implementing Community law specifically on Community level , in addition to the actions carried out at government level .
Mr President , I agree with the last comments by the honourable Member , Professor Medina Ortega .
I must confess frankly that I have been surprised by the degree of support from the European Parliament , which I imagine none of my Defence colleagues have enjoyed - given all the shades of opinion its legitimate plurality implies - for the European security and defence policy and the many possibilities and variations suggested in each and every intervention , and I thank you for them and have noted them very carefully .
I think that Mrs Lalumière is right when she says that we can forecast following this sitting , and the opinion polls she has mentioned - which basically agree with those in my country - a good future for the European security and defence policy .
I would like to organise my replies according to whether they are considerations for the immediate future or those for the hopefully near , but rather more remote , future .
I was enormously interested in Commissioner Patten 's approach on the budgetary issues and also the reply he received , amongst others , from Mr Souchet .
If only such things could be heard every day and in every parliament .
We Defence Ministers of the Member States can only be grateful for any progress in the European Parliament and hope that it sets an example .
I would like to take up Mr von Wogau 's argument in relation to employing synergies .
Ladies and gentlemen , it is not just a question of creating an additional budget within the Union .
It is also a question of making an effort to harmonise our arms policies , because if we harmonise our requirements , programmes and management by means of a European agency which coordinates marketing and , of course , funding , we will be saving money .
We will not just be increasing our efficiency , which is our obligation , but we will also be saving money .
I confess that the gap that has been mentioned resulting from the 14 % increase in the United States is unavoidable , but what can and must be avoided , are all those differences between our programmes , which must become common programmes .
In fact , ladies and gentlemen , this does not hinder the SMEs , because every country has examples of small and medium-sized businesses being able to link their production to large programmes and to participate by means of their involvement with large European consortia , which are no doubt inevitably , and perhaps in a transatlantic sense , the future of companies .
But I cannot go any further into this issue .
I wanted to reassure Mr Marset in relation to the law .
Our Union , if I may put it this way , is based on law .
This has obviously been the concern of the Presidency in scheduling the Salamanca meeting .
We believe it is essential , and no less urgent , that amongst all of us - and with the completely indispensable cooperation of this Parliament of course - we start creating this law for Petersberg tasks , which can be applied from the start of any mission .
You ask about relations with NATO .
Mr Marset called into question the principle of subsidiarity , and this was taken up by Mr Katiforis .
It is a fact that NATO is currently completely irreplaceable as an instrument for collective defence .
Ladies and gentlemen , we cannot even talk about a European army for the moment .
I am sure that , just as so far there has been agreement , there could be serious discrepancies .
Today , the task of collective defence is conferred on NATO by means of the Washington Treaty .
As Mr Duff pointed out in his speech , we have a vision which is complementary to the Atlantic Alliance , which does not prevent us - quite the opposite - from having to make progress on this European security and defence policy by increasing missions , integration , arms policy and institutions .
Mrs Lalumière asks what changes are taking place within NATO following 11 September .
I am obliged to speak very much in summary : firstly , constant meetings are taking place with Russia , which were unthinkable before 11 September .
I must confirm here that without the cooperation of Russia , the operations carried out by the international coalition in Afghanistan would have been impossible and would not have achieved the results that some people say they have had in two months , although they are not yet over .
Russia 's relations with the Atlantic Alliance are currently so excellent that it would be madness not to take this opportunity to establish stable mechanisms through the necessary institutional reforms .
With regard to the enlargement of the Alliance , I believe that 11 September has left all of us with the feeling - certainly in the case of the Presidency and the Spanish Government - that enlargement should be oriented towards the ideological community rather than strict compliance with military requirements , because we have discovered that those common values we advocate and which are precisely those which underpin the European Union are not universally accepted , and they are at stake .
Therefore , we must be particularly sensitive to those countries which have recently embraced democracy and the defence of those values and which wish to contribute to their common defence .
Mr Patten pointed out firstly - and later many Members also pointed out - that the security and defence policy should be considered on an interpillar basis .
Undoubtedly , I would like to say to Parliament - I did not do so before - that the Torrejón satellite centre , which has been incorporated into the context of the Western European Union , already has this status , and the Institute of Security Studies in Paris should also have it , and that , in fact , it is currently carrying out a study - promoted firstly by the Belgian Presidency and now by the Spanish Presidency - on the European Defence White Paper .
This White Paper may be of great interest , since so far I believe we all agree on the same goal , but we have a different vision in relation to our understanding of what the objective of the European security and defence policy should be .
You spoke of the institutional reform which is being developed through the study of the PSC and the High Representative .
I will end , Mr President , by making some brief comments in response to the questions by Mr Salafranca on what my strictly personal and humble vision may be of the near future of the European security and defence policy : firstly , the Convention must reconsider the institutional structure of this pillar , bearing in mind the interpillar aspect .
Therefore , we will have to rethink the bodies whose nature has rapidly changed from transitional to permanent , but they will have to be reconsidered nonetheless .
Secondly , missions .
There is no doubt that we have to increase missions .
In fact , the Seville Declaration that we prepared on the problem of terrorist attack from outside the Union only would mean an increase in Helsinki Petersberg tasks .
We also have to think of strengthened cooperation mechanisms which have been mentioned here .
In some countries we already have Eurofor , Euromarfor and certain other forms of cooperation under way in the amphibious field .
And finally we will have to think - and why not ? - of certain convergence criteria , which - although I am not the person to point out what they are - should prioritise quality over quantity and competition for certain requirements .
Mr President , Mr Titley asked the Commission to reply to a very detailed question about the Court of Justice rulings on the use of Article 296 .
The Commission has used this case law to improve its regulation on the control of exports of dual-use goods and technology .
More recently , and as I mentioned in my speech , the Commission is challenging 12 Member States over their misuse of Article 296 regarding customs duties on arms imports , preventing a common customs tariff from being implemented .
The Commission will continue to follow this line .
I want to thank Parliament for a very interesting debate ; it is very important that we continue to act to promote a strong defence industry and capacity in Europe .
I have a very brief point to make , Mr President , which is that I have not received an answer to my questions regarding depleted uranium weapons and munitions .
Could the President-in-Office of the Council confirm whether or not he is able to give me an answer ?
I think he is willing to answer your question .
I cannot answer as to whether or not he is able to give you a reply .
Mr President , please forgive me but the necessary speed required by the time limits this House manages so well have prevented me from replying to the honourable Member .
I am very happy to do so .
Firstly , I must point out that the honourable Member 's information does not coincide with ours .
According to my information , which should not be declassified at the moment , we can rest assured that ammunition containing depleted uranium has not been used in Afghanistan and this has also been indicated by the units with NBC detection equipment within Afghanistan itself , within the ISAF .
Secondly , and with regard to your question on what protection measures had been taken : apart from being supplied with NBC detection equipment , in the units which the various countries have deployed , either in Kabul , or - as in the Spanish case - in Bagram , the medical units observe very strict rules of conduct and carry out constant monitoring , both of this type of injury in terms of health , and of the risks resulting from the internal situation of the country and any resistance .
Thirdly , I must point out that the Belgian Presidency began a study , which is being continued by the Spanish Presidency , on the most appropriate measures for safeguarding the health of troops .
And finally I must tell the honourable Member that the scientists who studied the problem in Spain - and they were independent academic and clinical scientists - guaranteed that no direct relationship between the use of depleted uranium and certain tumours observed amongst some combatants could be established .
That concludes the joint debate .
The next item is the statements by the High Representative for the common foreign and security policy , Mr Solana , the Council and the Commission on the situation in the Middle East .

Before I invite Mr Solana to open the debate I should like to place on the record , on behalf of the House , my thanks to Mr Solana and Commissioner Patten , both of whom have made particular arrangements to be available for this debate today , also with the Spanish presidency .
Ladies and gentlemen , since I took up my post , I have always tried to speak frankly , clearly and respectfully to the Members of this Parliament .
I believe that this is one of the most difficult debates I have taken part in and we must approach it with our customary responsibility and political sense .
The problem we are dealing with this afternoon , which involves a region that is close to us , is important . It relates to our values , but it also relates to our security and our interests .
Therefore , Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I believe it is the obligation of all of us , of all the institutions present here this afternoon , to seek formulae to resolve the situation .
We must not be part of the problem , but rather part of the solution to the problem .
Ladies and gentlemen , there is no doubt that the current situation in the Middle East is dramatic , tragic and dangerous , given its consequences , not only for the people who live there , but also for the region .
And we must face this stark reality with the sense of responsibility we Europeans have always had .
I honestly believe that we have reached the limits of what is acceptable .
The reality of what is going on on the ground leads nowhere ; it does not lead to a solution to the problem and only leads to desperation and misery .
I therefore believe that we must act on all possible fronts , not only to resolve the immediate crisis , but also to try to resolve its causes .
Mr President , I am going to make a few brief comments on these three points . I believe there is no doubt that everybody present in this House and all the citizens of Europe have condemned , do condemn and will condemn terrorism .
I therefore believe that we can state , with the frankness with which we have always dealt with our Israeli friends , that we will condemn terrorism a thousand times , as many times as necessary , and that we will have nothing to do with it .
With the same frankness , we can say to our friends that we do not agree with the activities they are engaged in .
( Loud applause )
I believe that today we are obliged to say what we think , from the point of view of friendship , and with a frankness which enables us to see how we have spoken on other occasions .
To say it with the same simplicity , but with the same sense of responsibility .
Mr President , I honestly believe that the military response of the Israeli Government that we are witnessing in the occupied territories is intolerable and we must stop it immediately .
It must stop immediately , ladies and gentlemen , because it takes us nowhere and it does not lead to the solution to the problem , which is , as has been said , to put an end to terrorism .
Ladies and gentlemen , we are aware of the enormous suffering of the civilian population , which does not want to take part in a war , which wants to live in peace , together , with two countries living side by side .
To deprive whole populations of electricity and water are actions which are unjustifiable on security grounds .
There is no doubt that this is taking place in violation of humanitarian law and military law , which we cannot ignore .
Mr President , the Israeli Government had the right and the obligation to protect its citizens .
However , we do not believe that what we are seeing is going to serve this purpose .
This is not just an anti-terrorist operation , but it leans dangerously towards war , and I am very sad to say this .
We have at least two clear , very clear , Security Council resolutions , which do not allow for differing interpretations , and the only possible interpretation of these resolutions is that the situation of the occupied territories at the moment must end .
And these clear resolutions must be applied immediately .
The military operation must end , and not in stages , and not city by city , but immediately and completely .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , international law must be respected by everybody , and this implies that it must also be respected by the citizens who live on the other side of the northern border .
Israel must fulfil its obligations to the United Nations Security Council .
We also condemn the attacks taking place from Israel 's northern border against Israeli citizens .
I insist : we will always be in favour of respect for international law .
Mr President , these military actions are not the right way to put an end to terrorism .
We can ask many questions about these operations and we can ask whether , when they end , the citizens of Israel will be better protected or not , whether their security will be increased or not , whether this operation is going to fight and reduce terrorism .
Unfortunately we do not think that this will be the case , that these operations will achieve this end , and therefore , honestly , as the United Nations Security Council has done , we ask that they stop .
Ladies and gentlemen , I am very keen this afternoon to stress that one of the consequences of this military operation is the destruction of the Palestinian Authority .
This is of immense concern to us , because if we have to achieve a ceasefire , with whom are we going to establish that ceasefire if there is going to be nobody amongst the Palestinian Authority 's people or institutions to speak to .
I have been able to do this on many occasions , on the many trips I have made in recent months - as the honourable Members know - with the security leaders of the Palestinian Authority .
We worked with these people , together with Israel and the United States .
Today some of them have lost their credibility and all means to act .
Therefore , ladies and gentlemen , we must make an effort to recover the Palestinian Authority .
Progress towards peace , after this military operation , is inconceivable with a ruined Palestinian Authority .
Therefore , ladies and gentlemen , this Parliament , the European Union , must make a more serious and stronger appeal for the Palestinian Authority to be respected .
Ladies and gentlemen , we believe that the Tenet plan , the security plan , must be supported , but who on the Palestinian side can carry out the negotiation contained in that plan ?
Unfortunately we do not know , and therefore we will have to continue to insist that the Palestinian Authority should recover the status , the responsibility and the meaning established in the Oslo agreements .
Having said this , ladies and gentlemen , we must continue to act on all fronts .
I honestly believe , and I will say this a thousand times , that President Arafat must be free to move and to meet with his colleagues .
( Applause )
Ladies and gentlemen , we are in a situation , a rather ridiculous situation , if you will pardon the expression , where after Mr Zinni met with Arafat to try to implement the security operation , the leaders of the Palestinian Authority who should have seen Arafat to subsequently negotiate that security agreement were not allowed to do so .

At 8 p.m. last night , the representative of all of us , Mr Moratinos , entered Ramallah for the first time and spoke to one of Arafat 's closest advisors , Abu Mazen .
The latter 's only request , addressed to all of us , is that Arafat 's political colleagues and leaders be allowed to see him .
Fortunately , thanks to pressure from various parties , this has been possible and we must be pleased about it .
Ladies and gentlemen , it has been said and written that Europe has been humiliated .
Ladies and gentlemen , I am going to refute that argument , since I believe that it has not been Europe that has been humiliated .
There has been one Prime Minister who has not had sufficient vision to take the correct decision and the humiliation has been for the leaders of the Palestinian Authority , who on the same day were forbidden from seeing their President , their political leader , Arafat .
That is the real humiliation , the one which is being experienced by the Palestinian people .
We are still working within the capacities and resources available to us , and with the will which we have all shown in trying to resolve this dramatic problem .
Ladies and gentlemen , not only do we have our representative , Mr Moratinos , permanently on the ground , but also representatives of this Parliament have also been there and have witnessed the situation and needs in situ with their own eyes .
I have had the opportunity to speak to them .
I thank them for their work , which has been useful and very positive for everybody , myself included .
I believe that what we have to do at the moment is not just concentrate on the possibility of a ceasefire .
While a ceasefire is absolutely essential , we will not achieve a lasting ceasefire unless there is a political perspective for the future .
Our desire must therefore be to start as soon as possible to go beyond a ceasefire and move towards the possibility of a lasting political relationship .
We will wonder what the parameters of this political agreement must be .
Ladies and gentlemen , the agreements and the parameters of that political agreement are well known to everybody , we do not have to invent anything much . We want at the end of the day to have two States , an Israeli State with fully-recognised and secure borders and a Palestinian State with borders which are also secure and guaranteed , which can live together side by side .
That has also been the offer made by the political leaders of the region in Beirut , where the European Union was present and I had the honour of working in the preceding days in order to reach that resolution .
Therefore , we have the objective conditions for reaching the end of the process , but what we do not know is how to get out of the hole we are in at the moment .
Ladies and gentlemen , in a few hours time we will have the opportunity to meet in Madrid with the Secretary-General of the United Nations , Secretary of State Powell , before he sets off for the Middle East , for Israel , with the Russian Foreign Minister , to see if we can jointly find a mechanism to end this situation .
I believe that the only solution is correct , frank and intense coordination between the players I have just mentioned , in order to try to find a formula which will allow us to achieve that end .
( Applause )
I insist , however , that a formula allowing us out of this situation must not be strictly limited to the ceasefire , which is an essential first step , because if we are not capable of providing a political perspective , the ceasefire will be signed but not implemented by the parties .
Therefore , ladies and gentlemen , I humbly dare to suggest that the position we should take should be to have the willpower and courage to ask for more than a ceasefire , to ask for a political solution to be put on the table as soon as possible .
Ladies and gentlemen , I said at the beginning , and I would like to repeat , that this Parliament , the citizens of the European Union , everybody , is against terrorism , and Israel can always count on us to be a serious and responsible ally in the fight against terrorism .
We believe that the current situation is mistaken and , as friends , we want to say that the sooner it ends the better .
We will therefore do everything possible to ensure that the United Nations Security Council resolution is complied with and on this basis to seek a ceasefire that will allow us to begin a political process which leads to the goal of two States , two democratic States with secure borders , which can live together within the context of the countries of the region , which have already offered a contractual peace to Israel in Beirut .
Ladies and gentlemen , that is what I wanted to say this afternoon and I would also like to say , Mr President , on my return , when the honourable Members deem it appropriate - on the 24th , if you like - I will be very happy to come back here to explain the situation or give my impression of the development of the situation during this period .
( Applause )
Thank you for your contribution and also for the offer to report back , which I am certain the House would be anxious to avail themselves of .
We will organise the detail of that .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , this Parliament has requested with some haste , which is justified given the drama and speed of the events , an appearance by the Presidency to explain the European Union 's views on the crisis in the Middle East .
The fact that I am doing so today , beside the High Representative , Mr Solana , and also Commissioner Patten , I believe is a good demonstration of the internal cohesion existing between us all .
I would like to take this opportunity to say that the Presidency unreservedly supports the High Representative and the Commission and the excellent cohesion and cooperation existing between us all in order to confront this crisis .
You will all agree with me that the situation in the Middle East is critical .
The Palestinian territories are on the brink of a humanitarian disaster .
The Palestinian Authority 's future is uncertain and the stability and security of the region are clearly in danger .
All attempts to relieve the crisis so far have failed and have not prevented the violence from increasing over recent weeks .
A spiral of violence created by brutal Palestinian terrorist attacks and by resulting Israeli reprisals is leading to ever-greater suffering within both populations .
We once again have to say that the conflict we are facing will not be resolved until the Palestinians are free from the 1967 occupation and the Israelis feel that they have peace and security ; until the Israelis and the Palestinians can live in two States , with secure and internationally recognised borders .
Once again it is also necessary to insist that there can be no military solution to this conflict and that peace and security can only be achieved through negotiation .
The international community and specifically the European Union have a responsibility and a role which cannot be ignored .
It is also necessary that any intervention or initiative be rigorously coordinated , especially between the United Nations , the European Union and the main powers involved .
The Presidency of the Union has not been inactive over recent weeks .
In the Barcelona Declaration of 16 March the European Union insisted on the need to deal with all aspects , both security aspects and political and economic aspects .
The Declaration also reiterated the bases for a solution to the conflict , that is , Resolutions 242 , 338 and 1397 of the United Nations Security Council and the principles of the Madrid and Oslo Conferences and subsequent agreements which would allow the two States , Israel and Palestine , to live in peace and security .
As I said before , there is a double objective : the creation of a democratic , viable and independent Palestinian State , putting an end to the 1967 occupation , and guaranteeing that Israel has the right to live within secure borders , guaranteed by the commitment of the international community and the Arab countries in particular .
The latest phase of the current crisis practically coincided with the end of the Arab League Summit in Beirut .
The Presidency of the Union , represented by the President of the Spanish Government , attended that summit in order to demonstrate the European Union 's interest in the whole process and with the aim of supporting the Saudi initiative , which would have implied the possibility of normalising relations between Israel and its Arab neighbours , in exchange for an Israeli withdrawal to its 1967 borders , and a fair solution to the problem of the refugees , on the basis of the relevant United Nations resolutions .
It was the first time a representative of the European Union has attended an Arab League Summit at the highest level .
The European Union has made constant efforts to achieve an immediate ceasefire , the withdrawal of Israeli troops from Palestinian towns , the restoration of total freedom of movement for President Arafat , compliance with international law and the return to political negotiations .
Furthermore , we have unequivocally condemned the terrorist attacks , such as the attack in Netanya , and we have urged Mr Arafat to take all the necessary measures to prevent them .
Israel 's right to combat terrorism cannot restrict the operational capacity of President Arafat as the legitimate representative of the Palestinian people and of the Palestinian National Authority .
The Union demands an end to the attacks on the general headquarters of the PNA in Ramallah and the immediate withdrawal from the city by the Israeli army .
The Resolution of the Arab League Summit in Beirut forms a solid base for progress towards a political perspective for a just and global solution in the region and for the normalisation of relations between Israel and the Arab world .
The diplomatic contacts of the Presidency at all political levels with the other European capitals , with all the Arab countries of the region , as well as the United States and Russia , are attempting to impose the necessary coordination between all international players in order to end the conflict and begin resolving the crisis .
Recently , given the gravity of the situation , the Presidency of the Union summoned the Israeli Ambassador to communicate four points to him : firstly , there can be no military solution to the conflict ; secondly , the Israeli troops must withdraw from Palestinian towns as laid down in Resolution 1402 , which must be applied immediately , and the siege of President Arafat must end ; thirdly , Israel must allow the special envoys to carry out their diplomatic mission and have free access to President Arafat ; fourthly , Israel must guarantee free access by the European Union 's diplomatic and consular representatives to their nationals , as well as guaranteeing that they can carry out their normal diplomatic and consular duties .
As holder of the Presidency-in-Office of the Council of the European Union , Spain called a special European Union General Affairs Council on 3 April in Luxembourg , with a threefold objective : to coordinate the actions of the Member States of the Union , to express the concern of the Presidency of the Union at the events and its will not to remain passive in an intolerable situation and to apply all the European Union 's political weight to an action intended to move beyond the current stalemate .
As a result of this meeting , as you know , it was decided to send the Presidency and the High Representative , Mr Solana , to the region with the aim of meeting with the parties at the highest level , in order to demand an immediate ceasefire , the application of United Nations Resolutions 1397 and 1402 and the return to negotiations on a political agreement .
The Israeli Prime Minister 's opposition to the European delegation meeting President Arafat has unfortunately limited the scope of the mission , the absolute necessity of which the Presidency was and remains convinced of . It is also convinced that the speech by President Bush last Thursday was a further attempt to redefine the conflict and seek a short-term solution .
The European Union believes that subsequent steps must be directed towards the following objectives : the complete and immediate application of Security Council Resolution 1402 ; the urgent need for a real ceasefire and the withdrawal of the Israeli army from Palestinian cities , including the general headquarters of the Palestinian Authority in Ramallah , guaranteeing the safety and complete freedom of movement of President Arafat ; the diplomatic efforts of the special envoys to the Middle East must not be hindered and in particular they must be guaranteed free access to President Arafat ; the need for Israel 's legitimate right to combat terrorism to be exercised within the framework of international law and in particular international humanitarian law ; the Palestinian Authority , whose operability must be guaranteed , must make all the necessary effort to prevent terrorist activities ; the grave humanitarian situation in the territories demands that medical and humanitarian personnel and institutions must be able to carry out their activities freely .



I would finally like to stress - as the High Representative did previously - that tomorrow the Spanish Foreign Minister , Mr Piqué , as President-in-Office of the European Union , and the High Representative , Mr Solana , are going to meet in Madrid with the United States ' Secretary of State Powell , the Russian Federation 's Foreign Minister , Mr Ivanov , and the Secretary-General of the United Nations , Mr Kofi Annan , in order to analyse the situation and seek solutions to this crisis , in yet another effort by the Spanish Presidency to coordinate the efforts of the international community in this respect .
Mr President , I should like to say at the outset how strongly I endorse what has been said by the High Representative and by the presidency of the Council .
How have we come to this ?
Almost ten years ago Israel and the Palestinians laid the foundation for a peaceful settlement of the Arab / Israeli conflict by recognising each other 's right to exist and by concluding the Oslo Accord which helped to establish a Palestinian governmental structure for the first time ever .
It equally helped Israel to improve its diplomatic and economic standing in the international community .
The Oslo Agreement also offered a precise time-line , at the end of which , in 1999 , we should have been able to witness the final Israeli / Palestinian peace agreement .
Alas , the promise of Oslo has not been delivered , partly because of what has happened on the Israeli side , with the rapid expansion of settlements and the non-implementation of agreed withdrawals from areas in the West Bank , and partly because of Palestinian violence perpetrated by extremist forces with the clear aim of sabotaging any Palestinian / Israeli peace deal .
Subsequently , the meeting in Camp David in the summer of 2000 and the last-ditch attempts to find a negotiated solution at Taba in January 2001 also failed to bring a lasting peace .
Since then we have seen appalling destruction and misery .
Israel - a democratic State that rightly takes pride in its democracy , rule of law and humanitarian principles , and which undeniably is threatened by horrendous suicide bombings - has , I fear , behaved in a way which contradicts much that it stands for .
Suicide bombings are totally unacceptable ; they are horrendous acts of terrorism - and I say that without any qualification .
They are wrong at every time in every place .
Wrong always , wrong everywhere !
( Applause )
I have to say that I would have wished that Islamist leaders had been more outspoken in their condemnation of such attacks .
Indeed , I wish they had been outspoken at all ...
( Applause )
... and I wish they would commit themselves to working more actively to prevent young people from taking such extreme action .
No circumstances , I repeat , can justify such acts .
I sympathise with all of those Israeli families who have lost their loved ones in such attacks , just as I grieve for all the Palestinian families who have also been bereaved .
It is clear that there are no easy solutions .
In my view the only way to bring a definitive end to the wave of suicide-bombings is to tackle the source of the problems and to find a just and lasting peace .
Without this there will be no guarantee of a cessation of violence .
This is the only alternative , as has been pointed out by courageous people like the Speaker of the Knesset , Avraham Burg , whom we all recall speaking from that podium a year or so ago .
He has openly spoken out against entering into what he described as " this insane cycle of violence " .
( Applause )
The current Israeli response of blockading an entire population , withholding tax revenues , extrajudicial killings , destruction of infrastructure , destruction of Arab land , is not in any sense the answer .
This kind of behaviour seems not only to be aimed at the elimination of terror but also at the elimination of the Palestinian Authority and any achievements of the Oslo Accords .
( Applause )
Let me just give Parliament the latest report that I have received , which I cannot vouch for but it seems to me likely to be true .
We have just heard that Israeli forces have broken into the Ministry of Industry , have broken into the Ministry of Education and into the Ministry of Civil Affairs .
They have destroyed computers , they have destroyed files , they have destroyed office infrastructure .
The expectation is that they will break into the Ministry of Economy tonight , and presumably do exactly the same thing .
I wonder what on earth this has to do with stopping suicide bombing ?
( Loud applause )
It is a deliberate and targeted attack on the infrastructure of government in Palestine .
It is a deliberate attempt to destroy the legitimate political ambitions of Palestinians to live in a viable state in their own land .
The European Union has made clear that it will continue to support the Palestinian Authority , that it will continue to support its elected president because , as the High Representative said , there is a need for organised structures to run the Palestinian territories and to represent the Palestinian people in peace talks and internationally .
As I have said here before , and as others have said , what on earth is the alternative to the Palestinian Authority ?
The alternative to the Palestinian Authority is Palestinian anarchy .
Is that what the leaders of Israel really want ?
( Applause )
In such circumstances , we Europeans , appalled by the daily deterioration in the situation , appalled by the horrific violence , must ask ourselves what we can do .
We can in due course provide a minimum of humanitarian assistance if and when the situation allows .
In this context we must implore Israel to uphold international humanitarian law , in particular the Fourth Geneva Convention .
We must urge Israel to desist from denying medical services to those in need , to end the indiscriminate shelling of refugee camps , the humiliating treatment of prisoners and wanton destruction of public and private property .
This will all only leave a legacy of bitterness and it will drag Israel 's international reputation through the mire .
We must obviously support initiatives such as the proposed mission by the UN High Commissioner for Human Rights , Mary Robinson , to look into the human rights situation and to recommend any appropriate action which may be necessary to protect human rights according to international standards .
There is no question that sooner or later Israel will have to justify , as a democracy which takes pride in its pluralist traditions , the way it is behaving at the bar of world opinion .
We support the international community 's call on Israel to stop its military operation in the West Bank and stop it now .
We support the Saudi initiative , which led to the historic decision of the Arab Summit at the end of March .
We also support the latest UN resolutions and we have expressed our agreement with President Bush 's statement urging Israel to stop its military operation without delay .
However , Israel does not appear to be listening to any outside advice .
It should care about the damage its current policies are doing to its international reputation .
Quite apart from the fact that a policy based on repression and force , as the High Representative said , will not achieve the aim of bringing lasting security to Israel 's population .
All it will do is to give a malign new impulse to a cult of violence and death .
The General Affairs Council next week will want to consider the gravity of the situation and to discuss how we can make our concern felt to Israel in the most effective way .
We want to keep open the channels for dialogue with Israel .
This is what President Prodi himself certainly had in mind .
However , Israel has to show for once that it is listening , that it will respect the international standards of behaviour that we have all agreed to uphold and that it will explore all avenues to peace , not just stick to a military approach .
Just about the whole world is united in its calls for an Israeli withdrawal from Palestinian territory and in the call for a return to the negotiating table .
This is the only way to find an honourable and lasting peace which is so desired by the populations of the region and by the wider world .
Unless we take that way , the only alternative will be more misery , more destruction and more death .
( Loud and sustained applause )
Mr President , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , Commissioner , my group , the PPE-DE Group , wishes to vigorously promote the future of two independent countries , Israel and Palestine , a future in which these countries live in peace and mutual cooperation .
This must be the objective of all of us , and that objective must be achieved soon .
In the present frightful situation we strongly condemn all the terror attacks against Israel .
Every territory that claims to be independent must be able to ensure that crime and terror do not surge across its borders , threatening its neighbour .
The Palestinian leaders have not shown themselves to be capable of this .
Nevertheless , the use of excessive military force to destroy civilian areas in the Palestinian territory is totally reprehensible and cannot be justified , even though it is said to be a war against terrorism .
Furthermore , the isolation of the Palestinian leadership , and Yasser Arafat in particular , must be broken .
Neither should Israeli troops be allowed to prevent wounded and injured Palestinians from getting to hospital .
The Red Cross has repeatedly reported that Israeli troops are doing this .
If Palestinian extremists believe that they can drive the Israelis into the sea by means of senseless suicide attacks , they are wrong .
If the Israelis believe that their country 's future can be secured only through the might of their army , in the long term , they will have made a tragic error .
Only peaceful cooperation can ensure the existence and welfare of both countries .
As Commissioner Patten said in this House in February : ' How many more people have to die before the voices of the moderates who are left in the Palestinian Territories and Israel are actually listened to by the citizens of those communities ? ?
In the same debate Hans-Gert Poettering remarked that it is extremely important for the future of us Europeans that we achieve peace in the Middle East and that we should work effectively and in peace with all the Mediterranean countries .
That is absolutely right , but the Israeli and Palestinian leaders know that they also need Europe .
We are Israel 's largest trading partner and by far the greatest source of assistance for the Palestinians .
If we do not see any sort of harmony or desire for peace in the region , we may alter our policy .
We have the option of terminating the Association Agreement with Israel and we have no desire either to finance any operation that we may reasonably suspect is continually breeding terror and endorsing its use against Israel .
This morning 's news concerning Israel 's partial withdrawal is encouraging , but obviously it is only really a very partial withdrawal .
What Commissioner Patten has just said in a way is totally inconsistent with this news .
We are calling for total compliance with United Nations Security Council Resolution 1402 .
Hopefully , Secretary of State Colin Powell will now work swiftly and resolutely to bring about a cease-fire on both sides and Israel 's complete withdrawal , naturally with the firm and effective support of the Council .
The killing must end immediately .
Some time in the very immediate future Israel , the Palestinians , the European Union , the United States of America , Russia and the moderate countries in the Middle East that want to see peace in their region must sit around the table and lead the region to peace .
Mr President , Mr Solana , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , these are grave times in which we have to work together in order to break the infernal cycle of violence by achieving a ceasefire which creates a window of opportunity and opens the way to negotiations in order that the states in the Middle East may live together .
The Europeans , for historical , cultural and even religious reasons , have an enormous responsibility which we cannot ignore .
Therefore , on behalf of the Group of the European Socialist Party I propose that we send three messages .
Firstly , via the High Representative for the common foreign and security policy addressed to tomorrow 's Madrid Summit .
We ask the Presidency-in-Office of the Council , together with the Secretary-General of the United Nations , the United States ' Secretary of State and the Russian Foreign Minister to express with one voice the need for a ceasefire and their joint willingness to send an international peace enforcement and observation force to support it .
The State of Israel was founded as a result of a decision of the United Nations , a David which is an expression of a world political and moral commitment and that David must listen to us and conform to the repeated declarations of the Security Council .
The second message we should send is to the Sharon Government , which must completely end its attempts to turn David into Goliath through its unilateral declaration of total war in response to the suicide attacks against the civil population by certain Palestinian elements .
The solution does not lie in an escalation of operations aimed at eliminating the Palestinian Authority and its elected President , Yasser Arafat , whose confinement must end immediately , nor in the flagrant violations of international humanitarian law or the law of war in the occupied territories .
In addition , the third message is a message of support for the Palestinian Authority so that it can play its role in the fight against terrorism , for which it needs resources that must not be destroyed - and we must remember that we , as the European Union , have actively contributed to these resources - and can act in the future as the core of a Palestinian State .
At the same time , we also want to express our concern at the occurrences of the conflict 's spreading and polarisation that we are currently seeing throughout the world .
We condemn attacks on Jewish symbols and institutions in Europe and we are also worried about the increasing tension , not just in the Arab countries , but also elsewhere in the world .
We are linked to both parties by means of Association Agreements and treaties which imply reciprocal friendship and cooperation .
Within this framework , we wish to express our disapproval of the Israeli Government 's refusal to accept the mediation of a mission from the European Union on 4 April and we believe that , under these circumstances , the Association Agreement must be suspended in accordance with its Article 2 until we see a clear and unequivocal sign that the Israeli Government is willing to resolve this crisis .
Furthermore , we support and advocate an arms embargo on both sides by the European Union and will ask my Group , in relation to the transnational compromise resolution we have negotiated - although we go further - to vote in favour of Paragraph 8 of that compromise resolution .
Finally , Mr President , despite everything , we want to reiterate our conviction that , despite the gravity of the current situation , peace is possible .
As you know , we have had a long and fruitful historic relationship with our colleagues in the Israeli Labour Party .
We have publicly criticised their participation in this government , but we want to continue talking to them .
Just yesterday I received a call from Simon Peres , a well-liked and respected person in this House , and we have agreed to hold a debate soon with the Labour Party in our group .
I urge everybody not to cease in this effort and to use all possible opportunities for dialogue with our Israeli and Palestinian friends and partners to tell them that we are not condemned to endless violence .
Our own history demonstrates this and what we have to do is support coordinated international action within the framework of the United Nations , taking advantage of the proposals of the Arab League so that Madrid may offer another glimmer of hope .
( Applause )
Mr President , this week we are debating military conflicts in two places : Chechnya and Palestine .
Both have worsened since the Western World declared war on terrorism .
It seems almost as if the dominant power in each conflict has taken advantage of the anti-terrorist cause to enhance its strategic position .
The impact on the lives of those caught in the crossfire , both literally and metaphorically , has been devastating .
For reasons of history , humanity and security , we have a duty to intervene to prevent the fighting .
Diplomacy , thus far , has failed , whether sponsored by the United Nations , the United States of America , the European Union or the neighbouring states .
It is probably the Saudi peace plan which currently offers the most promising pointers to peace .
The warring parties themselves offer little hope of a solution .
Neither Mr Sharon nor Mr Arafat can secure peace , just as certainly as neither can impose it .
Mr Arafat 's record of involvement in terrorism and his continued acquiescence in abominable Palestinian terrorist acts are at least in part to blame for the current situation .
The best way forward , in the view of Liberal Democrats in this House , is to establish an immediate embargo on arms exports to Israel and Palestine , and to persuade the United Nations to mount an international mission to send troops to the region to enforce peace .
Only then might the extremists be moved aside and the moderates be brought together by an honest broker in a political process in which the arguments of force give way to the force of arguments .
Reckless military adventurism on one side and cynical acceptance of terrorism on the other offer only further bloodshed and misery and the deepening of mutual hatreds , which will delay and render more difficult the achievement of lasting peace .
The recent Israeli military incursions into Palestinian territory have been as shocking as they have been self-defeating .
The West does have levers of pressure .
You , Mr Solana , must employ them .
An urgent meeting of the EU-Israel Association Council should be called .
On the agenda you should have Israel 's refusal to allow our representatives to meet Mr Arafat ; you should have its wanton destruction of EU-funded infrastructure and its violation of human rights provisions in Article No 2 of the Association Agreement .
You might talk to Colin Powell tomorrow about threatening suspension of USD 3 billion of aid annually to Israel .
Human rights observers should be deployed to document the plight of innocent Palestinian citizens , who suffer daily disrupted lives , random harassment , gratuitous humiliation and , in some cases , torture and death .
The international community is clear on where the borders must be drawn to secure the co-existence in two states of six million Israeli and some 4 million Palestinian citizens .
We cannot stand by while United Nations resolutions are flouted by an aggressive policy of settlements and a refusal to seek peace .
When international law is so blatantly ignored , such bloodshed , as we have seen , is unavoidable .
Those responsible must , eventually , be brought to justice .
On Thursday of this week , the statute for a permanent International Criminal Court will enter into force .
From Sabra and Chatila 20 years ago , to what is happening in Jenin this afternoon , Mr Sharon might reflect on whether he wishes to be among its first clients .
( Applause )
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I returned yesterday from Palestine and I would like to take two minutes to give you an account of my visit .
Words cannot express the horror of the situation or the atrocities suffered by the people of Palestine who are denied the most fundamental rights .
The hospital in Ramallah has been surrounded and the clinics are inundated by the number of people who are seriously injured .
All the hospital buildings have been destroyed .
Women are dying in childbirth , their babies too .
Ambulances drive round under a hail of bullets to rescue the injured and to collect the dead that they are unable to bury .
A single pit has been dug in the hospital yard so that the bodies can be piled into it .
A child crossing the road was hit by a bullet which paralysed him for life .
An old lady went outside to fill a saucepan with water in the yard , was hit by a bullet and was killed instantly .
An ill man , leaning on his walking stick for support , who came to be treated for diabetes , was killed by a bullet as he climbed up the first step into the hospital .
When we arrived at Yasser Arafat 's headquarters to bring him food and water , a tank pointed its gun at us .
The soldiers , maintaining the firing position , forced us to retreat .
In the light of these threats , we left taking the supplies with us .
Are these children , these elderly people and these women , terrorists who are putting the state and people of Israel at risk ?
There is also a curfew in force in Bethlehem .
We were there on Sunday , the day of universal prayer .
There was the sound of constant gunfire .
We decided to accompany worshippers to church .
Tanks were positioned at the bottom of the steps in Nativity Square blocking all access to the church .
The soldiers ordered us to leave immediately , threatening to shoot us .
We went back up a narrow pathway , past churches and schools that had been destroyed .
We walked through ruins , past smashed up and burnt out cars , the rubble from collapsed houses and smashed pavements .
Torrents of filthy water spewed out of crushed pipe work .
Drinking water supplies stored on roofs were practically empty , meaning the inhabitants will soon be without water . They are already without electricity .
At the corner of a house , we were again surrounded by soldiers who pointed their rifles at us .
You must be aware that our parliamentary delegation entered these towns secretly , using winding dirt tracks , through quarries and building sites , to hide from patrols , patrols of soldiers .
When they saw us , people of all ages came out to speak to us , to plead with us to intervene urgently .
They expect so much from Europe .
They are pinning all their hopes on us .
They told us that they would never abandon Yasser Arafat , the person that they consider to be their only legitimate representative , despite the criticism that has been made of him .
As democratically elected representatives waving the white flag , we hid like terrorists to assist and protect these people who are victims of terrorist acts .
Yes , it is war , but not a war of religion .
No , it is a colonial war , where people are resisting military occupation and a state which continues , with utter impunity , to breach international law and the right to live .
In the birthplace of cultures and civilisations , universal values and human dignity are being treated with contempt and humanity is collapsing .
We do not have the right to remain silent and we cannot say , in the future , that we did not know what was happening .
We must face up to our responsibilities and make every effort to bring an immediate end to this massacre .
We must make some genuine proposals .
You must make some genuine proposals , Mr President-in-Office , Commissioner , Minister , to bring about a political solution .
If we vote in favour of suspending the Association Agreements , declare an embargo on arms exports to Israel and send a peacekeeping force urgently to protect the Palestinian people , we will be taking practical action to restore peace and security in these two states .
We will also be taking action to promote peace for all the peoples of Israel and Palestine , for the entire region and the world .
We will be reaffirming that a future and prosperity cannot be achieved by disregarding justice and the law .
Thank you , ladies and gentlemen , for making your own contribution to peace by supporting this resolution .
Mr President , I wept in front of the Israeli soldier who was preventing us attending to a wounded Palestinian .
I wept for Ahmed who was lying on the ground , gesturing to us to come and help him .
I wept - I have to say - for my powerlessness , our powerlessness .
I wept for the Israeli soldier who had lost his humanity .
I told him : ' I am not crying because I am afraid of your machine gun : I am crying for you who are young .
I am crying for Hetty Hillesum who , even in the concentration camp where she was interned , wanted to be the thinking heart of the barracks .
I am crying because you are stopping me helping a dying man who - as you know - was not firing .
I am crying because I saw you throw to the ground Palestinian policemen who had not fired on you and I saw you force them to kneel with their hands up against a wall .
You forced them to strip naked and then you blindfolded them and tied their hands .
They had all come out of their building - the front door had been knocked down by force - with their hands in the air .
With them was an old man whom I have seen year after year in Ramallah .
We would always greet one another .
' Kiffech ' he would say to me .
' Mapsuta ' I would reply .
I am crying because , while the tank was firing on the building you forced us to evacuate - men , women and children - a young man was asking us for bread and cigarettes from the window of another house .
I am crying because Mohammed Iska 'fi , a doctor who had been wounded several times , did not hesitate to help a wounded Israeli soldier .
And yet we have been stopped by tanks and by your machine gun .
The wounded Israeli has been taken away ; Ahmed is still lying in the street : you tore him away from us as soon as we had managed to lie him down on a makeshift stretcher .
Are these normal scenes of war ?
Is there an unfortunate need for military intervention to protect the Israeli State against the wave of suicide bombers threatening to destroy it forever ?
I believe , together with many Israelis with whom we have been working for many years for a fair peace that recognises the right of both sides to their own state , that the only way to save the Israeli State is to end the Israeli military occupation .
The spread of the settlements , the seizing of land , the curfews , the Palestinians imprisoned in their own villages , the summary executions , the ambulances prevented from reaching their destinations , the women giving birth at check points , the destruction of the Palestinian Authority : these are not mistakes or accidents .
They are clear political policies dictated explicitly by Ariel Sharon , who , together with the parties of his coalition government , is demanding the transfer , in other words the deportation , of the Palestinian people , and not just the people of the occupied territories but the Arab citizens in Israel as well .
The reoccupation of land and the destruction are evidence of the Israeli Government 's intention to annex the occupied territories .
The policy of using suicide bombers , which , I am sad to say , is tragically no longer limited to Hamas or Jihad - organisations which , as a woman , I consider not just to be universally destructive but also to injure my rights too - must be stopped .
There is neither moral nor political justification for these acts .
I understand the Israelis ' fear , but I take courage from the organisation of Israeli and Palestinian relatives of victims who are saying , together : ' Military occupation kills all people ' .
I take courage from a Palestinian , Jamal Zakout , who bears the scars of torture on his body , who says : ' I am totally against attacks on civilians in Israel .
Even though civilians are being killed by bombing , it is wrong to take the line ' an eye for a eye , a tooth for a tooth ' , it is wrong to say that because our own children and young people are dying every day theirs should die too .
We must not lose our humanity .
The future of the Palestinian people must not be shaped by the culture of death and revenge . '
The tragedy is two-fold .
I wish we were all there , together with those Palestinians and those Israelis who continue to believe that the best form of security for all peoples , for all people , lies in the mutual acknowledgement of the right to exist and live in one 's own land in democracy and freedom .
Shulamit Aloni , an Israeli woman , declares , every day : ' I fought in the Hagannah to establish a Jewish state in Palestine and I find we have a colonialist state .
I do not support this , I am ashamed of this army , of our governments who are destroying lives and all our human values in the name of security .
I apologise to my group for using the common time available to us for such a personal testimony , although it is full of political relevance .
We call upon the European Union to take up a firm , clear position in line with international law and the protection of human rights .
It must use all the means available to it to compel the Israeli Government to withdraw from the occupied territories .
It must recognise the State of Palestine with the 1967 borders .
It must call for the immediate deployment of an international force .
It must suspend the Association Agreement with Israel for Israel has patently violated Article 2 ; there is no need for further analysis .
Peace is vital for the Palestinians , for the Israelis , for the entire region and for us too .
I am not taking sides .
I am for peace , we are for peace ; there must be no victory on either side .
But it needs to be established where the responsibilities lie and we must shoulder our responsibilities fully , so that we can all declare together that we want the reign of death , pain and suffering in Palestine and Israel to come to an end .
Mr President , Mr Solana , Minister , Commissioner , I have two sentiments that I would like to express .
The first is , of course , the emotion that the House feels in response to the account of what is happening in this part of the world , which concerns us all .
The successive attacks and killings have led to war ; this is what we are talking about here , war .
It is war that involves many horrific acts of violence .
My second sentiment is , when I listened to Mr Solana , who spoke with a great deal of honesty - and I am more than happy to acknowledge this - and impartiality today , what I felt , as well , was a certain feeling of helplessness . It is true that the European Union has so far been unable to find the resources required in order to put all its weight behind finding a solution which would bring an end this situation .
Thirdly , this is not a straightforward matter , of course , and I am perfectly aware of this .
I must , however , reiterate a number of things , particularly the fact that peace was almost achieved and that the reason it was not is precisely because the agreement proposed by Mr Barak was rejected , and since then the situation has only deteriorated .
I am convinced that the proposal by the Arab countries will not bring an end to this situation either .
The only way to bring this tragic situation under control is by sending a military intervention force to the area and the international community must also make a firm commitment .
We must be all the more attentive as there is a risk that this situation could have consequences in our countries , where we are beginning to see confrontations between representatives of various communities .
We are also seeing an increase in some racism , and anti-Semitism , which is unacceptable .
This is why I shall wholeheartedly support the proposals that will be made to send a peacekeeping force to the Middle East and to obtain the resources needed to put an end to this situation .
In December last year , the European Council demanded that the Palestinian Authority dismantle the Hamas and Islamic Jihad terrorist networks , arrest and prosecute everyone suspected of being involved in terrorist activities within its area of authority and publicly announce , in Arabic , the end of the intifada .
Mr President , four months on , we have to conclude that Arafat and the other Palestinian leaders have not met this demand by the EU Member States in any way .
What is worse , evidence is mounting that the President of the Palestinian Authority is directly involved in acts of terror against Israeli citizens .
What conclusions does the EU draw from this line of action , being , as it is , the Palestinian Authority 's largest donor ?
Should we not seriously consider the option of financial sanctions in this instance ?
It is legitimate that the Sharon administration , albeit only after numerous , extremely bloody Palestinian suicide attacks , has finally eliminated the Palestinian terrorist networks of its own accord .
Western diplomacy is now bringing heavy pressure to bear on Israel to dismantle the military operation .
However , what security guarantee do the EU and its Member States offer Israel ?
Can Europe promise that after the withdrawal , the Palestinian terror against the residents of Israel will not flare up again in all its intensity ?
I call on the Europeans and the Americans to specifically put this nightmare vision for the potential victims , the Israeli citizens , on the agenda tomorrow during their summit meeting in Spain .
Finally , the escalation in the Middle East has meanwhile led to extremely shameful expressions of blatant anti-Semitism in Member States of the European Union .
I call on all the European institutions to unreservedly condemn these , and hope that the Member States can counter this anti-Semitism effectively .
Mr President , firstly , I call for the same urgent , necessary attention that Europe is dedicating to the violence and bloodshed taking place in Palestine to be applied to the genocide inflicted on the Chechen people - mentioned by Mr Watson - 20 % of which has already been exterminated .
And Europe - it cannot be denied - has produced nothing but a cowardly silence on this matter to date .
Europe cannot claim that it is being completely neutral as regards Israel and the Palestinian Authority .
We will have no moral authority for any form of mediation if , most of the time , we only ever condemn one side , if we cannot show that we are making the distinction between a democratic country , the only one in the entire region , which is , moreover , committed to respecting human rights - although we do not know for how long - and a satrapy where those suspected of collaborationism are executed without even the semblance of a trial , if we do not acknowledge the fact that the Israeli army is engaged in an armed response which may be a futile mistake and which must not and , above all , cannot be the only response , but which is caused by the repeated massacres of unarmed , blameless civilians .
Few tears are shed for them .
As the High Representative , Mr Solana , said , in attempting to eliminate the infrastructures of terrorism Ariel Sharon is likely ultimately to produce fresh armies of fanatical terrorists , but we must not for one moment think that , unlike those who destroyed the Twin Towers , the Palestinian suicide bombers are not backed by an authority which is just as bloodthirsty and cynical .
We call on Ariel Sharon to withdraw and stop using armed force .
That is all well and good .
But what are we going to ask Yasser Arafat ?
Always providing Mr Arafat has a choice of whether to say ' no ' or not , as he has done thus far .
When we ask Mr Sharon to stop his violent retaliation , what guarantees , what solutions , are we going to offer him ?
There is talk of economic retaliation against Israel .
It would be interesting if the Palestinian Authority were to be asked to carry out an inquiry into European financing , at least to reassure the European taxpayers that they are not paying the salary of officials and leaders involved in organising suicide attacks ?
Europe must take a clear step and offer the Israeli democracy full integration into the Union .
This would be a way to overcome its authoritative behaviour , to stabilise the institutions of the State of Israel and to offer a strategic possibility of economic development too .
It would be a way of giving the Palestinian and Israeli citizens tangible hope of peace .
I have received six motions for resolutions to wind up the debate
Mr President , we are clearly facing an unprecedented crisis in the Middle East , which is all the more serious given that there is a risk of it spreading .
In the same area we must show our deep concern about the development of events on the border between Israel and Lebanon and call on the influential countries , such as Iran and Syria , despite their obvious indignation , to offer their good services to contain the climate of tension .
But in other geographical areas we have also seen angry reactions of solidarity with the humiliations being suffered by the Palestinians , as in the case of the massive demonstration in Morocco .
The Israeli Government must understand that it cannot ignore the clear views expressed by the international community .
We trust that tomorrow 's summit in Madrid , with the Presidency-in-Office of the European Union , the United States , Russia and the Secretary-General of the United Nations , will serve to confirm the strong will and agreement of the sponsors of the peace process that the last resolutions of the United Nations be complied with .
It appears that a partial withdrawal of troops is taking place and this is a step in the right direction , but it is clearly insufficient , especially if what Mr Patten has said today is true .
Mr President , I come from a country in which terrorism is the main concern of the citizens and we therefore feel particular solidarity with its victims .
But not everything is acceptable in the fight against terrorism ; the Rule of Law and international legality must always be respected .
From this point of view , it is not acceptable , under any circumstances , to attempt to undermine the structures of the Palestinian National Authority , which is for the moment the legitimate representative of the Palestinian people , however worthy of criticism some of their actions may be .
It is true that we must demand that it condemn the attacks : there are no good terrorists and bad terrorists ; they are all equally detestable .
They must do everything they can to prevent attacks and to arrest their perpetrators and instigators , something which unfortunately has not always happened .
In the European Union we must ensure unity of action .
A divided Europe is like having no Europe at all .
There has been progress between the Foreign Ministers of the Member States which I believe our public opinion considers to be insufficient .
I believe there are other avenues ; there are instruments in international practices which allow us to express our displeasure towards the policy of a government such as Israel 's .
Mr President , we find ourselves faced with the worst situation in the region since the 1967 and 1973 wars .
Israel is demonstrating its total contempt for the resolutions of the UN Security Council , for international law , for international treaties and for international conventions .
We must share the blame for massacres , crimes against humanity , and the repression and daily humiliation of a whole people if we remain silent and seek a balance between the oppressor and the oppressed .
There can be no such balance .
What can we do ?
A great deal , I believe .
For example , an embargo on arms to Israel , recalling our ambassadors to the European Union 's capitals , freezing all contacts with senior figures in Israel 's Government , and lastly suspending the Association Agreement .
Commissioner , I am now addressing you as the Commission 's representative here , but these words are really meant for Mr Prodi , the President of the Commission , for whom I have enormous respect both personally and for what he has achieved .
However , I simply do not understand his statements over the last few days .
Let me quote :
Mr President , the nightmare in the Middle East never ends .
While we stand here and debate , there is an orgy of violence and killing .
As you hear , Mr Solana and Mr Patten , we all feel incredibly powerless , disgusted and frustrated .
The suicide attacks are preventing Israelis from being able to move about freely .
Having a cup of coffee with a friend or shopping for food involves mortal danger .
The fear of new attacks has a paralysing effect , of course .
The European Parliament has condemned the terrorist attacks on countless occasions and urged Arafat and the Palestinian Authority to do everything in their power to stop them and to counter the hatred now also being spread to the Israelis .
Violence also prevails for the Palestinians on the West Bank and in Ramallah , with hundreds of Palestinians dead , among them many children .
Those of us who are friends of Israel , those of us who defend the Israeli state and its right to exist must react vigorously when the military and the government act as they do .
The escalated violence and brutality of the occupation is quite disproportionate .
A whole world is now united in demanding that Israel withdraw from the Palestinian areas .
Its action is indefensible , and the attacks against Palestinian civilians will lead to more , not fewer , suicide bombers .
The violent offensive and the killing can never lead to peace .
If Israel is at war , as Sharon has stated , there are certain international conventions and laws which apply .
Now , reports are flooding in that these are being violated .
We do not know this with any certainty because no organisations or media are permitted in the area .
Our fellow MEPs tell us that ambulances are not allowed to get through , either .
The hatred between Sharon and Arafat is bitter and long-standing .
It seems as if the parties can no longer escape from the situation .
Comprehensive international commitment and a clear list of demands are therefore needed .
It is good that the United States has stepped up its commitment and finally sent Colin Powell to the region .
The EU too must do more , however .
At the meeting on Monday , the ministers must ask themselves what we can do .
An immediate weapons embargo ?
Yes .
Obviously , the Association Agreement must be discussed .
I do not believe that , in the present situation , this would be the right moment to suspend it , but the matter must be discussed .
It must be possible for Palestinians and Israelis to live in peace , side by side .
There would be no more important contribution to world peace and the international fight against terrorism than if this conflict were to be resolved .
Mr President , Commissioner , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , Mr Solana , on behalf of the parties of Europe 's stateless , I can assure you that we share the view of Mr Solana and Commissioner Patten .
The violence must end and must make way for lasting peace .
A Palestinian state alongside an Israeli state .
However , we are disappointed with the resources used by the international community to achieve this goal , and more specifically , with the EU 's powerlessness .
We are ashamed by our powerlessness in the face of the suffering of so many people , so many unnecessary killings , the capture of so many citizens .
The Oslo spirit is dead .
Israel is guilty of state terrorism .
In his government , Mr Sharon has appointed ministers who want to reclaim the West Bank .
The serious human rights violations by Israel in Jenin and at many other locations in the reoccupied territories are tantamount to a cancellation of the Association Agreement by Israel itself , since respecting human rights forms part of the very substance of this Association Agreement .
The EU must now suspend the Association Agreement .
The proclamation of an arms embargo is not sufficient .
The Israeli and Palestinian peoples are crying out for peace , water , bread and dignity , but instead they are swamped by violence and war .
We must do everything in our power to stop this violence .
This is why we must decide to send a peace force now , as this has become inevitable .
Mr President , there is no military solution to the conflict between Israel and the Palestinian people .
Unless the root causes of conflict are addressed , no peaceful solution can be secured between the opposing sides .
Prime Minister Sharon has offered an uncompromising war on terror , but he has not offered any diplomatic solution to avoid the escalating spiral of violence and brutality .
The Tenet and Mitchell proposals are still on the table and , together with the recent proposals from the Saudi Arabian government , they too provide a basis for the resumption of peace talks if there is a full compliance with the recent UN resolutions by the Israeli government .
I firmly believe that Yasser Arafat is the political leader that the Israeli government must be negotiating with at this time , and that seeking to topple the Palestinian Authority is a recipe for long-term instability and will only intensify the hatreds between the Palestinian and Israeli people as well as between Israelis and other Arab countries in the Middle East .
The two sides will not be brought together unless there is an immediate and serious third-party mediation , and the US government must be seen to be vigorously involved in this process in a firm and meaningful way , as must the European Union .
Consideration must be given to suspending the EU-Israel Euro-Mediterranean Association Agreements which exist between the Union and Israel if Israel 's military attacks on the Palestinian people continue .
I would like to conclude by saying that I condemn the recent and ongoing violence in the Middle East and any acts of anti-Semitism which have been and are being committed in Europe or elsewhere in the world .
Mr President , there is of course nothing to indicate that Sharon plans to comply with any of the requests from either the EU or the United States .
Nor is there anything at all to suggest that Israel is concerned about its reputation at the moment .
However , Israel does respect money , and the only way to put pressure upon Israel is therefore to demand preliminary talks on our trade agreements .
I was in Israel in January when there were large demonstrations against reductions in the amount of support for students and the elderly .
Like any politician , Sharon obviously wishes to be re-elected , and the prospect of re-election would fade from sight if Israelis were exposed to economic sanctions because of the way in which he governs .
The EU has for all too long indulged Sharon 's government in its attempts to obtain influence over it , and the only result is Sharon 's refusing the EU access to talk with Arafat .
All the friends I made in Israel when , in 1967 , I landed there with the first plane-full of volunteers and subsequently stayed for two years are agreed that Sharon 's state terrorism is destroying Israeli society from within , and we must therefore curb Sharon for Israel 's sake too .
When does the EU plan to say that enough is enough ?
And when does the EU plan to call a spade a spade and designate as terrorism what Sharon and his soldiers and settlers are doing , namely killing thousands of civilians and innocent people - men , women and children .
For until we put that label on Sharon 's actions , he can , as now , continue to cut off supplies of food , water and medical aid by shooting at ambulances , all in the confident assurance that we do not plan to do anything at all other than talk and that we shall never take action .
Mr President , many people have called for action to be taken regarding Israel and for a ceasefire , and we would like to add our voices to theirs .
Much fewer were the voices which did not go along with the crowd and also spoke of the tragedy of the victims of the blind , brutal terrorism striking innocent civilians , of the ' loss of humanity ' , to quote one of the Members .
There is another requirement , in addition to these .
Europe cannot continue to stand by and do nothing when weapons threaten to destroy the places which symbolise our civilisation , the Christian civilisation .
Why has Europe itself never decided to propose , as has been advocated by the highest spiritual authorities for years , the internationalisation of the holy places ?
I would ask the President to inform both the Israeli Government and the Palestinian Authority of the pain currently felt by millions of European citizens of the Christian religion at the sight of the holy places where Jesus Christ was born in Bethlehem desecrated by bombs , fighting and occupation by armed soldiers , transformed into bivouacs for soldiers and becoming targets for both sides .
Mr President , the abandonment of the path of dialogue and negotiations has brought terrible consequences all round .
Violence does not bring justice , it does not put wrongs right , it does not address the root causes of a problem .
There are appalling violations of international law and human rights constantly taking place in the Palestinian territories at the moment , and the international community must stop this , as it must stop the madness of terrorism which is leading young people to sacrifice their young lives for a cause which , far from benefiting their own people , makes more innocent people victims and gives the leader of the Israeli Government the excuse to declare unilaterally outright war on the Palestinian Authority , its structure and members , starting with President Arafat .
One important development is that we have succeeded in organising a meeting , to take place tomorrow in Madrid , in which the United States , the European Union , Russia and the United Nations will , at last , be able to focus their efforts in the direction - it is to be hoped - of immediately sending an international peacekeeping force to the region which will be able to enforce the ceasefire and put an end to all the violations of rights .
In order to bring about compliance with the series of resolutions adopted by the UN Security Council , to bring about the immediate , total withdrawal of the Israeli army from the occupied territories and the release of President Arafat , we must put all possible pressure on the Israeli Government , not least placing a question mark over the EU-Israel Association Agreement .
The establishment of a sovereign Palestinian State , together with an international effort guaranteeing Israel 's security in line with the progressive position recently adopted by the Arab League , must remain our objective .
To this end , we will continue to support those who are fighting , even at this tragic time , for peace , for mutual respect , to bring about the peaceful coexistence of the two communities in both Palestine and Europe .
Moreover , we must reiterate , with greater vehemence , our condemnation of all acts of violence and intolerance committed against symbols and members of the Jewish community .
Mr President , Commissioner , Mr Solana , we are dealing here with a struggle for existence between two peoples .
That is very much how it appears from their own subjective point of view .
It is a struggle for existence in which neither side exactly has the benefit of good political leadership .
Given that situation and the fact that emotions are running so high , it would be wrong to try and establish how one action or another started .
Anyone familiar with the more modern or more ancient history of the Holy Land knows that he who cast the first stone is impossible to find !
For that reason we should not be stirring up fresh emotions but rather trying to inspire trust , so that the peoples there can find some peace and thus be able to talk to each other again .
So it is extraordinarily important for us not to throw oil on the fire .
That is why I would like to thank you all for coming here today and for the meeting being held in Madrid tomorrow .
If the European Union , the United States of America , Russia and the United Nations can reach a joint position worked out by their most high-level foreign policy representatives and jointly put this over to both parties , then for the first time there will be a chance of the seriousness of the situation being appreciated by both sides .
Above all , there is a credibility factor , because just as each party has a credibility gap on one side or the other , there is a collective credibility here .
We should take advantage of that .
Credibility that we are in a position to give security guarantees for a state of Israel and a Palestinian state , that we are in a position to take onboard the proposals of the Crown Prince of Saudi Arabia , including the recognition of the state of Israel by the Arab states , and on this basis to establish the credibility of the idea that it is now time to withdraw and to refrain from terrorism , which is a condition for entering into concrete negotiations .
We have got our own concrete interest here , not just a general interest in peace and human rights .
Because of our close geographical proximity we are interested in the anti-terrorism coalition not collapsing and in a new fundamentalism not being used as an excuse , and we have an interest in our Mediterranean policy making successful progress under the Barcelona Process .
We should therefore seek to ensure that Mr Solana , Mr Patten and the Presidency should not travel alone to Jerusalem with Vice-President Powell travelling there alone eight days later .
Please try to ensure tomorrow that you will go there together .
That would send a message from the world community to the warring parties as a way out of this appalling situation .
I wish you all every success tomorrow .
Mr President , the other day , the Financial Times observed that the EU 's Middle East policy lies in ruins , and Le Monde complains about the EU 's impotence in the Middle East .
Listening to the Council 's and the Commission 's representatives , one can understand why .
Fine words and self-praise , but no action .
It is so much more gratifying to listen to MEPs and leaders of the political groups demanding that action should be taken , that the options under the Association Agreement should be used and that , in particular , peace-keeping troops should be despatched .
There is no question but that we must send tens of thousands of peace workers , both civilian and military , irrespective of whether the United States and Israel say we must not .
We must not send them to Israel and we must not bomb Israeli towns .
We must respond to the Palestinians ' request for troops to protect Palestine .
There can be no impediment in international law to sending tens of thousands of military and civilian peace workers to Palestine at the request of the Palestinians .
Why are you so afraid to act , Mr Solana and Mr Patten ?
Mr President , for cultural as well as political reasons , I have always been a sincere friend of the Israelis and the State of Israel .
I feel that the current duty of all those who are sincere friends of Israel must be to make the Israeli Government realise that , in many respects , it is making a mistake .
Friends have to be frank with one another if they want to be true friends , and this is the time for plain speaking .
That is why I feel that , while the European Parliament must call for peace and make every effort to bring peace to the region , it must also state clearly that a government which we respect , a country for which we have sincere affection and which we want to protect has a responsibility to change , and that it is precisely because we want to protect it that we are asking it to do so .
President Cox , we met with the President of the Italian Jewish Community , Mr Luzzatto , earlier today : you were with him a short while ago and he called for Parliament to take action .
I realise how difficult it is , Mr President , but I feel that , if we too as Parliament , as the Presidency of Parliament , can make some contribution , however little , to this quest for peace , then let us do so .
The European Union was right to try and do something , even though it came up against a brick wall .
If we have responsibilities , we too must discharge them fully .
Mr President , the debate currently taking place , including the debate in this Chamber , is proof - if proof were still needed - of how different and divergent the proposals that have been made are .
The sad conclusion we must draw is that there is currently no possibility of stopping the war in the Middle East .
In any case , in the Middle East , two men - Ariel Sharon and Yasser Arafat - are continuing to jeopardise the stability of the world today , and although they talk of peace they do not genuinely desire it , they are shying away from it , avoiding it , for neither of them want peace : both hope , or believe they will win the war , one with superior military force and the other with suicide bomb attacks .
The effects of this crisis in the Middle East are starting to impact on our countries too , as Mr Pasqua said just now .
Racism is on the increase and is attacking the rest of the world , Europe and the United States , leading to dangerous misunderstandings and differences of opinion between these two continents , between Europe and the United States .
It is difficult to envisage any sort of solution but , as Mr Solana said just now , we need to establish a political perspective for the future , and I feel that the idea of a sort of international Marshall plan aimed at resolving at least a small part of the problems of the Palestinians could be a useful contribution .
The Italian Government has developed an initiative of this kind , an initiative to support the economy in the Middle East and , in particular , the Palestinian economy , an initiative which Mr Berlusconi recently proposed to all his European colleagues .
I feel that all those who are calling and hoping for genuine peace in the Middle East must support this proposal .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I support the proposal put forward in this debate by my friend , Enrique Barón Crespo , for the European Parliament to send three messages : to the Madrid Summit , to the Sharon Government and to the Palestinian authority , as he said .
Words alone , however , are not enough !
We have already said as much as can be said and no one has listened .
Mr Solana is wrong : we have been humiliated by the treatment that the European Union delegation received in Israel , which is unacceptable .
We must now translate our words into action to ensure that we are treated with the respect we deserve .
At the point Ariel Sharon 's Government has now reached , only action can be understood .
Israel is no longer abiding by the rule of law , as hard as this may be for us to accept .
It is not complying with international law or with its own laws .
As Commissioner Patten said , the fight against terrorism that we all support cannot be used as an excuse to disregard international law .
I therefore support the measure , which must be implemented as a matter of urgency , to suspend the Association Agreement between Israel and the European Union .
This is the only option we have left .
We must also insist that the United Nations sends a military intervention force to enforce the cease-fire .
Following the repeated statements by President Bush , which have not yet led to any action , there is no other way .
I used to have a great deal of respect for Israel , but - and it pains me to have to say this - its army is acting like a real colonial army and , in the war that it is waging on the Palestinians , is not even respecting the Geneva Convention .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , Prime Minister Sharon promised his people that he would create greater security and peace .
In fact , his policies have lead to less security for Israel and less peace for the region as a whole .
We in Europe too should criticise what Israel has done , because we should measure Israel by the yardsticks that we have in common , those of constitutionality and the protection of human rights .
However , that statement should not obscure what this conflict is really all about .
It is about the right to exist , the very principle of Israel 's right to exist , and not about that of the neighbouring Arab states .
One aspect of a secure existence is a life free from terror .
The Israelis have always been denied the right to a life free from terror .
Israel has constantly not only been threatened by terror , but terrorism has also been put into practice by organisations like Hamas and Jihad , who have been able to ply their bloody trade in the Palestinian areas almost with impunity .
Some responsibility for these acts of terrorism clearly lies with the Palestinian leader Mr Arafat , who has never firmly distanced himself from terrorism , let alone effectively fought against it .
The inadequate measures taken to combat terrorism have destroyed a great deal of trust .
We Europeans should not let our influence be diminished still further by creating the impression that we are no longer capable of distinguishing between cause and effect .
No conflict can be solved through terrorism and violence .
Accordingly both sides must end this violent conflict .
Israel must withdraw from the Palestinian areas .
The acts of terror by the Palestinians must cease .
We need to make demands of both sides .
Mr President , Ariel Sharon is a man of war , it is part of him , he promised to destroy Oslo and that is what he is doing at the moment .
He confuses the aim of fighting terrorism with the liquidation of the Palestinian Authority and the daily carrying out of massacres .
Using his tanks , and with our consent , he has managed to establish a new political-administrative category : now there are occupied Palestinian territories and re-occupied Palestinian territories .
I welcome the advice given by President Bush that the perpetrators of the massacres withdraw from the places they have cruelly and unnecessarily destroyed .
Powell has pointed out that the President does not give orders to the Prime Minister of a sovereign country , but it does not appear that the advice has done much good .
Sharon will decide to order a withdrawal when the massacre is finished .
Unless we all , those of us who do not carry out massacres , decide jointly that there is a limit , even for sovereignty , when that sovereignty is employed in a way that goes against the dignity and ethics of humanity .
I found Secretary of State Powell more lucid when he said that we may be radicalising a whole new generation of Palestinians and that many new terrorists are perhaps waiting to act when the current operation ends .
That is the possible effect , to put an end to the moderates .
The day before yesterday , as we know , almost a million Moroccans demonstrated in Rabat against Sharon and in support of Palestine .
They are moderates or radicals .
If amongst all of us we do not stop Sharon now , hate and radicalisation will spread throughout the Islamic world .
We must take concrete and appropriate action now .
Mr President , I met both Shimon Peres and Yasser Arafat in the Middle East last summer .
The situation was desperate then .
There was a vicious circle of terrible violence but at the same time the recent knowledge that the ingredients for a solution had been on the table at Camp David and Taba .
Since then the security situation has deteriorated catastrophically .
Terrorist extremists have committed the most vile acts and deliberately incited the emotions , prejudices , ignorance and anxieties of vulnerable peoples , particularly among the Islamic communities , and aroused the deepest fears among the Israelis .
We should remember the strategic vulnerability of Israel , a tiny country whose people have been subjected to the most terrible terrorist attacks , at once unpredictable and random while organised and planned in order to have the most cruel and devastating effect .
I think of the Israeli mother who would not let her small children travel on the same school bus in case they should all be lost .
I think of the parents of those teenagers and others murdered or maimed in countless terrorist suicide bomb attacks .
There is no moral or political justification for such horrendous acts .
But I hold no brief for Ariel Sharon .
In fact I am baffled and dismayed by his approach .
On the one hand he has called for the Palestine authority to bear down on the terrorists in its midst but on the other he has crippled those very agencies which have the capacity to take such action .
He has wanted to change the attitude of the Arab peoples to Israel , but by his own actions has helped stimulate primeval hatred in yet another generation of Palestinians and fuelled the martyr culture .
We must recognise the desperate plight of the Palestinian people , so many of them abandoned by their Arab brethren in refugee camps for generations , prey to extremists , so often lacking the quality of leadership at crucial moments that would help release them from their misery .
These are the raw ingredients that we have to work with .
At this stage the European Union should not be self-interested , trying to promote some role for itself , but balanced , positive and constructive .
It would certainly not be helpful for the EU to take one side in this matter by some policy of sanctions against Israel , for example .
This would merely give comfort to extremists and sharpen the differences with the United States .
What is needed now is a bold , generous , urgent international initiative with the European countries , the United States , Russia and well-meaning Arab states , speaking with one voice .
We need to come together with a clear offer of massive international assistance .
There are other darker forces waiting in the wings of this conflict .
Time is running out .
Mr President , Europe does not believe in war , it only believes in peace , and therefore in a political solution .
This means that we all shoulder our responsibilities .
One of the Arab countries , Saudi Arabia - an influential country - has recently taken a major step by proposing a peace plan for the whole region .
Let us , therefore , shoulder our responsibilities , and I hope that tomorrow in Madrid , Mr Solana , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , Commissioner , you will be able to convince President Bush 's envoy that the time has come to become involved in this conflict to find the solution , and this can only be a political solution .
This also assumes that , in the future , when the ceasefire is in place and the withdrawal from the occupied territories has been accomplished , the Security Council will be able to send an intervention and observation force to the area . Its task will never be to enforce peace but will be to remind each party of its responsibilities within the Security Council .
The majority of French Socialists is in favour of suspending the Association Agreement , but we must ensure that we find a solution where we are still able to address all parties and that we do not put in place mechanisms which might be overturned , which would strengthen support for those whom we wish to punish .
Lastly , nothing that happens in the Middle East can ever justify acts of anti-Semitism being committed in any of our countries , whether ad hoc or organised , acts which take us back to the darkest hours of the previous century and revive our memories .
I hope that everyone here will be able to make every effort to make others aware and that , in all our countries , we maintain a spirit of tolerance , mutual respect and secularity .
Mr President , what can we say in response to the tragedy that is unfolding in the Middle East as we speak , other than to state our belief that the escalation to the use of extreme violence can only lead to increased levels of already unbearable suffering for the people of all backgrounds .
Under these circumstances , we can only , first of all , support the very firm positions adopted by the President of the United States of America , who , as we all know , is the only person who can now really influence the decisions taken by Ariel Sharon . Secondly , and in order to consolidate this support , we can only call on the Council and the Commission to use all the resources at their disposal to facilitate a return to peace , bearing in mind the possibility of suspending the Association Agreements .
Third and finally , we must urge the governments of the European Union to organise immediately their participation in implementing a peacekeeping force should the United Nations Security Council decide to use this option .
I recall that I once said , in this very Chamber , to our colleagues in the Knesset that this was the only way to restore peace . It is on this basis , Mr President , that a motion for a compromise resolution was negotiated .
Like you , Mr President , I hope that it receives as much unanimous support as possible .
Mr President , three days ago I was in Ramallah , and I am therefore one of those Members whom Mr Santini inappropriately accused of war tourism .
I would like to reassure him : there was no tourism , only war .
The eyewitness accounts of Members of this Parliament are one contribution to opposing this war .
While we were there we saw things we would have preferred not to : we saw check points closed by the Israeli army , bursts of machine gun fire at old people and children , we saw Israeli army tanks parading in the courtyard of Ramallah hospital .
If that hospital has not suffered the same fate as all the other Palestinian public buildings , if it has escaped the damage caused by roundups , that is due in part to the peaceful protection of these Members of Parliament , to their accounts of their experiences and to their power to condemn what they have seen .
Mr President , time is running out .
With an army that has become used to occupying and a civilian population resigned to being occupied , it is difficult to imagine that a peace free of hatred can exist .
Yet the world needs unqualified peace now ; above all , as Mrs Morgantini said , it needs peace without victory on either side .
Mr President , while we sit here debating , a tragedy is unfolding in Palestine : a humanitarian as well as a political tragedy .
If this policy is not stopped , it will not only destroy the present , it will also destroy the future for any political solution .
For both the Palestinians and the Israelis .
In this sense , Sharon 's political actions are to be condemned .
At this stage , sitting on the fence - or going nowhere near the fence - is tantamount to complicity .
It is time for action , initiative and intervention .
Any further prevarication is pointless and destructive .
Tomorrow , Mr Solana , you will be holding discussions with Colin Powell and the others .
I trust that Mr Powell 's opinion will sit with Mr Bush 's opinion and Mr Rumsfeld 's opinion and Mr Cheney 's opinion .
You know what I mean .
With Europe having to evaluate its values and principles now , however , its first message must be that it believes in what it says and will act on it and the proposals made by the various Members should be used as active guidelines for practical purposes .
Now we are being tested , now we are showing what our policies are really made of .
Mr President , due to time restrictions , I shall make a few brief comments .
In view of the last intervention by Mr Souladakis , I would like to tell you that tomorrow will not be the first time we have spoken to Colin Powell : we speak to Mr Powell practically every day and it is certainly partly as a result of those conversations that the meeting will take place tomorrow .
I do not share the frustrating feeling that the European Union carries no weight .
Quite the opposite : as a result of these contacts , of this passion we have applied to trying to resolve the problem , tomorrow 's meeting in Madrid has been called and the major players in relation to this conflict will reach a collective agreement to try to resolve it .
I would like to say that , at least for tomorrow , I believe there are three fundamental messages .
Afterwards , we will return to this House to explain the development of the issue by means of a parliamentary debate .
The first message , which is fundamental , is that the representatives of the major players who are going to meet tomorrow must make an effort to ensure that the Security Council resolutions be applied immediately , without delay .
I repeat : without delay .
I believe it is essential that for the first time a joint and public declaration of this kind should be made by the Secretary-General of the United Nations , the European Union , the Russian Federation and the United States .
And I believe that we Europeans must support this proposal and this type of declaration .
Secondly , I believe we must do everything possible to ensure that the important players meeting tomorrow see to it that the Palestinian Authority is not degraded any further .
Everything possible must be done to ensure that the Palestinian Authority recovers its capacities .
It is highly contradictory - as has been stressed already - to ask the Palestinian Authority to sign a ceasefire agreement , to arrest the terrorists who are free in certain parts of Palestine , when it does not have the means to do so .
This morning , you have seen the news that Israeli forces have withdrawn from a city .
On leaving that city they have bombed and destroyed the general headquarters of the Palestinian Authority .
At the same time it is very contradictory tomorrow to ask the Palestinian Authority to lead the way in finding the solution for a ceasefire .
Therefore , and as a result of this reasoning , it seems to me fundamental that this message be sent rigorously and clearly .
It is a message that must be understood and that must be expressed clearly so that everybody understands it and so that our Israeli friends also understand it .
We all have many friends in Israel who agree on this point .
It follows from this approach that it is necessary for the international community to be willing to engage on the ground .
This is something that I am saying with conviction , for the first time .
I believe that we must begin to think seriously about it .
But this is not going to happen in 24 hours , it is not going to happen without any mandate .
When it was said that the Europeans should be deployed in a military or policing sense - or I do not know how - in the territories , it is clear that this will require some kind of mandate .
And that is what we have to work on : on ensuring that the next Security Council Resolution allows , once the necessary conditions are in place , for the possibility of an international presence on the ground .
I believe that is a reasonable measure which the European Union can support , but which it must support jointly with others , in particular the United States and the Russian Federation .
That is what we must do .
Thirdly : tomorrow we must send a clear signal - not just the Europeans , but collectively with all the major players - that there must be a political perspective .
And there is no need to invent that perspective , since one has already been invented : it consists of two states , with secure borders ( one of which is the Palestinian State , whose borders must be set in accordance with the Security Council Resolutions , that is to say , those set in 1967 ) and able to live together .
That is the final objective .
How can that objective be achieved ?
That is the difficult question that we have been working on for many months .
It is possible that the only way forward is the Tenet Plan and that , afterwards , the Mitchell Plan should be implemented , which I know very well since I drew it up jointly with Senator Mitchell .
I am beginning to rather doubt - and this causes me to be very pessimistic - that the Tenet Plan , followed by the Mitchell Plan and followed by a negotiation - and I do not know when it will take place - is going to be the ideal formula .
If we do not have a negotiator on the Palestinian side , it is going to be very difficult - as I said before - for us to achieve our aim through this process of tiny steps .
That is my worry and that is why I am pessimistic .
I am not going to suddenly come up with some miraculous solution and it would be naïve , stupid and unworthy of you to expect it .
However , if we have to seek some solution , I have said on previous occasions that we need an ' express ' Mitchell Plan , a fast Mitchell Plan , not for the times in which it was conceived , but a much faster Mitchell plan , which would lead us as quickly as possible to a final agreement .
Finally , I think it is essential that we ask that the Beirut Resolution - which has not been read properly and it should be , since some of its points are very important - should also become a United Nations Security Council Resolution ; that that commitment , this gesture from the Arab world towards Israel 's security should also become a Security Council Resolution .
I believe that that would be an additional element in terms of recovering the trust between the parties , a trust which unfortunately does not exist at the moment .
( Applause )
Finally , a comment of a personal nature : I know that many of you have suffered a lot .
I have seen some people who have particularly suffered , some of whom have even been expelled from the region .
I can say that I understand your feelings just as I understand the feelings of the Palestinians and the Israelis .
I have seen many Palestinians die and I have seen many Palestinians suffer and I have also seen families of old friends on the side of peace in Israel who do not take their children in the same bus to school and who separate their children into two groups for fear of dying in a terrorist attack .
We must understand all of this .
If we do not understand the two things , we will never resolve the problem .
Therefore , let us understand the problem in depth so that we can resolve it .
Lastly , as for me , Javier Solana , rest assured that I will never cease working for peace in the Middle East , as I have done up until now .
I have been working for it since the Madrid Conference , many years ago , and I expect to continue working for it while I still have the energy and the strength .
( Applause )
Mr President , I shall be very brief .
All I can say is that I , and the Presidency as a whole , support everything Mr Solana has said in response to today 's debate in Parliament .
I would like to take this opportunity to make two observations .
The first is with regard to the meeting that will take place tomorrow . I believe that we can allow ourselves to feel a degree of satisfaction , insofar as it is no coincidence that this meeting is to take place in the capital of the country which currently holds the Presidency of the European Union .
This meeting is taking place on the EU 's , and the Presidency 's initiative , and therefore will be the most important event that has taken place until now with a view to achieving peace , and presents the only real opportunity to bring together all the major players , in one location , to break this vicious circle of violence .
We hope that all present will share the Presidency 's , and , naturally , the whole Union 's , determination to see this succeed , a determination that has been expressed here in Parliament , with whose support a final effort will be made at tomorrow 's meeting .
The second observation I would like to make , Mr President , refers to the need , that many honourable Members and leaders of political groups have expressed , for us to review our Association Agreement with Israel , in other words , that we should use our Association Agreement with Israel as an instrument .
I would like to say emphatically that the Presidency totally agrees with this approach and this very morning the Spanish Foreign Minister , Mr Piqué , announced that he intends , in agreement with the Commission , to call on the Association Council to carry out a review of our relations with Israel .
Ladies and gentlemen , I have to tell you , however , that for any steps to be taken within the Association Agreement , we need unanimity from the Council .
Put simply , and as you are all aware , these measures do not only depend on the determination of the Commission or the Presidency-in-Office , but on that of every Member State of the European Union .
We are already well aware of this Parliament 's determination .
I believe that this will also be reflected in the resolution that will be approved tomorrow and I hope that this will act as a wake-up call to the conscience of every EU government .
( Applause )
The debate is closed .
The vote will be taken at noon on Wednesday .
I should like to thank the High Representative , the Council and the Commission for their participation in this debate as well as our colleagues who have contributed to it .
( The sitting was suspended at 7.10 p.m. and resumed at 9 p.m. )

The next item is the recommendation for second reading ( A5-0095 / 2002 ) by Mr Sterckx on behalf of the Committee on Regional Policy , Transport and Tourism on the Council common position for adopting a European Parliament and Council directive establishing a Community vessel traffic monitoring and information system and repealing Council Directive 93 / 75 / EEC ( 11367 / 1 / 2001 - C5-0635 / 2001 - 2000 / 0325 ( COD ) ) .
The interest may not be overwhelming , but this does not detract from the significance of the legislation before us .
We have now reached the fourth report in the Erika package and in my view , these two Erika packages together can represent a considerable step forward in increasing maritime safety .
The first Erika package addressed the issues of port state control , the classification society and double-hulled tankers .
We are now discussing the first report of the second Erika package , which covers measures to improve traffic monitoring and information systems onboard ships , as well as to enhance risk management , especially in adverse weather .
This is the objective of the directive on which we are currently working .
The measures are therefore mainly preventive - and extremely important in my view .
Firstly , traffic monitoring and information systems involve the onboard installation of transponders which automatically send data to shore .
What is important here is not so much the list of what has to be sent - as we are all agreed on this - but that this data is understood among the various Member States .
In other words , it is important for the computer systems , as well as the people , to be able to communicate with each other .
In my view , we must pay particular attention to this aspect to ensure that this is achieved .
Secondly , I should like to comment on the scope of transponders , which should be looked at when we review the directive .
At the moment , the scope is relatively restricted .
I believe that when we review the directive , we - and I am looking in the direction of the Commission - would all benefit from endeavouring to achieve a more extensive scope , possibly combined with satellite communication , by working in tandem with the IMO , and we should ensure that this system has global coverage .
A third point is the black box , which was already mentioned in the report by Mr Watts .
We had to fight a tough battle to achieve this , of course , but now it is here .
The black box is not a panacea but a very useful tool , and we must ensure that this tool is used in the area of prevention , and we must learn from near misses and accidents in order to prevent future accidents .
We are focusing our traffic monitoring efforts mainly on ships which carry a higher risk on account of their cargo and their past history .
And we must also ensure that each incident - and this is a very valid point in the Commission proposal , in my view - is reported from now on , so that we are better informed of what actually happens at sea , which currently only takes place to a limited extent .
Another point I want to bring up is related to the fact that the most serious accidents at sea , with major and serious implications , happen under adverse weather conditions , and concerns improved risk management in adverse weather and during storms at sea .
We have managed to put forward a number of points which I believe may be helpful , and Parliament 's contribution has been considerable in this respect .
The authorities must take measures when the weather conditions are adverse : keeping the captain better informed , announcing a prohibition on entering or leaving ports which is specifically tailored to each situation in each port , banning refuelling at sea , etc .
However , I would still like to emphasise that , whichever way you look at it , it is the captain who is ultimately responsible for the ship .
In my opinion , we have stated this clearly in Parliament and this is very important point .
Moving on to another point , Member States have a duty of assistance to ships in distress .
This is also essential in my view , and this is an example of where Parliament , together with the Commission and the Council , have tightened up the original provisions .
These concern ports of refuge , safe havens for ships in distress - the Erika proved that these are necessary - sound equipment - and for me , this not only includes station tugs but also installations that can limit pollution - timing ( determining a strict period of time within which Member States must have made their measures known , namely 18 months ) - Parliament added this provision - and compensation for a port or coastal point which accommodates vessels .
The Commission intends to look into this and to issue a report to Parliament within three years to assess the state of affairs .
Ladies and gentlemen , I should like to thank everyone involved for their contribution and the efforts made .
In my view , we have delivered a sound piece of work .
I should also like to thank the offices of the Commission , and the people of the Council , as I am of the opinion that this has been an excellent and constructive team effort and we have ended up with a sound piece of legislation .
Commissioner , what is important is that we also monitor what happens , both now and as and when we complete the six measures of the two Erika packages .
The European Parliament , or , as far as I am concerned , the rapporteurs of these various reports , must , together with the Commission , check at regular intervals what has happened , how far we have got and what the problems are we are facing .
We have legislation - and I believe we have laid down sound legislation - but safety , including at sea , is man-made .
In my opinion , we should invest in these people , also in the Union , the people who work on improving the monitoring of safety both at sea and on land .
Mr President , Madam President-in-Office of the Council , the Erika 2 package , like the Erika 1 package before it , is part of the attempt to establish reliable safety measures and protect the marine environment , the importance of both of which is recognised by one and all .
That goes without saying .
The package of measures which we are being called on to adopt today does , I think , strike the right balance and demonstrates yet again that we can only protect and improve European shipping standards by improving safety at sea and protecting both human life and the marine environment and I should like to congratulate Mr Sterckx on his tireless work over a long period of time to achieve the result which we have before us today .


The Commission 's initial proposal contained positive arrangements to improve safety at sea and reduce the danger of pollution from accidents .
Ships are required to use a transponder and voyage data recorders or so-called black boxes .
This has since been dealt with in the Watts report , which requires ships to comply with maritime traffic systems , improvements to be made to ship-locating systems and so on .
In turn , Parliament approved 29 amendments at first reading which , I think , improved the Commission proposal and most of which , I should point out , were subsequently adopted by the Council , which took a constructive stance .
However , a number of questions have yet to be settled and I therefore think we are right - and this is the point of the nine amendments approved in the Committee on Regional Policy , Transport and Tourism - to insist on keeping to a specific approach to point the way both to the Commission and to the Council .
I should like to comment very briefly on three of these amendments .
Amendment No 1 basically clarifies that a Member State may , in exceptionally poor conditions , stop a ship from entering port or even from leaving port , because ships in port sometimes represent more of a threat to safety and of pollution of the port itself .
I think our Committee , the Committee on Transport , is right to assert that the decision as to whether or not the ship sails should be taken at the discretion of the captain , who must of course explain the reasons for his decision .
We have tried in Amendment No 2 to take a more realistic approach to the cost of pollution or damage which the accommodating port may sustain ; obviously ports will be more willing to accommodate ships in distress if they know that they will receive fair and immediate compensation for cleaning-up costs .
Finally , Amendment No 3 basically endeavours to ensure that resources are immediately available so that the Member States can make the necessary arrangements to provide means and facilities in ports of refuge for assistance to ships , salvage and pollution response .
And Mr Sterckx 's proposed 18-month deadline is essential if these proposals are to become law in all the Member States of the European Union , rather than just a ' to-do ' list .
Mr President , we are taking action as a Parliament , as a European Union , to make our seas safer because of tragic events like the loss of the Herald of Free Enterprise , the Scandinavian Star , The Estonia and , most recently , The Erika .
We are putting in place a series of measures to ensure events like that can never happen again .
We save lives and we protect the marine environment .
I therefore applaud the Commission and the Commissioner for her commitment to improving the safety of our seas and the Council for its willingness to codecide with Parliament .
In particular I pay tribute to the rapporteur for his determination both to strengthen and clarify an already good proposal .
The three key elements are monitoring and information , transponders on every ship and monitoring by every maritime authority , an essential component of our package of measures - the Erika package .
This will ensure that there is no hiding place for substandard ships , that all ships will be watched and monitored and that they will not escape compliance with their international obligations .
That is our message to substandard ships and the flags of convenience .
Secondly , the proposal dovetails with my own report on port State control . In particular the black box voyage-data recorder .
As the rapporteur has said , this will enable us not just to learn from lessons but prevent problems occurring in the first place .
We are giving real help to ships in distress to ensure that they are properly handled in emergency situations , closing a loophole in the safety chain .
I , like the rapporteur , want to ensure that this and other Erika measures are complied with .
This perhaps is the greatest challenge we face as a Community .
We want to ensure all this new legislation , worthy though it is , is complied with not just by the ship operators but also by the Member States themselves who , sadly , over the years , have shown a reluctance to adhere to Community law .
I hope that the Erika rapporteurs together can meet the Commissioner soon to help bring forward proposals as to how best Parliament can ensure that Member States comply with their toughened obligations .
Finally , I hope our amendments can be accepted in full in order to avoid codecision and to ensure this legislation , which will do so much to make our seas safer , comes on to the statute book at the earliest possible opportunity .
Mr President , I would like to thank Mr Sterckx for his thorough investigation into this issue and the excellent way in which he has prepared this report .
The proposal for a directive as part of the second Erika package has focused attention on the matters that are essential for increasing safety at sea and reducing the environmental damage caused by accidents .
Waterborne traffic is popular , partly because it is environmentally friendly .
It is especially important for the EU 's peripheral regions and in commercial transport between the EU and non-member countries .
The risk of accident has grown , however , with the increase in traffic .
The committee has once again adopted some proposals to improve safety that are not contained in the Council 's common position .
It is particularly important to ensure there are adequate salvage facilities and equipment to deal with oil spillages in all coastal zones .
Likewise , we must see to it that essential search and rescue services are properly organised .
Besides tightening up the rules still further we must ensure that the decisions taken are realistic and , furthermore , feasible .
It is important for the interests of all concerned , however , that the proposal is adopted swiftly and that we make real progress in matters of safety .
Because the directive should be adopted and implemented swiftly it is not appropriate to wait around for the decision of the meeting of the International Maritime Organisation in December .
The directive 's annexes can be amended through the comitology procedure so that they are made to accord with what the IMO has decided .
This procedure allows internationally agreed deadlines to be incorporated into the directive easily and swiftly .
I would furthermore like to draw your attention to the fact that decisions taken by the Union alone to raise levels of safety at sea are not enough .
We need global agreements to deal with such matters as responsibility .
First of all , I would like to congratulate the rapporteur on the quality of his work . Like him I believe that we are working towards an excellent text .
Admittedly we still have a long way to go because , since the Amoco-Cádiz tragedy that everyone in Europe and particularly the people of France , can recall , no progress has been made . Quite the opposite , in fact ; things have deteriorated , since oil companies have decided to withdraw from transport to avoid seeing their name on the hull of a wrecked ship , and to avoid being associated with ships that have run aground and acts of pollution .
This decision had a dramatic effect , since maritime transport , oil transport had become a separate profit centre which was forced , like any other profit centre , to cut its costs , to make a profit and to survive under the pressure from those in charge , namely the oil companies . This had an undeniable effect on the quality of transport and on safety , since the average age of a ship doubled in the space of 15 years and so there is an obvious link between the average age of a ship and the number of accidents .
So , Parliament has a specific duty to intervene on these issues , not only because they concern the environment but also because they are transnational in nature and this is a good document that we are working towards . I would , however , like to stress one particular point .
Of course , the control of illegal trafficking , data registration and identification are all well and good , but it would be quite reasonable , in the same spirit of resisting economic pressure , to ensure that the decision whether the ship leaves the port when sea conditions are difficult is not simply left to the captain alone , as he may be placed under economic pressure due to his position . Instead , the port authorities could take this decision as they can decide whether or not it is safe to set sail without having to take into account financial considerations .
Mr President , Madam Vice-President , I believe that it is vital for the Council to take a rapid decision on what we will be approving at second reading tomorrow .
The rapporteur has been very cautious .
He has not gone too far at second reading , because we want rapid results , as , let us be honest , it is a long time since the Erika II sank .
So we need to take measures without delay and I would like to point out that transponders are not only suitable for monitoring but first and foremost also for rescue purposes .
So if a vessel really gets into trouble at sea and can no longer set off an adequate distress signal , it can be reached and rescued more quickly by using transponders .
Our requests to the Council with regard to equipping vessels with transponders and voyage data recorders are really very modest .
We can only hope that the IMO will agree an accelerated timetable in the autumn , one that we can implement without delay .
Commissioner , the vital thing here is for us to react more quickly , and Mr Sterckx has been kind enough to give you three years to sort out compensation for ports that accommodate ships in distress .
The Erika need not have sunk if it could have entered the port , and it is therefore a reflection of the situation here .
We need ports that can accommodate ships in distress , but if those ports are to allow ships to enter , we need compensation arrangements .
Commissioner , I urge you to sort out those arrangements more quickly , because ports will then be far more willing to accommodate ships in distress and a case like that of the Erika II can be avoided .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I feel that those of us concerned about maritime safety and the protection of our seas - and , in this regard , the protection of crews is naturally the most important factor - are today witnessing the culmination of one more measure within the Erika I and Erika II packages , involving a series of measures which is providing the European Union with sufficient and appropriate instruments so that it can carry out genuine preventative action and prevent accidents at sea .
The sinking of the Erika reminded the world of the constant risk involved in the transport by sea of oil-based products , and made the need for a better understanding and monitoring of maritime traffic off the European coastline perfectly clear .
The measures the Commission has proposed have gone much further and have not been restricted to proposals solely concerned with the oil sector , but have been extended to the maritime traffic sector as a whole .
Today 's proposal , which relates to the directive establishing a Community vessel traffic monitoring and information system , is a response to this concern .
It sets up a global strategy with the intention of guaranteeing a high safety standard for this traffic along the whole of the European coastline , and its objective - I assure you - is prevention , through more precise identification and better monitoring of ships .
It also has the objective of improving the response of the coastal authorities in the event of an accident or the risk of an accident , since , as Mr Hatzidakis mentioned , port control , the establishment of ports of refuge , and assistance to boats in difficulty are absolutely key issues .
I would like to say that , throughout the whole of the analysis and discussion of this proposal , the Commission has enjoyed Parliament 's active support , as it has on all previous reports , particularly through Mr Sterckx 's most constructive contribution .
I believe that cooperation between both institutions has paid off and today we are very close to reaching a definitive agreement on a text that , from the outset , involved sensitive issues , such as the prohibition of setting sail in bad weather , the aforementioned ports of refuge , for example , or the obligation to carry transponders or black boxes .
In this regard , once again I would like to praise Mr Watts ' tenacity , thanks to which we have been able to secure Council 's agreement with regard to conciliation on the directive regarding the control of the port state .
With regard to ports of refuge , I would like to say that compensation for possible damages are an absolutely fundamental feature , and here I agree with Mr Jarzembowski , if EU States are to make ports of refuge available , and this is an absolutely key issue .
Ladies and gentlemen , I would like to conclude by thanking Mr Sterckx once again for his magnificent work , and also all of those responsible in the appropriate committee .
We share many of your concerns and we accept all the amendments you have tabled .
In this regard , I would highlight the follow-up of the report after three years and the true-to-life assessment of the situation , the issue of controls in places of refuge and assistance to boats .
In short , we shall accept all the amendments that have been tabled and I hope they will also be accepted by the Council , which will mean that we do not have to resort to the conciliation procedure .
We will shortly be presenting the last measure needed to complete this package , a package that will allow us to significantly improve safety in sea transport .
After Commission 's approval of the measures relating to the transport of passengers , we shall present the measures relating to crews , which is the human element and always a decisive factor .
Thank you very much , Commissioner de Palacio .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon .
The next item is the report by Mrs Palacio Vallelersundi ( A5-0059 / 2002 ) on behalf of the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market on the proposal for a Council regulation on the Community patent ( COM ( 2000 ) 412 - C5-0461 / 2000 - 2000 / 0177 ( CNS ) ) .
Mr President , I would like to begin by telling you that I am satisfied with this report , which is the result of a lengthy process in the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market , a committee that I have had the honour to chair over much of this negotiation , in addition to being rapporteur in this particular instance .
Today we are presenting the European Parliament report on the Community patent .
I have to tell you , first of all , that in this case the European Parliament only has the competence to present a report .
This is the first - I do not really want to call it an anomaly - but , in short , the first issue that , from Parliament 's point of view , I would like to draw your attention to .
We are dealing with a proposal from the European Commission that dates from August 2000 - in other words , some time ago - that was accepted by the Lisbon European Council , which stressed the importance of achieving a Community patent before the end of 2001 ; this importance has once again been highlighted at the Barcelona European Council , and the Council was urged to adopt a political position at the Internal Market Council on 21 May .
This characterises a debate that has not been easy , because the adoption of the Community patent is not a trivial issue .
This is our second attempt , and I hope and trust that this time we will have a Community patent .
We need a Community patent that covers the whole EU , which will complement the European patent and national patents and will be competitive worldwide .
These are the three axes that the European Commission took as a reference point and which subsequently the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market took as their starting point .
However , for us , Mr President , and above all for the reason that we only have one single report , it was crucial for the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market to reach a consensus .
I believe we have achieved this .
I hope that tomorrow the vote in Plenary will basically support the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market 's position , which is a position we reached after debating and discussing for many hours the following three fundamental issues that are the key elements of this Community patent :
Firstly , the role of the national patent authorities . Without a doubt , when we have the Community patent , the role of the national patent authorities will be greatly reduced , except that we trust that they will carry out complementary work .
The Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market 's report includes the possibility for national patent authorities to participate in the first phase of the negotiation of the Community patent - the research phase - provided that they can guarantee a sufficient level of quality .
This is the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market 's first point on which consensus was reached .
Secondly , the legal question . The Commission proposal is ambitious and has no current legal basis in the Treaty , and it would be based on a provision of the Treaty of Nice that has still not entered into force , consisting of the creation of a centralised Community Court of First Instance .
Therefore , Mr President , after much debate , the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market has adopted exactly the same approach as the European Commission , without going so far : for there still to be a national Court of First Instance , albeit with many elements that are already communitarised , and I feel that this is a possibility that the Council should follow if we are to have the patent we need .
Thirdly , with regard to the procedural languages : the intention of the Commission proposal was to uphold the European patent system , that is to say , to have three procedural languages - English , French and German .
As rapporteur , and with reality in mind , given that English is much more than the language of one State of the European Union , that it is the lingua franca of research , I proposed the use of English alone .
Finally , given that Parliament adovocates cultural and linguistic diversity , we reached a consensus , advocating the Alicante system , that is , to have five procedural languages .
I think that in this regard also Parliament is sending an important political signal that should be considered in the Council in order that consensus can be reached .
I am saying this in full knowledge of the latest news I have on the Council 's working group .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , both personally and on behalf of my group , I would first like to thank the rapporteur very warmly for her report .
Because this is a complicated and important topic it inevitably took some time to prepare , but we managed to find a workable compromise acceptable to the majority of this House .
Not everyone will be happy , but that is in the nature of compromises .
Nevertheless , it is a good result .
In view of the limited time I have , I wish to address just one very important aspect of our deliberations , and that is the issue of jurisdiction .
The Commission originally proposed that in parallel , as it were , to the existing national structures , there should also be a system of purely European jurisdiction .
I have always said , and I would like to stress this once again now , that I regard this approach as totally wrong .
We should not make the mistake that the United States has already made with its court system , so that on top of state courts there are also federal courts , with the guiding principle being that federal courts rule on federal law and state courts on state law .
That is nonsensical , it cannot be explained to taxpayers , it costs a lot of money and leads to a divide in the administration of justice .
We very much believe that European courts are also national courts , and that national courts obviously have to apply not only national law but also European law .
The approach adopted in this report by Anna Palacio Vallelersundi therefore represents a great step forward . That approach is that powers at national level can continue to be exercised with regard to European law in future , and that the court of first instance will be the existing national courts .
In order to provide uniform administration of justice and avoid a lack of uniformity in Europe , the court of second instance will be a higher , European court .
I regard that as a good proposal .
Mr President , please excuse me for having to leave this sitting very shortly , but I have another commitment and have to take part in another meeting .
Please excuse me and thank you for your attention .
Mr President , like Mr Lehne , I too would like to congratulate Mrs Palacio Vallelersundi on the work she has carried out to produce a balanced report on this issue .
As Mrs Palacio Vallelersundi pointed out , the European Parliament 's role in this particular case is of a purely consultative nature , for the issue is really in the hands of the Commission and the Council .
However , I believe that the European Parliament is currently giving some very good advice .
Firstly , as Mrs Palacio Vallelersundi pointed out , a Community such as ours is important in relation to the role of the National Patent Offices .
Secondly , as Mr Lehne stated , the field of jurisdiction .
The other day several lawyers from large North American companies told me that the advantage of the North American federal system is that state jurisdictions are , generally speaking , more favourable to local businesses and consumers , whilst large companies prefer to go to federal jurisdiction , which is more favourable to them .
We will probably have to consider whether the conferring of powers to a special Community jurisdiction could possibly create imbalance , or give rise to what the Americans call ' forum shopping ' , which consists of each lawyer or expert in legal matters bringing the matter to the jurisdiction most favourable to them .
I would like to refer to another matter , which is that we have arrived at this new European patent indirectly through adhesion to an existing international convention .
This causes problems , for example , of a linguistic nature , a matter of some importance to the European Union .
The European Community is not a federal union , but more like some kind of confederation , in which different cultures and national traditions are very important .
In specific terms , for a country like Spain and for the 500 million people who speak Spanish worldwide , submission to a language which is not their own is going to cause very serious problems when carrying out research , not only in Spain , but in all of those countries who have called on the Spanish Patents and Trade Marks Office to patent their inventions .
The European Parliament can only give a recommendation , using recital 2 , with regard to Article No 5 .
This recommends recourse to the Alicante system , as Mrs Palacio Vallelersundi pointed out , which has functioned well in the past and is currently functioning well in five languages , thus permitting inexpensive and large-scale Community-wide participation .
We notice that this system is particularly well suited to the European Union 's requirements .
I believe that Parliament 's proposals and the agreement we have reached in the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market are reasonable .
Therefore , our group will support all the amendments approved by this committee , although we do not think that it would be appropriate at this time to vote for any of the other amendments , since this would upset the balance we have managed to achieve in this committee .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , on behalf of our group , I too should like to thank the rapporteur for the work she has done , and I should like to focus on three issues while adopting a very practical and less political approach , as many of my fellow MEPs have already mentioned .
The first issue is that of languages , and we have tabled an amendment on this , Amendment No 31 , because it is indeed of major importance for the European patent to be established on behalf of industry in Europe , which forms one big market , and we therefore regret the fact that this was postponed during the Laeken Summit to 21 May .
The discussion surrounding the language issue bears more witness to a political sentiment than to a sense of reality , as I have already stated .
We agreed in Lisbon to turn the European economy into the world 's most competitive knowledge economy , and I am of the view that , when it really comes down to it , we will not act on this intention , which is evident from the many amendments on this topic .
The linguistic costs will push up the price of the patent disproportionately high , which will adversely affect the competitiveness of businesses within this European market compared to businesses in other major markets , such as the United States and Japan .
European industry has itself indicated that it will not be using the European patent if it turns out to be too costly .
Then I should like to mention the jurisdiction .
We take the view , unlike Mr Lehne , that a European patchwork quilt , where each court provides a different interpretation of the European Community patent , would not be beneficial .
We are of the opinion that one central court of law should be set up which passes judgments in first instance , and that the European Court of Justice should subsequently handle appeal cases .
Finally , I should like to touch upon the constitutional question .
As Liberals we would welcome one European patent in Europe , independently of the Convention , in other words without joining the Convention , thus ensuring that the European Parliament retains a democratic hold on the European patent and that European legislation can be adapted to the European patent .
Mr President , I thank you for this opportunity , and I thank you all for your attention .
Mr President , like everybody else here , I enormously appreciate the work which Mrs Palacio Vallelersundi did as rapporteur , partly because we appreciated so much her work as chair of the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market .
I agree very much with the three points she wanted us to focus on , although on one I take a different view .
We are all agreed about the importance of preserving a role for national offices .
On the second point about jurisdiction , it seems to many of us to have been a part of the genius of the development of the European Community that justice was largely decentralised and that the role of the Community courts in matters particularly of private law and commercial law was an advisory or secondary role , with the main jurisdictions being localised .
That is a vitally important principle to keep - if it can be done without destroying the patent regime .
As Mr Lehne said , there are wrong roads that we could go down that would end up with a dispersal of Community jurisdictions and parallel jurisdictions between the national systems and the Community system .
That would be a great pity .
So I hope that the jurisdictional proposals will be accepted .
Then there is the language regime , a question on which I differ , with great respect for Mrs Palacio Vallelersundi , and so does my group .
We believe that sustaining the existing system inside the European Patent Office is important .
On the other hand , we also believe that people should be able to put forward a patent claim in their own language .
We then believe that it should be translated into all the other languages - not the whole process but just , as it says in Amendment No 20 ( c ) , " issued in the language of submission and in the official language in which the procedure has been carried out , accompanied by translation of the patent claims and of a short abstract in the other official languages of the Community " , and then paragraph ( d ) , " translations shall be performed by the Translation Centre for the bodies of the European Union and costs borne by the European Union " .
Preserving the principle of linguistic equality is an important public good of the European Union .
The Union should pay for that .
It should not become a cost to patent holders .
Therefore the objections about over-pricing the European patent would not apply .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , for me the issue of which national courts are responsible for a European patent and when is not the vital question regarding this report .
As I see it , what is far more important is the purpose of this draft and exactly what a patent system of this kind is intended to achieve .
This report and other planned changes to the EU patent system are intended to make patent applications more attractive by making the protection offered by the patent directly applicable in the EU and thus extending it .
A patent suggests that the patent holder has invented everything that he or she wishes to patent .
However , as a rule the invention draws on all kinds of knowledge that people have developed beforehand , and which can only be used at no cost if this knowledge is not itself covered by a patent .
This absurdity is particularly apparent when you consider the present attempts to make more and more software patentable .
Even algorithms in computer programs would no longer be freely available .
This would deprive all developers of the building blocks they need for any new computer program .
Supporters of the patent system often put forward the argument that patents would benefit invention ' freaks ' who do not work for companies but who come up with their inventions either privately or at least with limited financial resources .
A patent would protect these people from having companies use their inventions without paying any fee to the inventors and thus not paying them for their work .
The problem with this picture is quite simply that it does not match the reality of the patent world .
In Germany at least , most patents are held by companies that are constantly extending their patents .
Private individuals often cannot access the system because of the high patent fees involved .
As the term ' intellectual property ' implies , patenting simply means exploiting intangible things such as ideas , inventions and even discoveries .
I am not interested here in the fact that the proponents of capitalism are shooting themselves in the foot if they really believe in their credo of innovation and competitiveness .
I say that because my aim is free access to and exchange of information and knowledge and its further development .
That is precisely what is needed for a self-determined lifestyle and an emancipatory political approach .
However , in contrast to all this , Mrs Palacio Vallelersundi 's report is aimed at treating an ever growing proportion of worldwide knowledge as goods that can generate profits for industry .
Surprisingly , the fact that the report that is before us today is attracting a great deal of interest in my country , Flanders , has less to do with the actual topic of the Community patent than with the proposed language regime , whereby , unfortunately , a distinction is once again being drawn between first-rate and second-rate languages within the European Union .
Indeed , following on from the Council 's position , the rapporteur suggests applying the procedure , the working method , of the Trademarks Bureau to the Community patent .
Let there be no doubt about this : this is unacceptable to us in Flanders . All EU working languages should be treated equally , certainly including Dutch , my language , which is spoken by more than 21 million Europeans .
And I am quite aware that this will , of course , entail a considerable additional cost .
We should accept this as the price we have to pay if we want to retain this diversity which makes up the richness of our continent .
I have in fact noticed quite specifically that the Member States of these so-called ' major ' languages would also be prepared to get the European Union to carry this considerable cost if their language were likely to be pushed aside .
In fact , the OVV , the Flemish Associations Consultation Centre , a large representative umbrella organisation for a large number of Flemish cultural-political associations in my country , is making similar demands , and has decided in this case that if the European Union fails to come up with the goods , Europe is at risk of becoming an increasingly alienated occupying force instead of a co-operative based on equality , with respect for the national identity of all Members , as is , in fact , enshrined in the basic treaties .
This serves as a serious warning issued by a large and important cultural-political association .
This voice should also be heard in the European Union .
Mr President , I , like other colleagues in the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market , would like to congratulate our ex-chairman Mrs Palacio Vallelersundi , on all her work on this dossier .
It has been a real labour of Hercules but , despite that , I fear she has not , in the view of the British Conservatives , been able satisfactorily to resolve the issues that have been so vigorously debated in the Legal Affairs Committee .
However , I should emphasise that I do not think that is any reflection on her .
Rather it seems to me that , as has already been mentioned by a number of other speakers , there has been a series of real conundrums - serious issues - at the heart of this proposal .
In particular , it indicates the more or less complete impossibility of reconciling our language policy with the needs of those who use and work with patents .
I suspect that in microcosm this may be one of a much larger series of problems that we shall be experiencing in the Union in the not-too-distant future .
In my view , there is no point in having a Community patent , which could be a very useful development in intellectual property law , if those who use and work with patents find it no help .
I am told by industry that the Commission 's proposals could be helpful but what Parliament is proposing will not be .
Since this is not a codecision matter , the best thing Parliament can do is to give an opinion as required and then leave matters to the Council to see if it can succeed where we have failed .
I am the first to confess that I do not think this is a very glorious suggestion but it is a pragmatic one .
I believe it is the correct course of action in the circumstance in which we now find ourselves .
Finally , just like my colleague Mr Lehne , I have another meeting and I hope you will bestow your blessing on my leaving as you did on his .
Mr President , I too would like to thank our rapporteur , Mrs Palacio Vallelersundi , for her excellent report and , more importantly , her consistent and energetic efforts to achieve a consensus on the Community patent in the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal market .
It is those kinds of skills that we sorely miss now that she is ex-chairman of the Committee on Legal Affairs .
Her efforts , I have to say , have sadly not been helped by the failure of the Council to achieve an outcome in this area and , indeed , an unanimous agreement .
It is clear that we need a Community patent and that it is a key element in underpinning the Lisbon agenda of encouraging EU innovation and competitiveness .
But the system , as Lord Inglewood has said , has to be attractive to industry and business otherwise it will simply be an irrelevance .
Industry has given the Member States , the Commission and Parliament a very clear message : it wants consistent judgments under Community jurisdiction and a common jurisprudence , in particular regarding enforcement .
In particular they want a cheap and user-friendly regime .
If SMEs and especially inventors are to derive any benefit from this Community patent , what they do not want is a convoluted system which will tie them up in paperwork and red tape .
I illustrate this problem with the experience of one of my constituents , John Hamson , an engineer and inventor who cannot afford to employ expensive patent agents .
He has a UK patent .
He cites to me in letters his problems in dealing with the European Patent Office and the litany of hurdles he has to go through to obtain a European patent .
I do not want to repeat them , and it is not meant as a criticism of the European Patent Office .
But the fact is that he has spent a lot of money and he still has no European patent .
His comments are summed up in his last letter to me some weeks ago : " the process is clearly designed to discourage small inventors and favours large business equipped with legal and patent expertise to navigate its treacherous bureaucracy . "
We owe it to industry , to small and medium-sized enterprises and individual inventors to provide a simple , affordable Community patent which in turn will help EU innovation and competitiveness .
We must be able to offer industry and SMEs a better deal to ensure that the protection of intellectual property is genuinely an opportunity to create and encourage innovation .
Like Lord Inglewood , I do not believe that the Council has the answers to these problems .
It will fall to Commissioner Bolkestein to try to find the solution .
However , we have had a rapporteur who has made a Herculean effort to try to achieve this .
It is no fault of hers that we have not got the right consensus , but I have to say that there is no compromise to be achieved on languages .
Therefore I leave it to Commissioner Bolkestein to try to find a solution that will satisfy some of my constituents back in the north-west of England .
Mr President , Mrs McCarthy stated that it is up to the Commissioner to find such a compromise .
I would take the liberty of proposing Amendment No 32 , containing a simple system through which proposals can be submitted in English or another of the Community languages .
Summaries of the applications would be translated into all the Community languages .
I wish to emphasise that this amendment would mean citizens ' being given a glimpse of the monopolies that restrict their opportunities .
I should also like to point out that there are other factors just as important as the Community patent when it comes to increasing the number of innovations within the Community .
I believe , for example , that the inventions of universities and the latter 's opportunity to exploit these are pivotal .
In Europe , we at present have rules which are difficult to interpret and which mean that the universities cannot make the most of their opportunities .
I would urge the Commission to review this aspect which affects a relatively large number of countries , as well as the right of universities and researchers to their inventions .
We are now in the process of creating a vigorously competitive system , and it is not necessarily only European inventors who may benefit from this .
It is competing systems that are crucial when it comes to the Community patent .
Mr President , Commissioners , ladies and gentlemen , we insist that the fundamental equality of all languages be retained .
This is one of our priorities .
Needless to say , we endorse a Community patent .
It is a service to the community of European citizens , and in my view , all European citizens should be able to address the Union 's bodies in their own language , including in patent applications , and they should also be able to receive a reply in their own language .
Discrimination on linguistic grounds would contravene Community law and the Charter of the Fundamental Rights .
Consequently , we cannot sanction the selection of five languages as an honourable compromise .
We would request Parliament , the Council and the Commission to endorse our amendments which allow everyone who submits a patent application to do so in their own language and to receive a reply in their own language , with translations into the other official languages of the Community .
Consequently , we believe that the discussion in the three working languages within the Bureau does not contravene these principles , because it would also have a cost-saving effect and avoids all procedures being conducted in English .
Mr President , creating a Community patent at any price is not acceptable , particularly if this jeopardises the interests of the small and medium-sized countries either in terms of the language arrangements or in terms of the role of the national patent offices , quite apart from the basic issues of the existence of Community patents and the serious problem of the potential impact of patents on fundamental areas such as life , our natural heritage or medicines , amongst other things , in which unacceptable scenarios have already opened up , mainly serving the interests of the big multinationals .
Applying the existing Munich arrangements for the European patent to the Community patent is unacceptable , since the Munich system only uses three languages and this would conflict with the principle that all the official languages are equal and create unacceptable discrimination from the procedural point of view as well as problems of legal security .
However , the linguistic arrangements proposed in this report , the so-called ' Alicante arrangements ' are totally unacceptable for the commercial framework since they only provide for the use of the five languages of the largest countries , which contravenes the principle of non-discrimination between undertakings , creates a directory of main languages , sets precedents for the future and threatens all the official languages .
In this context , we tabled our amendment suggesting that , at the forthcoming Diplomatic Conference on the Revision of the Convention on the Granting of European Patents , all the official languages of the European Union be used on an equal footing so as to ensure that everyone can use his or her own language throughout the process and in order to guarantee the legal security of the patent .
The second issue concerns software and the need for software to remain free of any European Community patent , as we also suggested in our proposal for an amendment .
The unimpeded development of software , specifically of what is known as ' free ' software , is a prerequisite for promoting innovation and more widespread use , for guaranteeing the continuity of its creation and its use by the public and for providing added value .
It is , therefore , necessary to ensure that software remains , as it has done until now , free of any restriction imposed by any European Community patent .
Mr President , we should not allow the Community patent to pass as a wasted opportunity .
Everyone is calling for it , but no one has managed to finalise it .
There are two dates which stand out from all this to-ing and fro-ing : 1975 and 1989 and in the meantime , there have been many unsuccessful attempts to finalise this issue .
The Heads of State and Government made the Community patent a priority at Lisbon and it was due to come into being before the end of 2001 .
The Feira , Stockholm and Gothenburg European Councils reiterated that there is an urgent need for it .
So what is the current situation ?
The Council did not reach an agreement and Parliament , through its Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market , which was essentially responsible for this matter , proposed a political compromise which I welcome , Mrs de Palacio , but which I feel does not truly meet the expectations of future users , as it does not improve the existing system to any great extent .
Manufacturers and inventors are calling for the cost of the patent to be reduced , so that the patent can be competitive .
They also want the respect of legal certainty to be guaranteed with the greatest fairness possible .
The European Commission 's proposal is a pragmatic response to these aspirations , focusing on reducing costs .
This can be achieved , firstly , by using the language regime of three working languages of the European Patent Office , which , since it guarantees the threshold of international competitiveness , meets our specific linguistic needs . Secondly , by recognising the important role played by the national patent offices in providing specific information and technical assistance to inventors and SMEs .
And , lastly , by using a legal system that guarantees single jurisdiction by establishing a Community court for intellectual property .
These three fundamental points have attracted the support of those working in the profession .
They are the ones waiting for the patent .
We must not risk creating a Community patent that they would not use because it is too distant from their concerns .
This is the message that we must send to the Council with our vote tomorrow .
Mr President , Mrs de Palacio has demonstrated her legal and political skills and struck the right balance .
My congratulations .
A Europe of free competition , especially in today 's age of knowledge and innovation , needs a Community patent if it is to thrive .
Even though we all recognise this , the way in which opposing views have been expressed in the past reveals something which we would do well to take onboard : the huge problem of reconciling straightforward national interests with straightforward Community interests which , in the final analysis , are supposed to serve the individual national interests .
The first attempt to grant a European patent was under the Munich Convention .
However , once it had been granted , it became national law subject to national provisions .
Today we are trying to communitise the European patent following the failure of the endeavour made in the Luxembourg Convention .
I should like to raise three issues . ? he first is language .
Everything has been said and a compromise has , I think , been reached .
However , it would be helpful if at least all the claims in a European patent were translated into every language .
This would reduce the cost of granting a patent considerably , compared with the cost of a European patent applicable in 15 countries .
As far as the main offices are concerned , the idea of giving the European Patent Office a central role , with some of its work delegated to the national offices , is a good idea .
This would combine the advantages of a strong European patent organisation with the de facto strengths of the national agencies by reason of their geographical proximity , knowledge of local conditions , knowledge of the local language and facility to mediate between the public and private sectors .
Close contacts with national patent authorities are of crucial importance for the purpose of information , public support and the dissemination of the information technology contained in patents .
They will also make it easier for small and medium-sized enterprises to access centralised information .
I think that , if we can agree on this basic position , we can also agree on the type of work which could be delegated to the national offices .
Finally , jurisdiction .
The proposed solution , that is , that the patent courts in the Member States should have jurisdiction at first instance , without discrimination , with the Community intellectual property court ruling at appeal , is a happy compromise between centripetal and centrifugal tendencies and will guarantee easy access to the courts , swift justice and affordable appeals , making innovation easier for small and medium-sized enterprises and hence fitting in with European employment policy in general .


Mr President . Industrial intellectual property rights are a useful instrument for the economy and for society in general , and I believe it is only natural to want to tailor them to Community requirements in an internal market .
I therefore welcome the Commission 's proposal to create a Community patent .
I should also like to extend my thanks to the rapporteur for all the work she has done . However , I do not see eye to eye with her on one particular item , namely that of the language regime .
In my view , a Community-based approach also presupposes respect for the Community principle , including the use of language .
And the fact that the discussions on the use of languages have never been absent from the agenda in the debates says a great deal , in my view .
I have also listened very carefully to my fellow French , Italian , German and Spanish MEPs and have ascertained that everyone is calling for a scheme in which their own language is still used to the fullest extent .
Since as long ago as 1958 , the citizens of the Member States have had the right to use their own official language in their communication with the European institutions , and also when they communicate before legal bodies of the Community .
In fact , we even enshrined this in a treaty in Amsterdam .
However , while the citizen is given the impression that progress is being made in their linguistic rights , these are increasingly being undermined , and that is certainly the case in the sector of intellectual property rights .
First there was the Trademarks Bureau ; this was followed by the drawings and models , and now there is also the patent regulation .
Since then , we have also witnessed a - fortunately frustrated - attempt to no longer translate even generally binding standards which enhance our book-keeping into all official languages .
Ladies and gentlemen , I would therefore urge you to vote consciously tomorrow , to send out a signal to the Council and the Commission to very carefully reconsider the articles concerning the language regime .
We must really prevent a new clause from being added to the list of incidents of unjustifiable discrimination against languages when the regulation on the Community patent enters into force .
I therefore call on you to study these language amendments very carefully and to support them .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , after many years of working towards an effective Community patent , we must make it clear that a number of issues still remain to be resolved : the language regime , the differences between the role of the national patent offices and the role of the European Patent Office , and the legal arrangements .
Despite repeated invitations from the Heads of States and Government and successive European Councils , most recently the Barcelona Council , the situation has not improved .
We encountered the same problems in the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market over the language issue .
After lengthy debate , the committee opted for the language regime already used in the context of the Community trademark , under which applications can be filed in any of the official languages of the Community .
However , the applicant has to specify a second language as well , known as the language of proceedings , which can be one of five languages - English , French , German , Italian or Spanish - the use of which he accepts as a possible language of proceedings , particularly opposition , revocation or invalidity proceedings .
If the application is filed in a language which is not one of these five languages , the Office will arrange to have the application translated into the language indicated by the applicant .
As I see it , this is not an ideal solution .
For reasons of economy , it would have been preferable to use just one language , English .
Moreover , European industry has called for this .
However , that has not proved possible and so we look forward to the introduction of the Alicante model , which , although perhaps not the best solution , is the only solution possible .
As regards the legal arrangements , the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market proposes that first instance jurisdiction should be at national level , such that appeals can be made to national courts with experience in patent cases as first instance courts for Community patent litigation , while second instance decisions would be the responsibility of the European Chamber for intellectual property .
This is a compromise solution .
We would have preferred one single , centralised first and second instance jurisdiction , which would have ensured greater uniformity of interpretation .
However , the opposition was extremely strong on this matter too .
Lastly , assurance is given that the national patent offices will be able to continue to play an important role in the procedures for granting the Community patent .
In other words , in our opinion , the solution adopted is not completely satisfactory , but it does mean that this complex issue is closed .
I believe that , in her heart of hearts , even the rapporteur , Mrs Palacio Vallelersundi - whom I do , of course , congratulate on her work - shares these concerns .
However , Parliament has merely a consultative role in this procedure , it is not colegislator .
We therefore give the report the thumbs-up , in the hope that the Council of Ministers will be able to come to a swift agreement without hiding behind any excuses .
The Commission welcomes the report prepared by Mrs Palacio Vallelersundi .
At a moment when the Council is still struggling with the Community patent , it is important that Parliament should deliver its opinion on this difficult and complex issue .
The report of Mrs Palacio Vallelersundi addresses all the key issues that are relevant to the Community patent .
Several of the proposed amendments enshrine principles that the Commission is ready to consider favourably .
Firstly , there is the principle enshrined in Amendment No 8 to allow testing for the sole purpose of receiving market authorisation after the expiry of the patent - the so-called Bowler exception .
The Commission has already proposed a similar line in its revision and whilst not committing myself to the exact wording , I can inform Parliament that the Commission will carefully consider the issue , taking into account the need for the Community patent and Member States ' national patents to produce identical rights .
But Amendment No 18 on the same issue goes too far and cannot be accepted .
A second example regards Amendments Nos 1 , 6 , 7 , 21 , 27 and 39 .
These amendments refer to the national patent offices .
The Commission recognises the important role of those national patent offices .
The Commission can also agree in principle that they should participate in the processing of Community patent applications provided that four conditions are met : first , to ensure the quality and uniformity of Community patents , national patent offices and their participation should be set in a properly defined framework .
Partnership agreements with the European Patent Office , with quality criteria and mechanisms for quality control would constitute a proper framework .
Secondly , national patent offices ' participation could go as far as doing the prior search - a suggestion made earlier this evening by Mrs Palacio Vallelersundi .
Thirdly , the applicant should always be free to ask that his application should be processed exclusively by the European Patent Office .
Finally , national patent offices and their participation should be restricted by clear quantitative limits .
But even with this clarification , I should like to stress that the participation of national patent offices is a matter on which the Community alone cannot decide .
It is thus not an issue for the regulation but should be negotiated in the framework of the European Patent Organisation .
A third example is Amendment No 9 on the distribution of income from renewal fees .
While the Commission can agree to the principle of distribution of part of the fee income to Member States or their patent offices to be used for innovation promotion purposes , it nevertheless considers that this issue should be dealt with in the context of the European Patent Organisation .
It remains to be discussed whether the importance of the patent office is the right distribution key .
Some of the proposed amendments are not in line with the objectives of the Community patent and cannot therefore be accepted .
Today the driving force for a Community patent is the competitiveness of European industry at a global level .
There is no point in creating an instrument unless it is affordable enough and offers a sufficient level of legal certainty for it to be used by our inventors and our industry .
The Commission continues to believe in affordable language and translation regimes .
Here two different issues are involved .
The first one is the language for the processing of patent applications and for the granting of the patent , including translations of applications .
The European Patent Office functions well with a three-language regime .
It is not necessary to modify it , whether by reducing the number of languages , as has been suggested by some , or by adding more languages .
In particular , adding two or more working languages to the European Patent Office would considerably complicate its work .
It would put a heavy burden on its cost-effectiveness .
The European Patent Convention allows , in principle , EU citizens to submit the initial application in their own language and compensation is provided for those applicants who must translate their applications into one of the working languages of the European Patent Office .
I should also like to add that the language regime of the European Patent Office cannot be decided by the Community alone .
That is the first issue .
The second issue concerns translations of the patent once it has been granted .
If the amendments imply that the patent would have to be translated in its entirety into all official Community languages which soon will be either 19 or 20 , depending on whether Maltese becomes an official language , this would make the patent so expensive that the Community patent system would simply not be used .
I remind Parliament that we have been here before .
There has been a Luxembourg Convention which required translations of the whole patent into all the official languages .
That convention has remained a dead letter - it has never been used .
Surely we do not want to repeat the same mistake .
Let me give some examples of the costs that would be involved : there would be EUR 17 000 for translations just in the Community of 15 Member States .
Last but not least , costs must be evaluated , taking account of enlargement .
Translations into 19 Community languages , excluding Maltese , would cost around EUR 31 500 per patent .
For all these reasons the Commission cannot accept the following amendments : Amendments Nos 2 , 22 , 31 , 32 ( 2 ) , 32 ( 3 ) , nor Amendment No 36 .
The Commission would like to accept Amendment No 34 .
This does not mean that the Commission would systematically oppose any translation requirements of a part of the patent or patent application or of other information .
After all , there is the patent in its entirety , a summary and the claims .
So we may be talking about different requirements for translation .
The Commission could accept such translations of parts of the patent provided that they were truly useful and that the overall Community patent system remains affordable , simple , cost-effective and legally certain .
In this respect Amendment No 25 , part of Amendment No 19 ( 1 ) , 30 and parts of 32 ( 1 ) and 32 ( 4 ) merit closer evaluation .






But parts of Amendments Nos 19 ( 1 ) , 19 ( 2 ) , 19 ( 3 ) and 19 ( 4 ) , part of Amendments Nos 20 , 28 and part of Amendment No 31 ( 4 ) are unacceptable .
Firstly , there is no reason to require a translation of the patent into the language in which the initial application has been submitted .
That already exists .
Secondly , the Community budget should simply not be used to finance translations , nor should applicants be obliged to use the translation services of the European institutions .
Thirdly , the patent should be published by the European Patent Office in the Community Patents Bulletin and not in the Official Journal of the European Communities .
Fourthly , Article 44 ( 3 ) , as proposed by the Commission , offers sufficient guarantees to protect third parties in good faith .
There is no reason to require further formalities from a patent holder who wishes to enforce his patents .
On the other hand , Article 11 ( 3 ) cannot be deleted because it corresponds to Article 44 ( 3 ) ; it just applies in the pre-grant phase .


Finally , the procedural languages of the courts will have to be determined in a separate context and not here .
The Commission also has difficulties with Amendments Nos 23 , 24 and 38 on the relationship with the European Patent Organisation .
The Commission continues to believe in a user-friendly system where applicants can obtain a European patent and a Community patent in one go from the European Patent Office .
The accession to the European Patents Convention will enable this .
It will also enable sufficient legal and political control over the European Patent Office , taking into account that the European Patent Office is not a Community body .
As far as the judicial system , about which a number of Members have spoken , is concerned , the Commission is prepared to consider Amendments Nos 26 and 29 in principle , but in the light of the new EC Treaty provisions - namely Articles 225a and 229a - adopted by the Nice Treaty .
The Treaty introduced the possibility to set up Community judicial panels to handle cases in first instance with the possibility of appeal to the Court of First Instance of the European Communities .
The setting up of such a system would naturally be possible only once the Nice Treaty has entered into force and it requires a separate Commission proposal .
However , the Commission has major difficulties with Amendments Nos 3 , 4 , 5 and 10 to 17 .
There should be a high level of expertise and unitary case-law right from the start .
That pleads for a centralised Community jurisdiction .
The system proposed in the amendments would not provide this , because some national courts would have so few cases to handle that they could not build up or maintain the necessary expertise .
That could result in divergent case-law and quasi-systematic appeals to a higher court .
This would imply higher litigation costs and also that parties would have to wait longer for the final decision .
I should also like to recall that it is highly doubtful whether the articles of the EC Treaty , to which the amendments refer , would allow a system as proposed in those amendments .
As regards reporting on the application of the regulation , the Commission is ready to prepare the first report at the latest within five years of the entry into force of the regulation .
Should the Commission believe that earlier reporting is required , it will do so .
Moreover , the formulation in the Commission proposals , which focuses on the costs for obtaining and renewing the patents , should already cover all relevant cost factors .
It also goes without saying that the Commission will propose amendments whenever this is appropriate .
Therefore the Commission cannot , regrettably , endorse Amendment No 33 .
Finally , the Commission considers that Amendment Nos 35 and 37 are unacceptable .
The Commission has presented a proposal for a directive on the patentability of software-related inventions , which is now before Parliament and the Council .
Therefore a debate on this question should be carried out in that context and not in this .
I would like to thank Members for their support and collaboration on this important regulation .
I hope that Europe will soon be able to improve its performance at the global level by offering its industry a competitive , unitary , affordable and legally secure Community patent .
Thank you very much , Commissioner .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon .
The next item is the joint debate on the two following recommendations for second reading :
A5-0100 / 2000 by Mr Florenz on the adoption of a European Parliament and Council directive on waste electrical and electronic equipment ( 11304 / 1 / 2001 - C5-0636 / 2001 - 2000 / 0158 ( COD ) ) ;
A5-0097 / 2002 by Mr Florenz on behalf of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy on the Council common position for adopting the proposal for a European Parliament and Council Directive on the restriction of the use of certain hazardous substances in electrical and electronic equipment ( ( 11356 / 1 / 2001 - C5-0637 / 2001 - 2000 / 0159 ( COD ) ) .
Mr President , Commissioner , as rapporteur I regret the fact that a relatively interesting report on the issue of how electronic scrap is to be recycled in Europe in future is being debated in the middle of the night .
When I tell people in my constituency at home that we discuss subjects like this at anything up to midnight , nobody believes me .
But the administration cannot seem to find any other solution .
I am often asked why we need a directive of this kind .
Do we need yet another European law to address the issue of electronic scrap ?
The answer is relatively simple .
We have seven to eight million tonnes of scrap in the European Community every year , and every year there is an extra million tonnes .
That alone is sufficient for us to acknowledge that we are really not just talking about scrap here , but about recyclable material which future generations should not be deprived of , and which should certainly not be dumped on landfill sites .
That brings me to the European Parliament 's first request .
In the course of our various deliberations and committee decisions , we have written a ban on disposable equipment into the directive , which should send a message to the European public that an electric shaver should no longer be thrown into the dustbin , but that it should be collected separately , because it is recyclable .
The EU Member States , and above all my own country , have very limited ambitions in this area and believe that it is not necessary to make such demands of the Member States and of Europe 's citizens .
The Member States have an equally low level of commitment as regards what collection targets we should aim for in future .
The Member States believe that an optional collection rate of 4 kg is the right way to go .
I can only say this : why should a Parliament like ours bother with this report if the end result is not binding and is actually lower than the targets already being achieved ?
Because the United Kingdom , believe it or not , is already achieving far more than we are calling for , namely a binding 6 kg collection rate .
An important point here is of course who meets the costs .
Opinions on that are divided in this House as well .
I believe that the Commission originally brought forward a very good proposal , which it unfortunately subsequently departed from again .
With regard to costs , there are two models , one for historical waste and another for new equipment .
As far as historical waste is concerned , the costs should be borne collectively , because this can no longer be achieved individually .
You know that there are a great many orphan products ; there are non-branded products and it is no longer possible to allocate precisely those products .
That is why collective financing is needed here .
However , up to the point of collection , for example in the city centre , the costs are to be borne by the companies .
There are a few individual Members of this House who believe that in future even a toothbrush should be collected by the producers from the user 's bathroom .
I am of course exaggerating somewhat , but I want to make it clear that enormous costs are involved here : exactly 50 % of the costs are incurred between the front door and the collection point .
I am convinced that in many cases this will impose a heavy burden on medium-sized companies throughout Europe .
That is why I believe that in future the costs borne by companies should be from the collection point and not from the front door .
In the case of collective historical waste , we have proposed an alternative form of cost allocation with the voluntary visible fee for companies .
That also helps to answer the question of whether there will be any retroactive effect in this area .
Particularly in cases where costs are borne collectively , and are separately identified , this issue of retroactivity , which we debated so passionately in this House when we were discussing the end-of-life vehicle directive , might be addressed .
When it comes to the financing of new products , as I see it , and as this House in general sees it , we are looking at individual cost allocation .
There are many good reasons for doing that , and in fact that is where there is scope for innovation and motivation , because , in future , companies will have to accept that their fridges will be returned to their yard .
They will at long last have to find a way of dismantling them more easily and more cost-effectively .
It is precisely for that reason that we are proposing individual responsibility here .
We would not grant the Member States any individual scope for decision making ; it should be the companies that do that on an individual basis .
As far as I am concerned , it is very important that costs should be borne up to the point of collection in this case too .
We are at present going through the implementation of the end-of-life vehicle directive , on which this House also decided that companies should pay everything , so that the companies are now saying - and I mean real blue-chip companies in my country - that if you pay everything , you should also set the price !
It is precisely that which is not consumer-friendly .
That is why I would really like to warn you against thinking that collection from people 's front doors is a consumer-friendly act , Mrs van Brempt . It is not , because the companies alone are then responsible for how high the collection and recycling costs actually are .
There is then no third-party control .
I am enough of an entrepreneur to know that it is an opportunity for companies , if you say - as the Council and unfortunately now Mrs Wallström too are saying - that the costs should at least be borne from the collection point .
We will then end up again with exactly the same patchwork quilt that we were trying to get rid of by means of this directive .
We have said that we want to harmonise the various different regulations in Europe in the long run , with the aim of achieving comparable rules .
That was one of my great ideals and reasons for getting involved in Europe , because I said that this enormous internal market should take advantage of its synergies . And then - because we are such good people - we go and allow for individual and even 15 separate options in this internal market .
That just cannot be right .
I would like to draw your attention to the fact that this directive serves those Member States which are already working hard , achieving targets and have built up systems and that we are anxious that those Member States , and I particularly have in mind countries such as the Netherlands and Belgium , should be able to keep their existing systems .
I would have to be crazy if I wanted to penalise those countries and say that they have to adopt the European system now .
Of course not , they should achieve the targets , and if they comply with those targets and rates and guidelines , then they should be able to keep their financing systems over a period of about 10 years .
Over the last few days , industry has written some angry letters , because a decision in the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy missed the target , namely how can we prevent free-riders in future when it comes to new products ?
You all know about those special offers just before Christmas , when big companies buy 10 000 fridges in the Pacific Rim which are then marketed any old how through some kind of agent , and then , all of a sudden , once the fridges have been sold this agent and importer disappear and the SMEs who then have to foot the bill are the ones that suffer .
Industry itself has to develop guarantees to protect itself from free-riders .
Industry is clever enough to protect itself against such free-riders , or , if you will excuse the expression , these wolves .
I regard this as a very up-to-the-minute form of protection for SMEs .
There is a rather euphoric tendency , Commissioner , to overuse the word ' re-use ' in this area .
Re-use sounds very good at first , but is it really as good as we think ?
A ten-year-old fridge is an incredible power-guzzler .
The amount of water consumed by a twenty-year-old washing machine is phenomenal .
So re-use is not necessarily the best solution - it needs to be considered with a critical eye .
I hope that you will agree with me .
I have made a very modest 10 % increase in the rate of recovery , because in the foreseeable future we can expect a ban on landfill .
I have left the recycling and re-use rates , because they are entry rates and because industry , including smaller industries , needs to follow these entry rates .
It is no great feat to increase the rates by 20 % - for example , for a mobile phone like this - and nor is it a political masterstroke , but the vital issue for me is what they do with the recyclable material .
We are seeking a ban on six dangerous substances as quickly as possible .
We have brought this forward from 2008 to 2006 .
Commissioner , I would be pleased if you would follow these initiatives and motivate your colleagues in the Member States .
They were not particularly ambitious about the electronic scrap regulation .
Thank you very much , Mr Florenz .
I have every sympathy with your complaint about the timing of this debate .
However , and this is by no means false modesty , I must point out that it is neither the administrators nor the President of the Parliament that sets the agenda , but rather , in all their wisdom , the political group chairmen .
If the powers that be decide that we should discuss issues like NATO and defence , for which we have no responsibility , during the day , then so be it .
Many of them base their actions on the principle that detailed knowledge simply obscures their judgment , and then we end up with agendas like this .
I cannot do anything about it either !
Mr President , I fully support the idea behind this directive but there are certain tests to which we should submit the proposal and our amendments .
Firstly , would existing successful arrangements for dealing with electronic waste be allowed to continue ?
I believe there is a danger that they would not .
Parliament 's amendments emphasise individual producer responsibility so that none can escape the net of the directive , but this means changing existing collective responsibility systems .
The rapporteur has dealt with this by allowing for such collective responsibility agreements to continue for 10 years after the entry into force of the directive .
That will create two systems in one EU and lead to distortions of competition .
I look forward , with some trepidation , to the problems which we will encounter at conciliation on that one .
Secondly , are we legislating with open eyes about the cost of what is proposed ?
No , we are not .
The cost impact assessment in the original proposal is inevitably inadequate .
The British Government has done a cost-impact assessment , learning from the fridges debacle .
It has estimated a possible annual implementation cost for this directive at EUR 500 million , with a maximum save in landfill costs of approximately EUR 15 million a year .
Do we have similar estimates from other countries ?
No , we do not .
Will they legislate without counting the cost ?
Yes , in all probability they will .
Thirdly , should we consider the interests of small businesses ?
Clearly the rapporteur thinks not because he has deleted in Amendment No 15 the possibility of giving micro-companies five years ' grace to comply with the directive and take advantage of the technical changes that bigger companies may pioneer .
I very much regret this and will not support that amendment .
Fourthly , does what we are doing help responsible companies ?
Not yet .
As it stands , the directive creates the possibility that some companies may end up paying for free-riders on the system .
We look forward to hearing the Commissioner 's reply on Amendment No 92 .
Fifthly , are we being fair to local authorities ?
No , the amendments ignore them .
Sixthly , is it wise to increase the recycling targets ?
No .
It is not done on the basis of any assessment of cost or practicability .
Parliament habitually increases targets - any targets .
It is a very bad trade union habit and one that we should get away from .
Thank you , Mr President , ladies and gentlemen .
The rapporteur has already emphasised the importance of the directive , which , like many in this Parliament , I support .
I also endorse his important additions to the directive , such as the duty to collect all electronic waste , the higher compulsory collection target of 6 kg which , as the rapporteur has already stated , is very realistic , and thirdly , the very important compromise which we struck with the different groups at first reading in this Chamber and which we must continue to support , namely individual producer responsibility .
Without revisiting these three points at great length , we can , in my view , ensure in this way that less new waste is produced , which is , therefore , the best prevention possible , that waste will become more environmentally-friendly and that it will be easier to recycle .
I therefore believe that these points are essential to this Parliament , and I would like to pre-empt events slightly and inform the Council that we will be able to back these three principles when we leave for conciliation - hopefully unanimously , or at any rate jointly .
Nevertheless , there are a few points on which I fail to agree with the rapporteur .
Something which he himself dwelled on for quite a while was the question as to how far this individual responsibility extends and who is now responsible for paying for collection and the collection points .
If we do not address this , then it will be the local authority that will be picking up the tab , as Mrs Jackson said .
I must say , I am not in favour of this .
If we wish to implement the principle of responsibility and of ' the polluter pays ' to the letter , then we will need to ensure that manufacturers bear their share of these costs .
Consequently , we must at any rate ensure that Amendment No 67 of the rapporteur is not supported on this score .
Waste prevention also means that products must be re-used as long as possible .
I certainly agree that certain refrigerators which use up far too much energy should not be re-used , but since there is now a tendency for these products to have increasingly shorter life spans , we can ensure that products that are being made now can be re-used in future .
This is also an essential social objective , which I want to support 100 % , and I therefore ask you to back Amendment No 73 .
As far as the consumer is concerned , it is also important to us that he should be informed of the dangerous substances currently present in products , such as mercury , lead and such like .
Allow me to finish off on a controversial note , namely the topic of light bulbs .
I should like to broach this subject again , mainly because it is an aspect that has been lobbied heavily for , and I sometimes have the feeling that the more we lobby in this Parliament , the more productive it seems .
In my view , it is too ridiculous for words that we should keep light bulbs outside the scope of the directive , while many other , often less polluting products are included .
Mr President , on a final note , I should like to support you and the rapporteur in the fact that we are holding this debate far too late in the evening , and that attendance is disappointingly low .
A fellow MEP said to me today : surely this is sheer madness .
It is undoubtedly the most important directive we are bringing to the vote this week in the plenary session , and yet we are discussing it at an impossible hour .
Mr President , travelling across the Union can sometimes seem like travelling in a time machine .
Starting off in Britain , which still has a poor recycling record , the WEEE Directive looks like the future .
But when you visit Denmark or the Netherlands where electrical and electronic waste is routinely collected , you see that the Commission directive is really only an attempt to harmonise and build on the best practice of the present .
It is only those of us who still live in the past , Mr Bowe , who find it challenging and ambitious .
It certainly will play a major part in waste-management policy and that is for the good .
The Group of the European Liberal , Democrat and Reform Party wants to encourage recycling , good product design , best-use resources and reduce pollution .
We strongly support the principle of producer responsibility .
There is a lot still to be agreed between Parliament and the Council through the conciliation process and the fact that we are going to be engaged in lengthy discussion is a tribute to the rapporteur , who has done so much to bring all the political parties in this House together so that we are united and will almost certainly secure qualified majority voting on many amendments tomorrow .
In particular I welcome his latest compromise proposal on paying for the costs of dealing with orphan waste .
I do not believe that large legitimate manufacturers should have to pay the costs created by other companies , whether they be free-riders or small organisations .
I am pleased that encouragement is now being given to re-use materials where environmentally appropriate , and I thank my colleagues across the House for the support they have given me in opposing the development of these so-called clever chips .
My words may fall on some deaf ears here but I would ask Members to consider giving their support to a couple of amendments I have tabled .
Amendment No 82 attempts to address the concern of cable manufacturers by making clear that financial responsibility for WEEE rests with the producer of the finished equipment and not with individual component manufacturers .
I thought we were all agreed on that point .
Amendment No 71 represents a plea for help for plastic recyclers .
I conclude by saying with a certain mischievous glee , as someone who has campaigned for better recycling in my own country for 30 years , that I rather hope that this directive puts a bomb under my own local authorities and recalcitrant government .
Thank you , Mr President .
I too should like to add my words of praise to Mr Karl-Heinz Florenz , the rapporteur .
In addition , I should like to thank the other shadow rapporteurs for their fruitful cooperation .
This is modern environmental policy .
We are supporting pioneering businesses , instead of what we usually do , namely coasting along at a European mean rate , and granting the countries that are lagging behind another three years ' respite .
Nearly the whole of Parliament will be voting in favour of individual producer responsibility tomorrow .
This is new .
Nine years ago we saw the adoption of the packaging directive .
We Greens were on our own with our plea .
We opted for producer responsibility rather than individual responsibility in respect of recycling cars .
And now , tomorrow , the long-awaited moment will arrive .
Individual producer responsibility .
Why are both major groups now adopting the Green line ?
One reason is that pioneering businesses have now started lobbying .
Electrolux in Sweden deserves credit in this respect .
A year ago , Philips was still opposed to the concept , but it is now keeping a low profile .
The well-known environmental principle is : the polluter pays , not : polluters pay . And certainly not : consumers pay , as is the case in the Dutch system .
There is a collective system in the Netherlands .
Everyone - every consumer - pays a waste disposal fee .
This system encourages laziness in producers .
Responsibility for individual products stands for innovation , which benefits the environment and , ultimately , pushes the price down for the consumer .
If a business makes a product which lasts twice as long , the recycling costs will be twice as low .
If they stop using dangerous substances , they will not need to pick up the bill for disposing of these later on .
The new regulation will enter into force in 2006 if it is up to Parliament , or in 2007 if it is up to the Council .
In my view , this would be a good time to review the Dutch system as well .
In that case , we will be able to avoid the two Europes which Mrs Jackson referred to , and we will not have to wait for the ten years on which we agreed as a compromise .
We must , however , convince the Council tomorrow , as the Council has produced shoddy work .
Countries can choose between an individual or a collective system .
That does not work .
We have one market and we thus need one system for the whole of Europe .
Mr President , our political group regards the main features of this proposal very favourably .
The problems associated with waste are among the greatest environmental problems we have to tackle , and we like the idea of finding an overall solution whose objectives are , in the end , to reduce the total quantity of waste , to increase the amount of recycling and , at the same time , to reduce discharges of hazardous substances in connection with the treatment of waste .
A cleverly thought-out directive can also give a boost to better product design on the part of the big manufacturers .
Even at the first reading we had achieved fairly broad compromises in Parliament , and I think it has been a strength that we have been able to retain most of these compromises at the second reading too .
It also means that we are in a strong position in relation to the Council of Ministers when we reach the conciliation stage .
I would thank the rapporteur for his valuable cooperation and open-minded attitude .
When it comes to the directive on hazardous substances , there is one aspect we are particularly pleased with , and that is the proposal that a ban on hazardous substances such as lead and cadmium be introduced by no later than 2006 .
Nor must this present any obstacle to those countries which wish to progress more quickly and which already have more progressive legislation in quite a few of these areas .
Where the WEEE Directive is concerned , the fundamental issue for us is that of manufacturers ' direct liability , which must be as clear as possible .
On the one hand , it is an issue of principle that manufacturers should pay their own costs . On the other hand , direct and total liability on the part of manufacturers means that there would be a genuine incentive for product development and for making different products as easy to recycle as possible .
The Council 's proposal can be improved in a number of further respects .
For example , small manufacturers should be included . We also wish to avoid the problem of free-riders , to which I think Amendment No 92 may be a good solution .
We also , of course , support the demands for higher recycling quotas , as well as the specific minimum levels of collection per person .
Thank you , Mr President .
I should like to congratulate Mr Florenz on his report .
I support the thrust of his approach .
However , there are a few points with regard to which we must continue to keep a check on reality .
I am talking about light bulbs , television tubes and fire retardants .
Light bulbs only have a limited impact on the environment .
The separate collection of these is not environmentally effective .
It is therefore not sensible to ban lead in the glass of light bulbs .
This would result in light bulbs becoming very fragile , which would be a problem , particularly during manufacture .
For reasons of safety , I am in favour of the use of lead in television tubes .
If we were to prohibit lead in these , we could definitely expect more accidents to happen .
In actual fact , the same applies to fire retardants .
I am in favour of the ban on brominated fire retardants , which have clearly been demonstrated to be harmful .
However , I believe that to prohibit all fire retardants would be taking matters one step too far .
The disposal of gases with a considerable global-warming potential is not very effective .
The contribution which would be made to controlling the greenhouse effect is virtually zero .
Moreover , I should like to call attention to the risk of electronic waste being dumped in countries outside the European Union under the guise of re-use .
The Member States must therefore ensure that only usable electrical and electronic equipment which will actually be re-used is exported to countries outside the European Union .
Finally , I should like to ask the European Commission , namely Mrs Wallström , when she will be reviewing the batteries directive .
The European Commission 's argument has always been that this review proposal could become a reality as soon as the proposal for a directive on electronic waste has been drafted .
I hope that this is now the last time I will have to prompt the European Commission on this matter .
Mr President , the two proposals we are debating tonight - which I agree are taking place far too late , given their importance - are pertinent for a variety of reasons .
Firstly , because they are going to test the capacity and will of the electrics and electronics sector to maintain an attitude of active commitment to the protection of the environment , but also because they are going to test the capacity and will of the European institutions , Parliament in particular , to take a realistic and coherent approach , that can be adopted by the industry .
The rapporteur , Mr Florenz , has had a difficult task in his attempt to produce a solid and effective proposal that can be accepted by all parties concerned .
Now , as is apparent from this debate , in dealing with a complex and pioneering initiative in this field , there are still , in my opinion , many gaps and problems coming to light in its practical application .
Two of these are of particular concern to me .
One such example is consumables , such as those that have been mentioned here tonight .
I believe that if we use this concept in an excessively wide sense we will be jeopardising those Member States who already have collection systems in place , in breaking up existing re-use circuits , inasmuch as we would be favouring recycling over re-use , before asking ourselves the question whether we are favouring the most ecologically sound system .
Secondly , I would like to refer to ' free-riders ' .
I believe that the compromise amendment presented is an appropriate solution , given that it did not seem logical that , taking the issue of individual financial responsibility as an example , we should have to make product manufacturers who disappear from the market or those who refuse to be identified responsible for their actions .
I think we should take on a demanding approach with manufacturers who do not face up to their responsibilities with regard to waste , in order to defend those responsible manufacturers who have no reason to take on costs caused by these ' free-riders ' .
Mr President , like everyone else I should like to congratulate the rapporteur for the work he has done on this proposal .
He has worked very hard on it and moved it quite fast , in parliamentary terms .
When you consider the full implications , what he has achieved has been quite phenomenal .
This is the most extensive recycling scheme we have ever seen in Europe .
Unfortunately , we live in an increasingly throw-away society where we produce more and more waste .
What I am pleased to see with this proposal is that we are finally moving in the direction when the days when we can throw fridges , televisions , toasters , mobile phones and other electrical goods into a landfill are over .
We all want to see a new era in which environmentally-friendly electric goods are fully recycled or reused .
We all need to play our part in this as consumers and become habitual recyclers .
But are these proposals going to help us ?
Furthermore , are Parliament 's amendments going to make things better ?
In large part I can say ' yes ' , but not entirely .
Too rigid an application of the principle of individual responsibility will cause major problems for small- and medium-sized enterprises across Europe and prevent sensible collective schemes being implemented .
Enforced mandatory separation of electronic waste at each household , which could then , when non-compliance is found , be threatened with punishment is not a sensible way to encourage the cooperation of consumers nor is it , in every case , technically feasible .
Do we really want to include consumable spare parts and sub-assemblies in this proposal even if they add contamination and enormous technical problems to the recycling process ?
Does not everyone realise that small firms throughout the European Union need some extra time and assistance to cope with their full responsibilities and do this job properly ?
All this leads me to think that we need a bit more time .
After tomorrow 's vote we should all pause for some thought about how we can make this directive fully environmentally friendly , cost-effective and attractive to the public .
Mr President , in the part of Helsinki where I grew up , a waste truck is doing the rounds this week .
WEEE waste can also be put into it upon payment of a special fee .
One kilo per person per year is collected in the district .
In another part of Finland , where ' Rosk 'n Roll ' operates , waste is collected and advice dispensed in return for a special eco-fee . Europe 's fifteenth largest waste recycling company also operates here - on the principles of the market economy .
Eight kilos of WEEE waste per person is collected .
I think we have something to learn from this practical example , as we also have from the matter of oil waste at sea and the way in which it is treated .
There must be common systems in which the principles of the market economy apply .
There must be no benefit from throwing things away .
I support the rapporteur 's proposal because I believe that it fulfils these requirements .
I would nonetheless observe that the proposal on brominated flame retardants does not in reality take account of the environment because it may lead to our having a great need to collect waste as long as we are not able to use plastic in some other way .
I do not in actual fact believe that the amendment concerning flame retardants is of any benefit to the environment .
Mr President , I welcome this directive and thank the rapporteur for his hard work .
This will mean that electric and electronic waste will have to be collected and recycled instead of dumped - as in my own country - with negative effects on the environment .
Producers need to be responsible for their own products to ensure that future products live up to a more environmentally responsible design .
For example , the insides of televisions can now be made completely of plastic instead of plastic and metal , making them easier to recycle .
Such producers should be rewarded for designing to reduce waste at competitive prices .
Consumers need to be involved in this process in order for the directive to be a success .
Easy access to collection systems is absolutely essential and consumers must be able to return products free of charge .
Making producers responsible for their own brand products will lead to improvements of design and have a direct effect on the costs .
The loosely-framed common position must be tightened up to discourage free-riders who do not take responsibility for their own waste .
Here I welcome the amendment on orphan waste products .
Finally , it is vital to have comparable rules implemented in all Member States .
Otherwise we will simply have chaos .
Mr President , I wish to congratulate the rapporteur , Mr Florenz , on this milestone in environmental policy .
I would like to comment on two great causes of concern .
The first is that existing collection systems could be destroyed .
I do not share Mrs Jackson 's viewpoint , in fact I believe that they could continue to operate .
But it would not be unreasonable if some change were necessary after ten years .
Secondly , cities and municipalities are terrified that it will be incredibly expensive for them .
However , it need not cost the municipality anything at all , because they would of course be able to recover the cost from consumers via waste charges .
I regard it as being very dangerous to take over costs from producers at least from the collection point .
In view of the late hour , I will take the liberty of becoming literary : I almost regard this as an un-European way of doing things .
One final word about Finland . I am sorry for the Finns that things are in such a mess there , but it not the only thing to go wrong in Finland .
They even want to build a new nuclear power station !
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , in my opinion the directive on electronic waste should first and foremost serve the environment .
We support all amendments that reinforce the environmental objective .
However , the environment does not benefit from European rules that are opposed to collective systems .
Producers must be individually responsible , that goes without saying .
Producers must be encouraged to use eco designs , I agree on that score too .
However , individual funding is not the answer .
Different makes of hairdryers , electrical toothbrushes , hand blenders , kettles , TV sets etc . , hardly differ in terms of recyclability .
Individual funding will therefore hardly benefit the environment .
Collective systems , however , are less bureaucratic and more practical .
There is therefore no reason why collective systems should only be called upon in exceptional circumstances .
My second point concerns the waste disposal fee .
Why should this not be visible ?
I can understand the underlying rationale , that environmental costs must be incorporated in the price , but should this be done invisibly at all costs ?
Would it not be more transparent if it were mentioned ?
Visibility would certainly enhance awareness on the part of the consumer , and this is of major importance , as consumer cooperation is crucial if we are to achieve the environmental objectives .
Mr President , I warmly congratulate the rapporteur , Karl-Heinz Florenz .
Under his direction Parliament has been able to have a central role in bringing together the views of consumer associations , environmental organisations and producers also .
The prevailing and uncommon mood of consensus is a resource that all parties should cherish , also bearing in mind future plans for acts .
The directive will be an important application with regard to the producer 's responsibility .
I am satisfied that in many respects I have been able to strengthen and clarify it through my amendments .
Producer responsibility will have a huge impact on the volume and quality of waste electric and electronic equipment , greater than any other possible decision that Parliament might take regarding waste .
It will create incentives for more environmentally friendly design and for innovations before products have yet come on the market and so reduce the ecological burden of products throughout their lifetime .
Similarly we are now creating alternative methods for treating waste to act as an incentive , resulting in an ecological burden that is as light as possible .
The amendment I tabled with this in mind was adopted by Parliament at first reading and the Council adopted it in its common position in a formulation that was further improved .
The European Union is now making legislation that will clearly show to the rest of the world that the conflict between consideration for the environment and the economy is not unavoidable but one that can be settled through carefully considered legislation .
That is why it seems foolish that the Council wanted to allow collective financing - in practice a waste tax - not just with regard to historical but also future waste .
For one thing it would not be an incentive for ecodesign , which in practice would mean the whole directive would be watered down .
Secondly , it would allow an opportunity for ' free-rider ' , which would penalise honest and respectable producers .
Thirdly , it would increase the public tax burden since no proportional reduction in existing taxes can be anticipated .
The Council 's common position therefore means fiscal greed to be endured by consumers , producers and the environment alike , although , fortunately , it would seem that Parliament is on their side .
I think Parliament 's work in connection with this directive has succeeded so well as a process that it would be worth exploring and clarifying what courses of action we could adopt more frequently for the future .
If we were in the habit of erecting statues to legislative projects we might now build one gladly .
Mr President , I wish to begin by thanking Mr Florenz for the work carried out in the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Protection and for the cooperation with the Commission .
Let me briefly recall why we are tackling the specific problem of electrical and electronic waste .
It is the fastest-growing part of the waste stream , indeed it is growing three times faster than the average .
Each of us produces on average about 14 kgs per year of this waste and by the year 2010 , when this directive is fully operational , electrical and electronic waste will account for over 8 % of the entire municipal waste stream .
Once adopted and implemented the directive on waste electrical and electronic equipment will allow us to divert this type of waste from landfills and incinerators to environmentally sound re-use and recycling .
The directive on restricting hazardous substances in electrical and electronic equipment will prevent the presence of unnecessary hazardous substances , posing risks for human health and the environment in various stages of the life-cycle of such equipment , including its waste management .
The work undertaken by the European Parliament substantially reinforces the original proposal , and I welcome the majority of the amendments tabled .
In particular I support the strengthening of individual financing , as proposed by the Committee on the Environment , and limiting collective systems to those cases where these are necessary for practical reasons .
This can help to internalise waste management costs into the product price and give incentives for a better design for re-use and recycling .
It is a first step towards fuller integration of environmental considerations into product design and consumption patterns .
We also need to find appropriate solutions for the financing of historical waste put on the market before the entry into force of this directive .
One of the options to achieve this may also be the use of a visible fee .
This should , however , be done in line with Articles 88 and 89 of the Treaty .
I welcome the principle of increasing the collection target to 6 kgs per capita and per year , though the timetable foreseen needs to be more realistic and take into account the time needed to collect and process data .
I also support the proposal to advance the phase-out date for the substance bans in the RoHS directive to 2006 , though this should be done in accordance with the principles set out in Article 95 of the Treaty .
Let me also answer some of the points raised during the debate .
I can assure you that we have carefully evaluated all aspects of this proposal , including its costs .
For the overall target of 4 kg per capita collected waste , we estimate that the costs will be in the region of EUR 500 to 900 million .
We also base our estimates and evaluation on the existing systems , of which there are not many : the Netherlands is the one example from which we can draw conclusions and learn lessons .
These figures have been confirmed by practical experience , for example in the Netherlands .
If Parliament wants to increase the collection target , this is obviously a political decision , and we agree with that .
When it comes to subsidiarity , we have tried to strike an appropriate balance between harmonising certain elements of the proposal and leaving others to subsidiarity .
This is why the way the collection systems operate is left to the Member States .
We also think it is not necessary to define at Community level who is to finance the collection point up to the moment the equipment is brought to it .
This is why we reject both Amendments Nos 69 and 83 .
What about small and medium-sized enterprises ?
The Committee on the Environment has voted in favour of deleting a temporary exemption for SMEs from the financing obligations of the directive .
We can accept this point as we think that practice has shown that there are no excessive costs for these companies and that such an exemption is not needed , and it might even lead to market distortions .
Mr Blokland , I hope that any day now we will be able to present the batteries proposal and I am working hard on that .
Finally , a total of 82 amendments have been tabled on the WEEE directive and 18 on the RoHS directive .
On the waste electrical and electronic equipment proposal , the Commission can accept 32 amendments in full , two in part and 20 in principle .
The Commission can accept Amendments Nos 9 , 11-19 , 24 , 27-37 , 39 , 40 , 43 , 44 , 45 , 50 , 57 , 65 , 76 and 77 .
In Amendment No 23 , the Commission supports a new paragraph 1 and paragraph 1 ( b ) , last subparagraph in full and paragraph 1 ( b ) , third and fourth subparagraphs as well as paragraph 2 in principle .
In Amendment No 73 , the Commission can accept the first part .
In Amendments Nos 1 , 3 , 5 , 6 , 7 , 10 , the first , third and fourth sentences can be accepted in full .
In Amendments Nos 20 , 21 and 41 , the first sentence can be accepted in full .
Amendments Nos 42 , 48 , 49 , 51-55 , 66 , 78 and 92 can be accepted in principle .
On the RoHS proposal , the Commission can accept four amendments in full , one in part and seven in principle .
The amendments acceptable in full are Nos 3 , 4 , 10 and 17 .
Amendment No 5 can be accepted in part - first paragraph - and in Amendments Nos 2 , 6 , 7 , 8 and 9 , the first paragraph can be accepted in full and Amendments Nos 13 and 15 in principle .
I thank all Members for this important debate .
Thank you very much , Commissioner .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon .
The next item is the recommendation for second reading ( A5-0090 / 2002 ) by Mrs Ries on behalf of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy on the Council common position for adopting a European Parliament and Council directive amending for the 24th time Council Directive 76 / 769 / EEC relating to restrictions on the marketing and use of certain dangerous substances and preparations ( pentabromodiphenyl ether ) ( 12332 / 1 / 2001 - C5-0638 / 2001 - 2001 / 0018 ( COD ) ) .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , on 27 October 2000 , the Council of Ministers adopted its common position on this draft directive on the marketing and use of certain dangerous substances , specifically pentabromodiphenyl ether , a flame retardant used - I would reiterate - almost exclusively in the manufacture of flexible polyurethane foam .
PentaBDE builds up and remains in the environment , it escapes from the foam and enters our blood stream and nervous system via the atmosphere .
I therefore welcome the fact that the common position - as , in fact , was suggested by Parliament at the vote at first reading - is placing a ban on pentaBDE in all its forms , including when it is the residue from the manufacture of a related chemical product , namely octabromodiphenyl ether .
This ban is due to come into force in July 2003 .
As far as the rest of the text is concerned , however , I would say that we still have a great deal of work to do .
The Council , which is supporting the opinion of the Commission on this issue , has rejected Parliament 's proposal to extend the scope of the directive to cover all the polybromodiphenyl ethers on the market , namely octaBDE and decaBDE .
We must make it clear there are two arguments for justifying this refusal , which a majority of the Member States opposes .
The first is that we must wait for the final results of the risk assessments in progress ; the second is that we must ensure , before any ban is placed on a flame retardant , that equally effective substitute products are available .
I would like to reiterate that this is precisely the reasoning that Parliament followed at first reading , and also that used by the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy during its vote on 21 March , with regard to decabromodiphenyl ether in both cases .
In other words , by calling for a deferred ban on this substance to come into force no later than 1 January 2006 , depending on the final results of the risk assessment , Parliament is taking into account the latest available scientific information forwarded by the United Kingdom , which is the Member State acting as rapporteur on the environmental aspects of the risk assessment .
The British experts concluded with a proposal to the authorities responsible to consider the need to apply the precautionary principle to both octaBDE and to decaBDE .
The European Parliament is also responding to the Council and Commission 's desire to respect the rules laid down by the 1993 regulation on the assessment and control of existing substances , on the existence of substitutes and on the difficult balance that needed to be found between the obvious advantages in terms of safety in the event of fire , on the one hand , and the harmful effects of these products on the environment and health , on the other .
In this respect , I would point out that decaBDE , which constitutes 80 % of bromine fire protection products , is a particularly resistant and effective flame retardant .
In the United Kingdom in 2000 alone , 155 lives were saved and thousands of cases of severe burns were avoided thanks to these substances .
That is why the Committee on the Environment wanted to phase in the precautionary principle rather than apply it rigidly , as I said .
This is the purpose of Amendment No 4 , which was unanimously adopted , and it is also why I am opposed , as I was at first reading and during the vote in committee , to Amendments Nos 9 and 10 tabled by Mrs Schörling and Mr Sjöstedt .
I am , however , in favour of Amendment No 7 , tabled by these Members , which is much clearer in its wording in that it explicitly refers to decaBDE in the recitals .
As regards octaBDE and its imminent ban , which I believe is justified , there is no further information to reassure us on this substance and Parliament is therefore unable to change its position adopted on 6 September 2001 .
The results of the risk assessments currently in progress forwarded by the French Government remain applicable ; they are preliminary results revealing that octaBDE is harmful to human health and the environment .
There is a further reason for our request to limit the marketing of this flame retardant which justifies the reintroduction of Amendments Nos 1 , 2 and 3 , and that is that octaBDE is used in a fairly small number of products and can be replaced in many cases by decabromodyphenl ether , and this is why my fellow Members and myself call for the precautionary principle to prevail over all other considerations .
To sum up , I have some brief comments to put to the Commissioner .
The Commission is developing programmes , greatly increasing the number of initiatives in order to ensure even greater levels of protection for human health and the environment .
The new strategy on chemical products launched by your services is the best example of this .
It would be a strong , reassuring signal if you made a commitment to implementing a risk reduction policy for all polybromodiphenyl ethers without delay .
I have , of course , noted the progress that the Commission has made in this area with its declaration attached to the minutes of the common position , where it undertakes to consider as a matter of urgency the need for a new proposal to restrict the marketing and use of octaBDE and decaBDE , but the conditions applied - namely , that it is still necessary to wait for the results of the risk assessments - mean , in this case , that the timetable for introducing urgent measures is at risk of being further overloaded .
Where scientific doubt persists , it is necessary to make a political choice .
That is why I think that we do not need to wait for a never-ending story to unfold to analyse the risks but to unite and promote a balanced solution . The most important thing is to reconcile the immediate safety of our citizens from fire risks with the longer-term benefits for public health and the environment .
Mr President , I thank the rapporteur for the work she has done , and the cooperation she has had with other rapporteurs has been very helpful .
This is an interesting issue .
These substances are dangerous , they are toxic .
But they also have an extremely useful and important role in that they save lives in their role as fire-retardants .
There is absolutely no question about that fact .
We have to very carefully consider how we deal with these substances .
It is quite clear that penta and probably octa are really not necessary and that the risks they pose to the environment and human health do not justify their continued use as flame-retardants .
But I urge Parliament to pause for a moment and think seriously about what alternatives there are to these very useful flame retardants .
Can we still use deca in a sensible and serious way ?
Will the risk assessments finally rule out its use ?
We simply do not know because we have not had the risk assessments .
The Commission has to press Member States to come forward with them as quickly as possible .
We want this issue resolved .
We want to know exactly what to do with these substances .
For the moment it is an open question .
I hope that we use our intelligence in this question and realise the importance of these substances in protecting human life as flame-retardants .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I do not think it is acceptable for most environmental matters to be debated as late as this in the evening .
Environmental policy and legislation really need a bit of ' prime time ' here in Parliament .
It is a big responsibility to take decisions about public health and the environment that are to apply for a long time into the future .
This directive and the report on brominated flame retardants are good examples of this responsibility 's being exercised .
After the first reading in September 2001 , there was a reappraisal of the EU 's risk assessments in relation to oktaBDE and dekaBDE .
That took place in November of last year .
The European Chemicals Bureau believes that , when it comes to oktaBDE and dekaBDE , the risk assessment and situation are now the same as they were for pentaBDE , when the result was a total ban .
These substances are persistent and bioaccumulative .
The scientific proofs in relation to oktaBDE and dekaBDE are now so alarming in terms of public health and the environment that the Bureau has recommended the Member States to take a political decision , that is to say to use the precautionary principle .
In the European Parliament , we must also accept our responsibility as co-legislators .
Following the reappraisal and the new risk assessment , we must also arrange for the precautionary principle to prevail .
Those of us from the Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance , the Group of the European Liberal , Democrat and Reform Party and the Group of the Party of European Socialists are therefore re-tabling Amendments Nos 7 to 10 , according to which dekaBDE too must no longer be used .
There is no reason to wait any longer .
There are substitutes .
In 80 per cent of cases , the use of brominated flame retardants involves the use of dekaBDE .
In view of the new knowledge we have acquired , we cannot continue to gamble with the environment and public health .
We therefore hope that the political groups will vote in favour of the amendments and that Commissioner Wallström too will confirm that the precautionary principle is to be applied .
Mr President , the rapporteur 's proposal and the proposals adopted by the committee entail a tougher attitude than the Council 's common position , and that , I think , is good .
Just like Mrs Schörling , I nonetheless believe that we now have arguments for being able to go still further .
Now , we have arguments for banning not only pentaBDE and oktaBDE but also dekaBDE .
If we are to wait for the risk assessments , we are in danger of having to wait too long .
Moreover , we are in possession of the arguments right now , and we know that these substances , which are hazardous , accumulate in the human body and are increasingly present in our living environment .
We really have all the arguments needed for taking a decision right now .
There are also alternatives to these brominated flame retardants , which are otherwise in danger of becoming a major health problem in the future .
Just like Mr Bowe , I think we must take an intelligent decision which , in this case , means daring to take the lead and ban what we know to be hazardous .
Mr President , brominated flame retardants constitute a serious threat to public health and the environment .
After decades of industrial use , we find them everywhere , including in fish , birds ' eggs , polar bears , agricultural products and mother 's milk .
It might be imagined that this information had been taken from a paper written by fundamentalist environmental organisations , but that is not the case .
One of the signatories of the paper is the Director-General of the Swedish emergency services authority , comprised of experts on , for example , fire protection , and that authority too is prepared to say that flame retardants have had their day .
I think that this view should be listened to , for the major argument in the debate against a ban on oktaBDE and dekaBDE is that we cannot expose people to the danger involved in not using adequate flame retardants in buildings , furniture etc .
At the same time , we know , however , that there are substitutes , that there is the possibility of using other materials and that there is the ability to produce in different ways than we do today .
In a way , it is almost absurd that we are compelled to use chemicals to combat those chemicals we use in our buildings today .
The reason our products burn as well as they do is that we already use chemicals in them .
The Commission should have a proper think and try , for all that , to make a serious effort also to ban oktaBDE and dekaBDE .
The issue is one of how long we have to wait , following the assessment , before a ban or a restriction on the use of oktaBDE and dekaBDE is introduced .
The Commission has nonetheless said that it is prepared to act quickly .
So how quickly is it prepared to act ?
Mr President , I wish firstly to thank the MEPs for their interest in this proposal , and I naturally want to convey special thanks to the rapporteur , Mrs Ries , for her constructive work .
This is certainly an important directive , involving a ban on the use of the substance pentabromodiphenyl , or pentaBDE , which a risk assessment has revealed constitutes an environmental risk .
The substance accumulates in nature and , as has already been pointed out , it has been found in mother 's milk .
The directive is far-reaching , covering all uses of pentaBDE and all types of goods containing this substance .
The directive is based on the precautionary principle .
The proposed directive does not entail the risk of fires starting or an increase in risks to the environment , because there are already suitable alternatives available .
I can understand and share the anxiety felt by MEPs regarding other , closely related substances not included in the original area of application of the proposed directive , and I wish to comment on this , as well as on the issue of timing .
The Commission is actively investigating the risks presented by the two closely related substances , oktaBDE and dekaBDE , as well as the risks which might arise due to fire if these substances were to be banned from the market .
The Commission 's attitude is that we must minimise the overall risks .
We shall soon have finished this risk assessment in relation to oktaBDE and dekaBDE , and we expect to have information before the end of the year about the consequences of banning these substances in terms both of a reduction in the chemical risk and a possible increase in the risks due to fires .
On the basis of the results of this work , the Commission will table a new proposal at the beginning of next year , that is to say at the beginning of 2003 .
The Commission will also give clear instructions to all the parties concerned to hurry up and complete the assessments , if possible before the end of the year .
Against this background , it is not now possible for the Commission to approve those of Parliament 's amendments designed to extend the scope of the proposed directive to include a total and immediate ban on oktaBDE and dekaBDE as well .
The amendments concerned are numbers 1 , 2 , 3 , 7 , 8 , 9 and 10 .
Nor is the Commission able to approve the amendment according to which there would be a total ban on dekaBDE as from 1 January 2006 if the risk assessment were to show that there are risks associated with the substance .
That is because it would be possible for suitable measures to enter into force much sooner than 2006 if these should prove necessary .
I assure MEPs that , at the first possible opportunity , the Commission will take action in relation to these substances so that the precautionary principle is complied with .
I also hope that MEPs are aware of the fact that the Commission has proposed a ban on these three substances - penta- , okta- and dekadiphenyls - in our proposal for a directive on the restriction of the use of certain hazardous substances in electrical and electronic equipment .
We are concerned here with Mr Florenz 's report , which has also been debated during this sitting .
Let me emphasise that the Commission will ensure that the proposal we shall table early next year concerning oktaBDE and dekaBDE will be compatible with our proposal to restrict hazardous substances in electrical and electronic equipment .
Because the risk assessment in relation to oktaBDE and dekaBDE is far advanced , it will be possible , if need be , for the Commission to take measures much earlier than in 2006 .
Once the risk assessments have been concluded and an investigation made into the availability of replacement products , it should be possible to establish in which cases there are risks associated with use of the substances .
Suitable measures can then be taken immediately .
Because the assessments will be ready shortly , it will be possible for the measures decided upon to begin to be applied well before 2006 .
On the basis of the assurances I have now given on behalf of the Commission , I look forward to this very urgent draft law 's being adopted as soon as possible .
I should like to thank MEPs for this debate .
Thank you very much , Commissioner Wallström .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon .
Before I close the debate , I would like to point out to the Sittings Service that the formula for octabromodiphenyl ether is wrong in Amendment No 4 , where it says C12H2Br10O .
The two hydrogens need to be deleted .
( The sitting was closed at 11.37 p.m. )
Situation in Chechnya
The next item is the statement by the Council and the Commission on the situation in Chechnya .
Mr de Miguel , the Minister speaking on behalf of the Council , has the floor .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , since the Russian military operations in the Russian Federal Republic of Chechnya resumed in September 1999 , the situation there has been treated as a priority by the European Union .
Both the conclusions of the Helsinki European Council , back in December 1999 , and the actions of the presidencies which have followed it , are testimony to this .
Contrary to what some people predicted , this position has not altered following the attacks of 11 September .
The Spanish Presidency has been acting and will continue to act throughout this six-month period in a way that is fully coherent with this issue of concern to the Union .
The Presidency 's work plan for the development of a common strategy for Russia included a paragraph which indicated our will to ' continue to express the Union 's desire for an early peaceful solution in Chechnya within the framework of the principle territorial integrity , the Rule of Law and respect for human rights , to promote an improvement of the conditions for the safer and more effective distribution of humanitarian aid ? .
In the months since January , these intentions have been turned into various concrete actions .
The Presidency has included the Chechen issue on the agenda of all political talks between the European Union and Russia at various levels , with both political representatives , such as the European Union-Russia Ministerial troika , the European Union-Russia political directors ' troika and the PSC-Russia troika , and in meetings of experts , the so-called COEST troika .
On the occasion of the recent ministerial-level troika with the Russian Foreign Minister , Mr Ivanov , on 2 April , the issue was once again raised by the Presidency .
Furthermore , at the beginning of March , the troika of Union Heads of Mission in Moscow made a representation to the Russian Federation 's Deputy Foreign Minister , Mr Gusarov , to express the Union 's concern at the human rights situation in the region .
We must add to all these actions , which have served to communicate the Union 's position on the development of the Caucasus Republic to the Russian authorities , the request for , and subsequent support from Russia for , the trip which the troika of Heads of Mission intends to make to the region during April , which will allow us to obtain information on the development of events .
For this same purpose of compiling information , the troika of Heads of Mission maintains frequent contacts with representatives of NGOs and competent authorities such as Mr Kalamanov , the Kremlin 's special representative for human rights in Chechnya , or Mr Yastrzhembsky , the presidential spokesman .

While explaining these specific measures , which are not restricted in this case to those being developed by the Spanish Presidency in particular , I must point out that the Union 's concern has been translated into a significant financial commitment .
The European Union is currently the greatest donor of humanitarian aid to the region .
The sums allocated to it amount to EUR 65 million for the period between the resumption of military operations in 1999 and the current time . Of these sums , EUR 40 million has been earmarked for 2001 .
With regard to the current situation in Chechnya , I would like to stress certain aspects .
In the field of human rights , all the reports from the OSCE support group , from the Parliamentary Assembly of the Council of Europe and from the various NGOs continue to give cause for concern .
Lord Judd stated in the report communicated to the Parliamentary Assembly of the Council of Europe , that the progress observed in this field over the last year had been scant .
The report of the support group of the OSCE for the early months of this year with regard to military operations carried out during this period spoke of civilian disappearances , lootings , the indiscriminate use of force and other violations of the human rights of civilians , all of this in contravention of what had been previously agreed .
The representative of the public prosecutor 's office was not present during all operations .
We must acknowledge the steps taken by the Russian authorities to improve the situation .
President Putin - we must recognise - has expressed his commitment that the people guilty of human rights violations , including the military , will be tried and punished .
These statements have also been repeated by other official representatives .
The Office of the Kremlin 's Special Representative for Human Rights in Chechnya has carried out its work , condemning alleged violations of human rights .
The Russian authorities are cooperating with the organisations active in this area .
With regard to the intergovernmental organisations , in addition to cooperation with the United Nations High Commission for Human Rights , the mandate of the OSCE support group in Chechnya has been renewed until 31 December 2002 ; three representatives of the Council of Europe are continuing to participate in the same office and the work of the mixed working group consisting of members of the Parliamentary Assembly of the Council of Europe and the Duma are continuing their work .
With regard to the NGOs , last January the creation of the Council for the protection of human rights in Chechnya was agreed , which would be made up of representatives of these non-governmental organisations , the public prosecutor 's office , the security forces and local authorities , and which would meet on a monthly basis .
Furthermore , within this repertoire of positive measures , the Chechen police are present at control posts on the Republic 's transport routes .
However , in view of the analysis of the current situation , these measures are insufficient .
With regard to the humanitarian situation , there is still the ongoing tragedy of the hundreds of thousands of displaced persons , who are mainly dissuaded from returning to Chechnya by the continuing situation of insecurity and there are also certain difficulties to be faced by the humanitarian organisations in carrying out their work .
We also have to recognise that the Russian authorities have adopted different measures in the region : as well as the creation of the aforementioned working groups with the NGOs , which will provide a forum in which to deal with these issues , the Russian authorities have applied various measures to normalise life .
These measures are not restricted to socio-economic development plans , the reopening of educational establishments or the reestablishment of the public pensions system , but they also extend to the drawing up of a draft constitution which will have to be put to a referendum .
This will lead to the holding of new elections in which the population of the region will be able to elect their representatives .
In view of the persistence of the problems I have just described , the European Union has exploited - and will continue to exploit - all channels of dialogue in order to communicate its position to the Russian authorities , and that position is based on the following points : firstly , the European Union recognises the territorial integrity of the Russian Federation as well as its right and responsibility to protect its population from terrorist attacks , which the Union condemns unreservedly .
This recognition is accompanied by a double consideration : firstly , the Union expresses its firm conviction that that responsibility to protect the population must be fulfilled within the framework of the Rule of Law and strict compliance with respect for human rights and international humanitarian law , which are enshrined in numerous treaties to which the Russian Federation is party .
The European Union requests that the Russian authorities try and punish the people responsible for human rights violations , thereby eliminating any risk of impunity , which unfortunately some people have enjoyed in the past .
Those authorities are furthermore urged to provide federal officials with appropriate training in the field of human rights , which would prevent these events from reoccurring in the future .
I would like to acknowledge the contribution made in this area by the Council of Europe and the Office of the United Nations ' High Commission for Human Rights , and take this opportunity to express the European Union 's support for the work of these organisations and the OSCE in Chechnya .
The Union also wants the Russian authorities to continue to cooperate with the international bodies and NGOs in order to eliminate the obstacles that are still hindering their work .
Specifically , these organisations must be allowed access to detention centres and they must be provided with the means for radio communication .
An improvement in the human rights situation will undoubtedly encourage the return of displaced persons .
The removal of the restrictions which currently make access to the area for the media difficult will also contribute to increasing trust , both within the civil population and within the international community .
The second major point of the Union 's position is that terrorist acts carried out by Chechen armed factions are without doubt part of the problem but they are by no means the whole problem .
A lasting solution to this problem therefore depends on the normalisation of civilian life by means of the restoration of democratic mechanisms and structures in the Chechen Republic .
That result must be achieved through dialogue with the various sectors of Chechen society .
In this regard , the European Union is urging the Russian authorities to renew the contacts initiated last November .
Thirdly , the European Union believes that its position on this issue is level-headed , since , on the one hand , it has no hesitation in acknowledging the progress made and , on the other , it must continue to indicate those areas in which there are still serious shortcomings .
The Union is thereby acting fully in accordance with the values that underpin both its very existence and its relations with third countries , including the strategic relationship between the European Union and Russia .
The core of these values shared by the Union and Russia is the respect for the Rule of Law and the safeguard of human rights and fundamental freedoms .
This attitude of equanimity and coherence will also guide the European Union 's actions with regard to the treatment of Chechnya at the 58th sitting of the Humans Rights Commission .
The Union has informed the Russian authorities of its full willingness to negotiate a Presidency declaration that incorporates both progress and shortcomings in similar terms to those which I have expressed in this House .
Also , we have told those authorities that if this willingness on the part of the Union is not reflected by Russia , the European Union will not hesitate in adopting a resolution , as was necessary during the 2001 session .

Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , it only remains for me to insist on the firmness and coherence of the Union 's position , which will continue to treat the Chechen situation as a priority in terms of its relations with Russia , and it will continue to direct all its attention and efforts towards it as events require , and I would also like to say that this issue will form a significant part of the dialogue that will take place on 28 May at the summit between Russia and the European Union .
Mr President , the Commission shares Parliament 's concern about the deterioration of the situation on the ground in Chechnya , as shown by a number of recent solid reports of serious violations of human rights over the past few months .
In view of these reports , including from the Council of Europe , the European Union has continued to express its concerns on the matter to the Russian authorities through the appropriate diplomatic channels .
As you are aware , the EU-Russia political dialogue offers an intensive calendar of high-level meetings , including last week 's Ministerial Troika with Foreign Minister Ivanov in Madrid .
The position of the European Union on this issue is quite simple , and quite firm .
The EU supports Russia wholeheartedly in its legitimate fight against terrorism , in Chechnya and elsewhere .
There should be no doubt about this .
Our calls for a political solution which , without prejudice to the territorial integrity of the Russian Federation , satisfies the majority of the Chechen people , do not in any way undermine such support .
Equally , there should be no doubt about the EU commitment to uphold human rights in the fight against terrorism world-wide , including in Chechnya .
In this regard , I am confident that the European Parliament fully shares the view that the fight against international terrorism cannot serve as justification or excuse for the violation of the most basic individual human rights , be it in the West Bank , in Afghanistan or in Chechnya .
This should not change - and has indeed not changed - due to the horrible terrorist attacks of 11 September last year .
Against the background of our joint efforts with Russia to establish closer political and economic relations , the European Union has repeatedly made clear to Russia that it expects her to act in full accordance with the values that Russia undertook to respect when it entered the Council of Europe and the OSCE .
These basic principles of full respect of fundamental human rights and the rule of law , including international law , constitute an integral part of the strategic partnership that we are trying to build together .
As you are aware , the Human Rights Commission is currently meeting in session in Geneva , and Chechnya remains an important item on the agenda .
The European Commission is fully participating in the internal deliberations of the EU in this forum .
While the European Union is prepared to engage in good-faith negotiations with Russia , in order to acknowledge all positive efforts undertaken by Russia during last year , there are still too many very serious issues that have yet to be addressed in Chechnya .
On the positive side , we have acknowledged some positive Russian steps towards a political solution that could guarantee long-term peace and stability in Chechnya .
We welcome these steps and are prepared to support them in any way necessary .
In the same vein , we must also acknowledge that there has been progress on a number of issues during the last year , including on physical reconstruction , setting the conditions for economic development , supporting the reestablishment of the Chechen judiciary to restore the rule of law , and so on .
Clearly , a lot more has to be done in all of these fields , but there has been progress and credit should be given where credit is due .
Also , we have noted that the number of reported violations of human rights that have been followed up by prosecutors has increased .
However , we must still regret the excessively low number of follow-up convictions that these reports have resulted in .
It is clear that , by dispelling any notion of impunity , the punishment of those guilty of human rights violations is crucial to avoid further violations in the future .
More must be done here .
Another area where progress is warranted is in the provision of and access to humanitarian assistance .
As you are aware , the European Union , through the European Commission Humanitarian Office ECHO , is by far the largest donor of humanitarian aid to the Northern Caucasus .
Since October 1999 , we have provided some EUR 65 million in aid to the victims of the Chechnya conflict and last year alone more than EUR 40 million .
Our funding is crucial for the presence of international humanitarian NGOs in the area , as well as being crucial also for the work and presence of UN organisations , notably the UNHCR .
In our view it is essential that representatives of the international humanitarian community are present in Chechnya .
We remain concerned about the persistent difficult operating conditions for humanitarian organisations in the Northern Caucasus , notably the opaque and time-consuming system of access and work permits for Chechnya , and also the denial to humanitarian NGOs of the right to use VHF radio communication which is very important for their safety .
We have been constructively raising the issue of operating conditions with Russian authorities at various levels for more than two years , with only very minor improvements so far .
We have tried all possible channels ; this is a discordant element in the ongoing discussion with the Russian authorities , but we will not stop pressing these issues .
Security conditions in the Northern Caucasus remain difficult ; indeed , one must expect a certain level of operational problems .
But we expect more cooperation to be forthcoming from the relevant Russian authorities .
In this regard , we will continue to advocate concrete improvements , so as to facilitate the conduct of humanitarian operations according to the basic established normal international standards of safety , efficiency and independent monitoring and evaluation .
In parallel , we will keep insisting that any repatriation of Chechen displaced persons , from within neighbouring Ingushetia and Daghestan , and refugees from Georgia , must take place on a voluntary and unconditional basis only .
This is becoming a more and more serious issue .
A massive return movement seems rather unlikely at present , given the persisting instability and violence in Chechnya and the very limited progress in the implementation of the Russian Government 's long-announced rehabilitation and reconstruction programme .
Mr President , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , yesterday we had a very solemn debate here in Parliament about the situation in the Middle East , and I think that the debate on Chechnya deserves the same degree of solemnity .
There is an open wound in Europe : in Chechnya , in the Russian Federation .
As members of the European People 's Party , as European Democrats , we say that security in Europe , on our continent , in the twenty-first century will depend on our having a democratic ...
... European Union , which is capable of taking action and committed to upholding human rights , and on our having a democratic Russia , which is capable of taking action and committed to upholding human rights , and on both - the European Union and Russia - working together as partners .
We want to have a strategic partnership of this kind because it is important for the future of our continent .
We must not remain silent , however , when human rights are violated , and of all people , we in the European Parliament must not remain silent .
Some observers are saying that more people are dying in Chechnya than in the Middle East .
Our group believes that a Chechen life is of equal value to the life of a citizen of the United States or a citizen of the European Union ...
( Applause )
? and that the life of a Muslim in Chechnya is of equal value to the life of a Christian , a Jew , a Palestinian , a Hindu , a Buddhist or a person of no belief .
( Applause )
Human rights - and it is particularly because we are Europeans that this matters to us - are indivisible the world over .
( Applause )
The President of the Russian Federation is currently visiting a Member State of the European Union .
Last night I heard his statement on Chechnya on German television .
The Russian Ambassador to the European Union , Mr Likhachev , and the President of the Committee for Foreign Affairs in the Duma , Dimitri Rogozin , called to see me last week in Brussels to inform me about the situation .
I am pleased that our debate on Chechnya has also provided an opportunity for them to contact our group .
Clearly we have to fight terrorism , but we must not do so in such a way that this has a disproportionate impact on the human rights and lives of the people in Chechnya , of civilians who want to live in peace .
( Applause )
If a study from the US State Department dated 4 March , statements from Médecins Sans Frontières - an organisation which we esteem greatly because of its commitment - and the organisation Human Rights Watch , which is based in New York , all say that the Russian soldiers have hardly any respect for human life , then this has to set the alarm bells ringing .
If the Duma representative for Chechnya , Aslambek Aslakhanov , says - and this shows that Russia is also on the road to democracy , and we do of course recognise this - that 80 % of the aid which Russia provides for Chechnya is not even reaching the people , then this has to set the alarm bells ringing .
If Mary Robinson , the UN High Commissioner for Human Rights , says that the economic , social and cultural situation in Chechnya is very grave , despite some progress - which we have of course also noted - then this has to set the alarm bells ringing .
These are descriptions of the situation by organisations and high-profile leaders who know more about what is happening than we do .
But it is our duty , as Members of the European Parliament , to debate these massive violations of human rights which are taking place in Russia and therefore in Europe , in Chechnya , for as long as they continue to be a reality .
We therefore call for a ceasefire and a political solution .
Those Russian soldiers who have no respect for civilian lives , who have scant regard for human dignity and human life , should not only be criticised for their actions in political statements in Moscow ; we call for them also to be brought before the courts and for judgment to be passed on them , because if not the violations of human rights will just go on and on .
( Applause )
We also call on Russia to open up Chechnya to observers - to an even greater extent than it has done so far - and also to work with organisations in the European Union .
The President-in-Office of the Council and also the Commissioner referred to this and generally speaking we are of the same mind .
In addition , we in the European Parliament should ask our delegation and the corresponding delegation in the Duma - and Parliament should as it were give the go-ahead for this - to establish a well-ordered procedure for attending to Chechnya properly on an ongoing basis .
Soon - as we of course already decided on 16 March - we should send a European Parliament delegation to Chechnya and that region .
For my part I would very much welcome it if you , Commissioner , were personally to travel there to speak to those affected on the ground .
( Applause )
Finally , we need to cooperate closely with Lord Judd of the Council of Europe , who is of course very involved in working on this problem , and overall we need a political solution .
Allow me , in conclusion , to say the following : I have visited all of the republics of the former Soviet Union , including Tatarstan .
Tatarstan , the capital of which is Kazan , has a high degree of autonomy , indeed the greatest degree of autonomy in the Russian Federation .
Why is it not possible for Chechnya to have something comparable ?
The representatives of Chechnya , who were here two months ago , appeared to have lost all hope ; they were depressed and their concern and despair were palpable .
It is our duty as the European Parliament to give hope to those who want to live in peace in Chechnya - within the Russian Federation , but with autonomous status of some kind - and to act as an advocate for human rights on this continent and throughout the world , including in Chechnya .
( Applause )
Mr President , the Group of the European Liberal , Democrat and Reform Party welcomes the fact that this debate is taking place , as we already did before our friend Mr Dupuis went on hunger strike .
It is important to devote special time to Chechnya and to discussing the situation there .
I have the feeling that the atrocities and the military offensive are taking place under cover of the events of 11 September and the situation in the Middle East .
Just like China , which we shall be discussing later , Russia is using the fight against terrorism as a kind of alibi for oppressing its own political opponents and minorities .
The war between Chechnya and Russia is a long , stubborn and apparently irresolvable conflict which has gone on for many years .
Obviously , atrocities are being committed on both sides .
These must of course be investigated , and the people responsible held to account .
It is true that a number of positive signs can be detected .
Lord Judd , for example , has pointed to certain modest improvements .
Here too , just like in the Middle East , there is a battle as to what news is to be released to the outside world .
We are awash with testimonies from human rights organisations concerning the situation of , in particular , civilians in Chechnya .
Death squads , summary executions , torture , rape and disappearances .
Terrible , systematic atrocities are quite clearly being committed against the civilian population of Chechnya .
The Russian authorities must get to grips with this state of affairs , investigate the events and punish those responsible .
Nearly 200 000 people have taken flight within Chechnya , and a quarter of a million have fled the country .
Their situation is , of course , incredibly precarious .
The European Parliament has adopted quite a number of resolutions on this conflict but , now , action is required .
It was good to hear from the President-in-Office of the Council that the troika is to be sent to Chechnya .
It would also be good if the Commissioner could travel to the area in order to discuss the situation and address the issue with the Russian President .
We must be very clear in demanding of Russia that it put an end without delay to the atrocities and massacres directed against civilians .
The ELDR Group demands that an independent committee of investigation be sent to Chechnya to ascertain what is really happening .
We also want to see President Putin and the Chechen President , Mr Maskhadov , invited to Parliament to discuss the situation , so enabling us to demonstrate our support for peace talks .
The tentative negotiations begun in November 2001 resulted in only one meeting , and there was no major progress .
Together with the OSCE and the Council of Europe , the EU can play a role in facilitating talks so that we can bring about a political solution .
There is , of course , no military solution .
My political group also wants the EU to take action by submitting an initiative concerning Chechnya at the UN Commission on Human Rights 's session in Geneva .
Mr de Miguel spoke of the EU 's support for the UNHCR , and that is important .
The truth , however , is that the EU 's contribution to the UNHCR 's budget has declined by a third in recent years .
Yesterday , we discussed the Middle East situation in this House , where there is a strong commitment to resolving the conflict .
Our commitment ought not , however , to lead to our closing our eyes to other conflicts and giving the Russians carte blanche to commit these atrocities .
The situation is drastic , and the conflict is in danger of spreading to the whole region , with devastating consequences for Russian democracy .
The ELDR Group supports the resolution before us , even though we think it is rather faint-hearted .
We must send a strong message to the Russian Government and President : We know what you are doing , and we find it unacceptable .
Mr President , Mr de Miguel , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the events of 11 September last year are still clearly dominating world politics .
And we all know that world politics are particularly cynical , which is certainly also true for Chechnya .
Since 11 September , I have the impression that Chechnya has indeed fallen into the cracks of world history and has been banished from current affairs , and today 's debate is therefore of particular importance .
Since my appointment as Chairman of the EU-Russia Parliamentary Cooperation Committee , I have conducted many talks with Russians , Chechens , aid workers and human rights activists .
Certainly , the situation is complex , and talking about this issue in black and white terms will indeed not bring any solace but , despite this , I have to make a few observations .
The problems in Chechnya cannot be solved by military means .
What we need is a political solution , an immediate cease-fire and political consultation .
In this vein , I support the appeal made by human rights organisations to invite Mr Mascadov to Parliament in Strasbourg in September of this year and to start consultations with the Russian representatives of the Council of Europe .
As Mr Poettering pointed out a moment ago , a number of Russian colleagues paid us a visit last week and told us that Chechnya is returning to normality .
This was also confirmed by the Russian ambassador .
I am not credulous , as you may have gathered . The many reports of human rights organisations and the testimonies of refugees themselves are flooding into our offices via the ordinary mail and via e-mail .
Mr Poettering was right to mention a few organisations , including Human Rights Watch , Médecins sans Frontières and Amnesty International .
He mentioned the testimony of Mary Robertson and of a Chechen Member of Parliament .
It is obvious that daily life in Chechnya today is not that simple .
And we must therefore invite our Russian colleagues to enter into consultation and to promote goodwill .
We can hardly label these organisations , these people who are mentioned in our compromise resolution , as agents of international terrorism , as representatives of Bin Laden .
This would be all too simplistic .
I am therefore delighted that our delegation will be spending half a day next Monday with our Russian colleagues in Chechnya to talk over the difficulties . I am also pleased that , in the compromise resolution which will be voted on in a moment , our delegation will be given the task of setting up a working party , which will very specifically follow the situation in Chechnya and will mount an independent inquiry into what is actually happening in Chechnya .
I am therefore thrilled that we are repeating our request of sending an ad hoc delegation to Chechnya .
We decided on this in March 2000 , but this has not yet been acted upon .
I would therefore ask the Parliament Bureau to ensure that this is at long last done .
Finally , I would turn to Mr Nielsen on behalf of my Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance .
Parliament has asked you twice to visit Chechnya .
Can I make a suggestion to you , Mr Nielsen ?
We will go together .
I am prepared to take some time out , and we will assess the situation in Chechnya together .
And we will try to take action at long last .
Ladies and gentlemen , I can assure you that the delegation next Monday will do everything in its power to move the situation on by one little step and to enter into consultation with our Russian colleagues of the Duma and of the Council of Federations .
I thank you , Mr President , for the extra time you have given me .
Mr President , during the debate on Palestine yesterday , there were many who brought up the subject of Chechnya , and there are also an incredible number of parallels between the situations in the two areas .
Like Palestine , Chechnya is a country occupied by a strong and sizeable superior force .
As in Palestine , people in Chechnya see their ordinary , fundamental rights being violated and , in the case of Chechnya , we also see a country completely reduced to ruins and in which 20 % of the population has been killed .
It is quite clear that both Israel and Russia are exploiting a situation in which the United States has declared war on terrorism and , under cover of this , are waging a war against a whole people ; a war , moreover , that resembles ethnic cleansing .
I think we should remember that there was no terrorism in Chechnya when , in 1991 , the country made use of the law of 16 December 1966 - which said that countries within the Federation too were entitled to independence - to acquire independence from Russia .
At that time there was no terrorism but , from 1994 , Russia has done everything it can to prevent such independence .
It is another example of the way in which the oppression of a people and the desperation felt by a population can lead people to do things they would never otherwise have done .
Terrorism does not come about of itself .
Terrorists do not fall from the sky .
Certain population groups obviously do not have special genes which make them behave differently to the rest of us .
It is of course the conditions people live under that make them behave as they do .
It is important that we take a decision to invite Mr Maskhadov and Mr Putin to Strasbourg in September .
In that way , we can bring about a debate , obtain a report and make an impression on both parties .
I think we must demand open access for the humanitarian organisations and news media so that the information war is not a factor operating to the Chechens ' disadvantage .
In the end , it is also necessary , however , for people who have been subject to atrocities to be given a clear sense that those who violate human rights will in the last analysis be punished .
Unless they have that sense , I do not believe we shall get very far either with the fight for democracy and human rights or with the fight against terrorism .
Basically , we must demand that the Russian occupation of Chechnya cease - preferably now .
Mr President-in-Office of the Council , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , this text , which was chiefly drafted by Mr Oostlander , is an appalling document .
It is totally immoral and cannot be considered to be politically credible .
To continue to demand that the Russian authorities and military forces , which have waged war for two and a half years and have systematically breached the fundamental rights of the Chechen people for two years , bring an end to their deliberate acts of violence , is absolutely appalling .
Similarly , it is absolutely appalling to continue to demand that humanitarian aid be allowed to get through to Chechnya , when we know that the Russian authorities are doing everything to prevent humanitarian aid from reaching its destination .
We are not talking about a massive breach of human rights taking place in Chechnya today . We are talking about outright genocide .
It is the first genocide to take place in Europe since the genocide of the Jewish people .
When 20 % of the population , namely 200 000 people out of a population of one million inhabitants - is massacred , when tens of thousands of men are tortured and when their reproductive organs are systematically destroyed , we are no longer talking about human rights violations . We are talking about genocide .
Forty per cent of the Chechen people are refugees and have nothing to live on .
These people are surviving in dreadful conditions in Ingushetia , and only 20-30 % of the Commission 's humanitarian aid gets through to them ; the rest is lost ' in the system ' .
As Mr Poettering said , the aid supplied by Russia does not arrive at its destination either .
Taking all this into account , you can only arrive at one conclusion . This is genocide and Europe is sitting back , watching this genocide take place .
Comparisons with Palestine can be made , but only up to a point , as we are talking about terrorism in Palestine .
I would like some evidence that the Chechens are committing terrorism .
We have proof that there are Palestine suicide bombers but , as for the attacks in Moscow of two or three years ago , there has been no evidence unearthed to prove that these were committed by Chechens .
On the contrary , there is increasing evidence to show that the FSB - the Russian secret service - may have been responsible for the attacks .
Is it possible that thousands of Chechens have been fighting with the Taliban ?
Hundreds and hundreds of foreign reporters have searched for Chechens in Afghanistan .
The international forces which were and still are in Afghanistan looked day after day for Chechen fighters .
But , so far , no one has found a single Chechen fighter in Afghanistan .
This rumour was put about by the FSB and the Russian counter-intelligence service .
So , it is wrong to call the Chechens terrorists when they are defending themselves , just as the Bosnians defended themselves , when they are defending themselves like the Croats defended themselves , when they have no Russian civilian targets because there are no Russian civilians in Chechnya .
There are Russian soldiers and there are Chechen fighters who are fighting the Russians .
It is , in fact , the Russians who are carrying out acts of violence and torture on a daily basis , resorting to blackmail , imprisoning Chechens in filtration camps , who are involved in bargaining and trafficking of corpses and prisoners .
They are asking people who do not have the equivalent of one euro to spend several dollars in order save their families .
This is the situation in Chechnya .
It is genocide .
Two and a half years have passed and Commissioner Nielson still has not managed to visit this country where genocide is taking place .
Mr Poettering , Mr Watson , Mr Cohn-Bendit and Mrs Frassoni met Mr Oumar Khanbiev , the Health Minister , who is sitting in the public gallery .
Mr Baròn Crespo and Mr Wurtz are meeting him today .
Mr Nielson , Mr Khanbiev is not suffering from the plague , you can also meet him .
He is sitting there , all you have to do is walk up to the public gallery and you can see him .
He knows everything about the needs of the Chechen population in Chechnya , Ingushetia , Georgia and Azerbaijan , you can discuss this with him .
Mr President , I am the reprehensible author , or co-author of the resolution .
Needless to say , I am also impressed with the enthusiasm and commitment with which Mr Dupuis is talking about this issue .
Nevertheless , I take the view that it is very important , particularly in a situation as complicated as this one , where it is important to help find a solution , to keep a cool head , even though we have a warm heart .
It is true that , after the first war , the politicians in Chechnya actually received all our sympathy .
The outlook was , in fact , very rosy and , indeed , as the Chairman of my group , Mr Poettering , said , Tatarstan was a shining example .
Chechnya could have developed into a Tatarstan , and perhaps even a Tatarstan with more independence than Tatarstan itself .
This was also provided for in Russian policy .
What did we ultimately see ?
That , in the time between the two wars over Chechnya , nothing was achieved in the way of forming a state .
A failed state emerged , which is a disaster .
We have seen this everywhere where the situation is similar . We have seen this in former Afghanistan and in Somalia , where this is still a live issue .
We have also identified this in other parts of the world .
A failed state is a disaster for all citizens and for the international community , for what can happen in such a failed state always has international repercussions .
We therefore watched - and this was also observed by our Western journalists - Chechnya degenerate into a kidnapping state , a robber state , a smuggler state revolving around the oil which runs through it . This is a disaster which we are facing .
Then a war breaks out .
One of a kind which we would never ever want to see , neither from the Chechen point of view nor from the Russian point of view .
So a war ensues in which it is even difficult to distinguish citizens from the military and which therefore claims many civilian victims .
The battle surrounding Chechnya has elements of a freedom struggle , but these are terribly overshadowed by radicalisation and imbued with criminal activity .
We are now also informed of Russian troops and Chechen rebels together earning a handsome figure from oil which is transported through the region illegally .
These are very ironic facts which we are facing and it is not easy to say : this is black and this is white .
It is not like that in this case .
I have to admit that I am pleased that , at the time , I was able to hold extensive talks with colleagues of the Duma , namely the chairman of the committee responsible for Chechnya , the chairman of the Human Rights Committee and the spokesperson of the army , General Manilov .
They were all very honest with me about the concern which all of this has caused them .
And they never disguised anything , which shows me that Moscow , too , takes this matter very seriously but fails to find the answer .
All the more reason why we should intervene on the strength of our partnership with Russia .
Human rights are in our line of business . They will never be able to disappear from our agenda , and certainly not if they involve a close partner , as Russia currently is .
We should make it our concern .
This is why our resolution is full of questions .
It is indeed easy and exciting only to address Russia with accusations , but we also have a great many questions .
We also have a number of proposals , and these are all aimed at reconstruction , humanitarian aid , better reception of refugees from those regions , options to return home and the development of the social conditions under which it is possible to return home .
This is also self-evident , even to the politicians in Moscow with responsibility for the situation .
During talks with them , it is impossible to ignore the feeling that they too are very much struggling with this issue .
And if the situation could be different , they would be in favour of it .
They are also very much convinced that war criminals from their own ranks should be brought to justice .
The difficulty and the uncomfortable fact that we are left with is that this is not done frequently enough , because commanders on the ground tend to protect their own soldiers from jurisdiction .
This is a reprehensible attitude , but we recognise it in different wars , including colonial wars , such as the one which the Netherlands fought in Indonesia after the Second World War .
It was very often the case that , only 20 or 30 years after the event , was it possible in the Netherlands to mention war crimes which our own boys had committed in Indonesia .
I am pleased that , at least in Russia , openness is being achieved more promptly in this matter , which also creates the opportunity for action .
Once again , we read recently that President Putin collects people around him and asks them to moot ideas for a viable policy to inject , where possible , peace and security into Chechnya once again .
Maybe in conjunction with Ingushetia , there are all kinds of plans afoot in Russia to examine to what extent it would be possible to create a reasonably functioning state , for that is something which concerns us all .
There are indeed 200 000 refugees , and it would be of crucial importance - and we have insisted on this in the past - for Commissioner Nielsen , who is , after all , responsible for refugee issues and humanitarian issues , to have a personal input in this .
It is , of course , the case that it would be quite difficult to ask for entry into Chechnya right now .
We , and I personally , have on a couple of occasions asked the ambassador and other Russian representatives here to allow us entry to Chechnya .
Every time , this question is avoided , and this is why I will give my full backing to the proposals , including those made in the Council of Europe , to set up delegations , possibly in combination with members of the Duma who have a sense of responsibility , to go there and to establish for ourselves what is going on .
For only if we really know what the situation is like over there and if the international press , as stated in the resolution , and the Russian press , are allowed entry , will it be possible to make well-informed proposals which make any sense .
Mr President , first of all let me say to the House that when we , as politicians , begin to trade insults on the issue of war in another place , we lose our purpose which is to drive forward the peace , and that must be our ultimate goal .
Mr Dupuis has spoken of atrocities which I find horrifying , because these atrocities are happening to real people ; to grandmothers , grandfathers , mothers , daughters , fathers and sons for no reason other than that they are different .
I do not hold to the cosiness of the view that Russia is doing all that it should , or that it is deeply concerned .
After all we were told that , post-September 11 , the world had changed , that fundamental human rights would be scrutinised with more vigour than before .
However , in the case of Chechnya , this is clearly not the case .
The rights of the Chechens , of whom 200 000 are living in direct danger and fear , are being ignored by the Russians .
Moreover , I believe , the situation is getting worse rather than better .
It seems that September 11 has been a catalyst for a cosy relationship between Russia and the US , in which the US turns its eye the other way .
I welcome this resolution but we must drive it forward .
Why have our actions lacked punch up until now ?
I will tell you why ; because there has been a lack of co-ordinated and consistent international approach for fear of offending Mr Putin and allies .
Atrocities grow , they do not diminish .
Conflict goes on for years .
It is an ongoing war that has been almost unnoticed .
Yet we see the denial of human rights , the denial of the right of humanitarian NGOs to operate effectively on the ground .
We need more co-operation with the Russian authorities and the independent media to report the truth to the outside world .
But let us never forget that the fundamental right is to live in peace without fear of persecution .
We need a political resolution , but Russia must be held to account .
Let me finish with this : When war begins , politicians have failed .
When wars continue , humanity loses its purpose .
This war must end .
The peace process is not an option ; it is the only way forward .
Mr President , I agree with Mr Cashman .
For eight years the Russian military has been waging war on the civilian population in Chechnya .
This is the reality and we must not close our eyes to it .
That is why I should like to ask you the following question Mr President-in-Office of the Council : in the trilogue did you present and explain the list of measures , which you have just presented to us , to the Russian Foreign Minister , Mr Ivanov , in the same terms in which you have just presented them to us here ?
Did you also tell Mr Ivanov about the threats you mentioned of adopting measures against Russia ?
Was this really the focal point of the agenda or was it only mentioned in passing .
The fact remains that it has not yet had any effect .
It is my impression that this was not put to the Russian side in the same serious tone that you have just adopted here .
This makes us guilty of these crimes too .
We know that in Chechnya people are being abducted , killed and abused every day .
In addition , we know that Chechens are known as ' blacks ' in Russia , a derogatory Russian term denoting that they are second-class citizens .
Remaining silent and looking away when civilians are being hurt and abused on a daily basis damages our credibility in the eyes of the world whenever and wherever we defend human rights .
That is why it is important for us not to believe President Putin 's protestations , which bear no relation to reality and which he repeated yesterday in Weimar , that the people need to be protected from bandits and that State rule needs to be re-introduced .
This is completely unrelated to what is really happening on the ground .
We need to ensure that there is international monitoring to report on violations of human rights by the army .
In any case I would support all calls to invite President Putin and Mr Machadov here to Strasbourg in September so that the dialogue can finally begin and the guns can fall silent , and so that we can end the spiral of violence in this region .
( Applause )
Mr President , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , Commissioner , I very much welcome this debate , because since 11 September the need to fight terrorism has been cited as justification for nearly every military intervention .
This is also true of the situation in Chechnya .
A change of thinking is required .
Conflicts and terrorism cannot be resolved by military means .
I was pleased to see in yesterday 's debate on the Middle East that this is also the unanimous opinion of this Parliament .
In the case of Chechnya , as in all other crisis areas , the only things that will lead to a solution to the problems are negotiations , a willingness to compromise , confidence-building , the development of civil society and the rule of law , and reconstruction .
The dialogue with Russia about these problems definitely needs to be stepped up .
We should press for the Russian Government to continue and intensify the contacts it began in November with Mr Maskhadov and other Chechens who are ready to talk .
The judicious proposals of a Council of Europe working group , in which members of the Duma are also represented , have got these initiatives for a comprehensive Russian-Chechen dialogue off the ground .
We should support this .
The human rights situation in Chechnya remains critical .
I welcome the fact that Parliament has drawn attention to these points in its compromise motion .
In my view , we should criticise the sluggish progress being made on prosecuting perpetrators of human rights offences and sentencing those who are found guilty of such crimes , despite the fact that President Putin claimed otherwise yesterday .
It is positive , however , that the Russian Government has taken the first steps towards rebuilding the country and restoring normality to everyday life .
I would refer in particular to the efforts that they have made to build up the civil administration , the judicial system and the local police force .
I do not think that it is fair for us to call into question or reject everything that the Russian side says a priori .
We need to trust both sides .
Because the only basis for being able to talk to each other at all is mutual trust .
The Commission should support this development by providing more funds .
To get an idea of what is needed we should finally implement our own decision of the year 2000 and send an ad hoc delegation to Chechnya .
Mr President , previous speakers have referred to the parallelism between Chechnya and Palestine .
Today in Madrid the Spanish Prime Minister and the Russian Foreign Minister are meeting to tackle the most dangerous conflict of our time .
Two days ago Mr Aznar told Mr Sharon that the Palestinian conflict could only be solved by political means under the premises of the mutual recognition of the States of Palestine and Israel .
Mr Aznar should firmly protest to Mr Ivanov about the violation in Chechnya of the basic principles of international law , including the right to self-determination of the Chechen people .
Unfortunately , he will not dare to do so because he knows that the Russian response would be to remind him , as Mr Putin did , of the ongoing conflict in the Basque country .

Yesterday Mr Solana , backed by the President-in-Office , proposed a very reasonable solution to the Palestinian conflict ; this would be an excellent solution for Chechnya , why not for the Basque country too ?
Mr President , while Chancellor Schröder and President Putin sit down together today in Weimar and do business as though there were nothing wrong , a secret genocide is taking place in Chechnya .
I use the word genocide advisedly because this is precisely what has been happening in Chechnya in recent years : a fifth of the population has been driven out of the country , tens of thousands have been systematically murdered , and there is no end to the killing !
These are not isolated violations of human rights or one-off attacks .
They are systematic .
It began with one of the bloodiest , if not the very bloodiest election campaign in the history of mankind , the election campaign which President Putin was fighting when he unleashed this war in Chechnya .
At that time his purpose was not to fight terrorism .
It was to sweep away a democratic , though - as it is quite clear in this region - extremely unsatisfactory , regime which had been elected under the supervision of the OSCE , and to appoint his own governors .
I find it rather grotesque that we should now be asking these same governors to investigate their own misdemeanours .
It has to be our task to make this issue an international concern and finally to expose it to the glare of world publicity .
That is why I am grateful to Hans-Gert Poettering and all those who overcame considerable resistance to enable this Parliament today to devote peak debating time to these really dreadful violations of international law and human rights and to this genocide , and finally to make it clear that it is not acceptable for a high-level EU delegation to travel to the Middle East and try to reach Mr Arafat while at the same time saying that they cannot travel to Chechnya because it is not possible or because permission would not be granted .
We cannot let a partner country like Russia get away with systematically isolating an area like this where such brutal violations of human rights are taking place , with closing it to journalists , to observers and to humanitarian organisations .
We must not stand for this any longer .
That is why I also agree that the Commissioner must go there , the troika must go there and the parliamentary delegation must go there .
We are all prepared to support this proposal .
I have to say quite clearly that we must also take the opportunity in September to discuss the situation in Chechnya with the Council of Europe and the elected head of the Chechen Government - of whom the motion unfortunately makes no mention - and to work towards a political solution .
We have to remember one thing : courageous journalists , such as Thomas Avenarius of the Süddeutsche Zeitung , or his colleague from the Frankfurter Rundschau , have risked their lives to fight their way into the country .
Around 4 March alone , they personally documented five systematic acts of terrorism involving numerous murders in five places in Chechnya .
It is Russian human rights activists , such as those from the organisation Memorial , who have risked their lives to go there and document the existence of death squads , set up by Russia 's military secret service in Chechnya .
These are facts which we finally need to take seriously !
We have cases of villages allegedly being cleansed 33 times - and another place 27 times - with around a seventh of the population being killed each time .
Civilians , including pregnant women , were pulled out of minibuses and shot .
This is not a war on terrorism .
Suspected terrorists were shot in their slippers .
I really must make it clear that the public is being systematically fed disinformation if the impression is being given that this is simply a rather overblown war on terrorism , quite apart from the fact that this is not how to fight terrorism , but at best how to produce terrorists , and here I must echo what Olivier Dupuis said , that so far there is not a shred of evidence to show that large-scale Chechen terrorism even exists .
As far as the assassinations in Russia are concerned , even the highly respected Neue Züricher Zeitung has stated quite clearly that there is not even a scrap of circumstantial evidence to show that it was Chechens who were responsible , and the Neue Züricher Zeitung thinks that we are dealing here with rather dubious circumstances and quite different people pulling strings .
This also needs to be stated openly in this Parliament : we have a long tradition of issuing many clear statements on Chechnya .
We have put ourselves at the forefront of those who finally wish to ensure that light is shed on this policy of systematically suppressing a people for the sake of oil and other raw materials .
This is a colonial war at the beginning of the twenty-first century and nothing else !
We have every right to oppose this colonial war .
We have a special partnership with Russia .
We are both members of the OSCE .
We are both members of the Council of Europe .
We have the means to take action , but we must finally use them . We must stop sleepwalking and acting as though these were isolated incidents .
The few officers who have already been brought before the courts or charged , such as an officer who raped and murdered a young woman in the year 2000 , a colonel , have not yet been sentenced .
This is all propaganda .
No one is investigating these crimes .
We must not stand for this any longer !
We must spell this out to Russia , because it is an important partner which we take seriously .
Mr President , it would appear important not to confuse the situation in Chechnya with the situation that has developed after 11 September .
Clearly , the Russians have a tendency to lump together what is happening on the various chessboards of the world - in Afghanistan , the Middle East , Chechnya and Georgia - as if it were all part of the same phenomenon , which it is not .
The Russians often appear to be the most avid readers of those geopolitical experts who predict conflict between the Islamic and Christian civilisations , some ideological gymnastics being necessary here in respect of the positions they held not so long ago .
In my opinion , we too make mistakes every now and again .
For instance , when the European institutions label the Chechen guerrillas ' bandits ' and ' terrorists ' , it is impossible to imagine being able to hold a dialogue with bandits and terrorists .
Therefore , I would look for a single term to define this section of the fighters , who have strong support from the Chechen people .
Given that the European position overall is much more complex , we need expert observers on the ground to counteract attempts to oversimplify the situation locally .
I therefore wholeheartedly welcome Lord Judd 's mission ; I wholeheartedly welcome the proposal to set up troikas , or quintuples I should say , with the Russian opposition party and the Working Group on Chechnya , to monitor the situation and investigate the violations of human rights ; it would appear appropriate , in addition , to set up an ad hoc delegation for the Northern Caucasus to discuss all the current issues with the Russians and Chechen representatives .
All this is very positive : it means that we will , at least , be present .
In essence , the resolution we are discussing today calls , for the most part , upon the Russians to help the victims , to accept the setting-up of monitoring committees and groups and to assist and cooperate with those who work for humanitarian organisations and need permits , visas and protection in order to be able to do their jobs .
In hoping for the return of 200 000 refugees , Parliament is , of course , doing no more than just expressing a nice idea .
It all depends , then , on goodwill , on the willingness of the Putin Government to accept what are essentially implicit criticisms of the current situation in Chechnya - for otherwise it would not be necessary to send so many delegations .
We will be able to measure the extent to which Russia intends to establish good working relations with the European Union from its willingness to accept these invitations .
Mr President , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , we will not be able to say that we did not know about the tragedy unfolding in Chechnya .
We are receiving cursory reports from the second war waged by Russian federal forces in Chechnya , based on the terrified accounts given by refugees and reports by the last journalists who were on the ground , that systematic violence and heightened and vengeful acts of barbarism are being committed .
Once again , we will not be able to say that we could not help .
Russia is no longer an autarchic state , conducting its affairs behind closed doors and determining which Russians have a right to live or die .
Russia is linked to the European Union and , consequently , to other parts of the world , through moral and political undertakings , on which its credibility and reputation on the European and international stage depend .
One of these undertakings is the European Union 's common strategy on Russia and the cooperation and partnership agreement compelling Russia to respect human rights .
Russia is supported in its difficult transition towards achieving Western economic standards by means of programmes , partnerships and funding , in which the Union plays a key role .
The enlargement of the Union will mean that Russia will soon find itself in a new geo-political situation which will force it to completely renegotiate its status and relations with its new European neighbours .
This time , we must condemn this state of lawlessness and send observers and representatives from the foreign media to find out what is really happening in this tragic , barbaric situation , or impose genuine retaliatory measures if attempts to do this are blocked .
We must demand that medical and humanitarian assistance be sent , as a matter of extreme urgency and , above all , we must stop using statements to hide our lack of action and stop soothing our conscience by claiming that we are preserving fragile democracy in Russia .
We must avoid any simplistic equation between the fight against terrorism and deliberate genocide . As long as we remain indifferent , the barbaric situation in Chechnya can only deteriorate further .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the Council has taken good note of everything that has been said in this debate and thanks Parliament for raising this very important issue , which is important not only from the point of view of our general international policy , but , above all , of the policy of our European family , since we consider Russia to be a country that belongs in our area and we want it to show the same behaviour , the same respect for the Rule of Law and the same respect for human rights as we do in Europe .
I would like to say that all the views expressed here are largely shared by the Presidency and the Council , who view the Chechen situation with concern .
I fully agree with the view that what happened on 11 September must not encourage anyone , especially Russia , to systematically violate human rights in the name of the fight against terrorism .
It is true that there are violations of human rights , very serious ones , but the Council believes that there are positive developments .
I therefore believe that we have to continue with our efforts : Parliament must make its voice heard and approve this Resolution - which I personally believe to be excellent - and the Council must continue to take every opportunity to communicate our position to the Russian authorities - the positions of the Council , the European Union , and the European Parliament .
I would like to reassure Mrs Schroedter , who has asked whether in our meetings with the top leaders of the Russian Federation , from Putin and the Foreign Minister to the Deputy Ministers and other high representatives , the Council really says what it is saying now .
I can tell you that the Council says the same things to the Russian authorities that it is saying here today .
I would not dare to come to Parliament and say something that we are not capable of saying to the authorities of the Russian Federation .
I can assure you completely that , during this Presidency and the Presidencies to come , we will continue to say the same things we have always said to the Russian authorities .
It is clear that we all have to continue with this effort .
It is reassuring that the European Parliament support us in it and we believe that the fight to re-establish normality in Chechnya , to establish fully-democratic conditions , respect for human rights , the return of refugees and a return to normal life are objectives that we can and must aspire to .
I can guarantee , Mr President , that the Council will spare no effort , together with the Commission and with the support of the European Parliament , to achieve this objective .
Mr President , let me again stress that we are present in the region .
We are present in Chechnya ; and the level of humanitarian aid funded by the Commission of EUR 40million in 2001 is clear evidence of the priority that we give to this crisis and to the suffering in Chechnya .
Our field experts and ECHO staff are evidence of our presence there .
We are also the only agent from the outside that has established an independent distribution system for food and assistance inside Chechnya .
The Danish Refugee Council is the only alternative to the Russian EMERCOM Ministry , which insists on doing this itself .
For instance , World Food Programme assistance is provided through the Russian organisation .
We are insisting on continuing to have an independent channel of distribution in order to ensure that we perform better than has been claimed in this debate .
I cannot accept the figure of only 3 % actually reaching the right people .
If this were true , the 200 000 refugees in Ingushetia would no longer be alive .
We are able to make a difference , but we are not in any way trying to portray this as an easy or flawless operation .
It is extremely difficult and that is one of the reasons why we have to continue putting pressure on the Russian authorities , both on the safety aspects of access to VHF radios and the work permits and general conditions for the international humanitarian organisations working in the area .
The first mission I went on after taking office was the humanitarian mission to East Timor in the autumn of 1999 , the second one was to the region we are talking about today .
I am grateful for the advice that it may be useful for me to go there once again , and we will consider that .
The effort of the Commission , the funding and the resolute support to our implementing partners is the only real effort to secure an international humanitarian presence in this theatre .
We are determined to continue this work and there is no weakening whatsoever of that determination .
It may also be useful to say , in view of what has been said in this debate , that I find it both necessary and clearly meaningful to maintain the established division between , on the one hand , the broader political dialogue - a dialogue also accentuating the human rights aspects - and the clearly defined humanitarian aid effort .
That division of labour as to who does what and how it is carried out is both necessary and meaningful .
If we mix all this up into one single cocktail , we will get carried away for good , sympathetic , political reasons , but we would actually endanger the access of international humanitarian organisations into this troubled arena .
Humanitarian aid has its own rationale and it is important to recognise that if we allow ourselves to politicise the whole thing , we are doing humanitarian aid no favours .
This is important to keep in mind , and I beg Parliament to understand that it in no way indicates any weakening of the purpose and strength of our political dialogue with Russia on the political aspects of all this .
But we have to put on a credible performance as a serious funder of humanitarian aid .
I have noted the many good pieces of advice given in the debate , and that will provide important input for our further deliberations .
Thank you , Commissioner .
Yes , Mr Dupuis , why are you requesting the floor ?
Mr President , again on the humanitarian issue , I have the following question to put to Commissioner Nielson : is he willing to walk 20 meters - yes , 20 meters - to meet the Chechen Minister for Health , who is sitting in the public gallery of the Chamber ?
To conclude the debate , I have received five motions for resolutions
The next item is the report ( A5-0087 / 2002 ) by Mr Esteve , on behalf of the Committee on Foreign Affairs , Human Rights , Common Security and Defence Policy , on the Commission communication to the Council and the European Parliament on the preparation of the Euro-Mediterranean Foreign Ministers ' meeting in Valencia on 22 and 23 April 2002 .
Mr President , I would firstly like to thank all the groups for their attitude - something which I said in committee - which has been constant throughout the preparation of this sitting .
I must also acknowledge the cooperation and dialogue we have maintained with the Commission and the Council , which reflects the unanimous approval of this report by the 49 Members who were present in the Committee on Foreign Affairs , Human Rights , Common Security and Defence Policy .
I will now comment on the amendments . Firstly , Mrs Boudjenah tabled seven amendments , of which I am aware that Nos 4 , 6 , 7 and 8 have been withdrawn and Nos 3 , 5 and 9 are maintained .
I would say to Mrs Boudjenah firstly that I believe that Amendment No 5 , on the harmonisation legislation on immigration , is fully justified in paragraphs 45 and 46 and that the issue of foreign debt is appropriately dealt with in paragraph 29 . I would therefore remain opposed to these amendments .
However , I believe that Amendment No 3 on public services is positive and improves the report .
Therefore I am in favour of it , although I would propose that in the vote we do not accept the place suggested by Mrs Boudjenah , but rather paragraph 26 ( ii ) as the appropriate place .
I believe that Amendment No 2 by Mrs Napoletano is a very positive contribution , since the Euroscola programme is a programme for young people which works and therefore I am in favour of it .
With regard to Amendment No 1 , which I tabled as rapporteur , I believe that everybody would agree that to include the Security Council Resolutions in the recitals of the report makes great sense .
I am obviously referring to Resolutions 1397 and 1402 .
Finally , Amendment No 10 by Mrs Napoletano on the Euro-Mediterranean Bank is the one that I feel requires most comment .
I believe - and in the Committee on Foreign Affairs , Human Rights , Common Security and Defence Policy we believe this - that the current wording expressed firm support for the creation of the bank .
Now , the Barcelona European Council established certain positions and measures which , although they do not move in this direction , neither are they contradictory with the possibility that in one year we could establish the bank .
I therefore sincerely believe that the Group of the European Socialist Party has made an effort to achieve consensus which could be valid for the debate in various groups - in my own - and that the amendment it proposes is a positive summary of the situation , since we could maintain a consensus on supporting the bank and advocate that the Commission present a new proposal which , of course , should be debated in depth in this House .
I am therefore in favour of Amendment No 10 .
Mr President , I also propose the reordering of four paragraphs .
Specifically , I believe that paragraphs 31 , 32 , 33 and 34 would express their ideas in a more organised fashion if they took the order 33 , 32 , 34 and 31 .
I also believe that paragraph 52 , which clearly belongs in the economic chapter , must be included in it and not it in the chapter it is in currently .
I think that it should come after paragraph 22 .
In conclusion , I believe that the important elements of this report , without going into detail , are two issues : the first is that the report will help and guide the Valencia Conference as a priority within Euro-Mediterranean policy and in terms of efficiency .
I believe that this is the case , and therefore I hope the vote reflects this , in relation to the part that corresponds to us .
Secondly , I am thinking of the grave situation in the Middle East , of the debate we held yesterday , of today 's tragic news from Haifa , of the meeting being held today in Madrid , which we hope will lead to a joint position .
Bearing all this in mind , I believe we can state that the Barcelona Process demands positive action in favour of general peace and stability in the region and in the Middle East .
Allow me to remind you that , if the meeting in Valencia takes place as expected , it will be the only forum that the Israeli and Palestinian delegations can attend .
I sincerely believe that , as the European Union , our instrument of the Barcelona Process is , if not the most important , probably one of the most important instruments for dialogue and cooperation .
It is also a process within our reach , because it is our responsibility .
I believe that it must continue to carry out its task , and do so genuinely .
We hope that that will be the case and I therefore thank you , Mr President , for the way this report has been drawn up and negotiated .
Mr President , Mr Esteve has indeed prepared an excellent report .
I have taken the unusual step of asking for the floor following the presentation of this report by the Committee on Foreign Affairs , because the Presidency would like to state publicly how grateful it is to the committee and in particular to the rapporteur .
This report was prepared in the run up to the Valencia Ministerial meeting on Euro-Mediterranean dialogue .
It was drafted against the background of the very difficult situation we find ourselves in , and at a critical stage of the Euro-Mediterranean dialogue .
As Mr Esteve himself stated , it is the only issue on which all those in the Mediterranean area agree .
It may represent the only remaining window of opportunity for Arab and Israeli delegations to engage in productive dialogue along with European delegations .
We therefore believe that the report provides the necessary political support from Parliament to encourage the Spanish Presidency not only to go ahead with the event despite the circumstances , but also to give a special impetus to this Euro-Mediterranean dialogue .
The Presidency can now further boost the process launched , significantly , in Barcelona in 1995 .
I believe it is highly symbolic that a Member representing Catalonia in this House should today remind us of the Barcelona spirit . We are hoping to revive that 1995 spirit today and in the near future .
To be precise , we would like to see it revived on 22 and 23 April in Valencia . In my view , the involvement of the Committee on Foreign Affairs is absolutely vital and provides the political backing the Presidency needs in these difficult times .
I would therefore like to put on record the Council 's appreciation and thanks for the work undertaken by the Committee on Foreign Affairs and the rapporteur , Mr Esteve .
Mr President , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , Commissioner , first of all , on behalf of the Committee on Foreign Affairs , Human Rights , Common Security and Defence Policy , I would like to thank you for your praise of the committee 's work just now and , of course , to applaud Mr Esteve for pointing out that this report was unanimously adopted and that it is the first time this has happened in our committee 's history .
I would also like to support the proposals that Mr Esteve , our rapporteur , has just made regarding the amendments , and to tell you why there is unanimity . In my view , it was due to the quality of the work , but also to the realisation , since 11 September , that the European Union must not be content to sit back and watch , from afar , what is happening on the other side of the Mediterranean .
This unanimity is also the result of the realisation that it is in the EU 's interest to help the African continent to escape from the chaos and poverty that makes it a breeding ground for some of the recruits to Islamic fundamentalism . We have furthermore become aware that it is now impossible for Europe to enclose itself in a fortress , which is certain to be attacked , as all fortresses are - and which has , in fact , already started to be attacked with the growing phenomenon of illegal immigration .
Consequently , there is also a need , as you have said , to relaunch the Barcelona Process .
I was appointed rapporteur by my fellow Members of a joint resolution for the Euro-Mediterranean Forum , held on 6 November in Brussels , and I could see that the cooperation which had developed between our Palestinian and Israeli colleagues within the drafting committee could serve as an extremely valuable symbol of hope , despite the tragedy that is unfolding in Palestine today .
Therefore , I too firmly support the conclusions of the report which call for the talks that were launched by the Barcelona Process to be recommenced . These talks were intended to lead not only to joint economic and political efforts but also to intercultural and even inter-faith cooperation .
I hope that they will also bring restoration , throughout the Mediterranean region , of this dimension of understanding and mutual respect which , once the difficult phase of decolonisation has been completed and the wounds accompanying this stage have begun to heal , must restore to the Mediterranean that sense of Mare Nostrum , that sense that we have of sharing with our colleagues values which are the basis of our civilisation .
I therefore believe that it is not only the duty , but it is also in the interest of Europe , currently the leading global economic power , to help establish privileged partnerships with our Euro-Mediterranean partners .
It is on this basis that we shall continue our work within the framework of the own-initiative reports on the union of the North African Arab countries which will be submitted to the House at the May part-session .
Mr President , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , Commissioner , I feel that today 's debate is appropriate for it places the debate we held yesterday in a more general context : the Middle East , the Mediterranean , Europe .
I would like to thank the rapporteur for his acceptance of contributions from all the groups to this report , which I believe will be a genuinely useful contribution to the Valencia meeting , and because he has used and accorded due importance to the contributions of all the political groups .
I would also like to thank the Commission for presenting an effective communication containing innovative proposals , which Parliament wishes to strengthen and promote through the Esteve report .
In this regard , I would like to emphasise three points .
Firstly , the Mediterranean is now the Union 's strategic priority .
After enlargement , that is our political priority .
We must therefore be consistent as regards both our policies and our resources .
Secondly , we need to explode this myth that the partnership primarily concerns the free market .
We need to make this partnership a major policy that includes the economic , social and cultural aspects and the questions of training and the parliamentary institutions .
We want to enrich this partnership much more than it has been in the past .
Thirdly , we need a human rights policy .
We cannot oscillate between Realpolitik and threatening to suspend the agreements ; there must be commitment from all the institutions , particularly the Commission , to promoting human rights in the countries of the Mediterranean region .
We are concerned - myself , in particular - because the more power the Commission gives to its offices in the Mediterranean countries , the more important it will be that it is efficient and capable of resisting pressure from those regimes .
Otherwise , we will be throwing our money away .
Lastly , I have to say that we would like to strengthen the institutional dimension of this partnership , giving the Parliamentary Assembly a leading role , involving ourselves in the initiative too and strengthening the two institutions proposed by the Commission , namely the Bank and the Foundation .
Mr President , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , on behalf of my group , I would like to pledge our total support for the Commission communication and the implicit decisions to reinvigorate the Euro-Mediterranean policy .
As has already been said , after eastward enlargement , this is becoming an absolute , essential priority , a duty we cannot shirk .
To all the reasons for this which have existed thus far must be added the tragic war and terrorism in Israel and Palestine .
We are currently faced with the proof , with constant confirmation of the fact that , if Europe does not become more involved and establish policies addressing the root causes of the region 's instability and lack of development , well then , we will be unable to prevent either real or potential conflict or its uncontrollable consequences such as illegal immigration .
I therefore look forward to a more effective European Union policy on the Mediterranean ; I welcome the idea of exporting the method of European integration , starting with the promotion of a genuine area of free trade facilitating as much south-south trade as possible , even above north-south trade .
The plan for funding this process , through specialised sections of the EIB now and a Euro-Mediterranean Development Bank in the future , must be welcomed with open arms .
However , where the Mediterranean is concerned - and I would stress once again , the Israeli-Palestinian crisis is evidence of this - we need to go deeper .
This means concentrating now on recreating the necessary conditions and developing the dialogue between cultures and religions , a dialogue facilitating that mutual awareness and understanding which - we must realise - is no longer sufficient to avoid conflict between the Western and Islamic worlds , between Europe and the other Mediterranean cultures and between the Mediterranean cultures themselves .
Good intentions or occasional interventions are not enough to achieve this : we need ongoing work with a lasting impact .
That is why I feel I must support and call strongly for the immediate initiation of the work of the Euro-Mediterranean Foundation mentioned in the Commission communication .
The Mediterranean is steeped in history and full of symbolic places in which the intercultural and interfaith dialogue has developed over the centuries .
I come from a city , Venice , which has a tradition in that area , and I am sure that , if the Foundation taps into all these energy sources , the many energy sources present in the Mediterranean , the many tales and experiences of cooperation and understanding , we will certainly be able to address the root of the matter .
We tend to see the cultural element as an optional extra in our programmes , as something which is second to politics and the economy , but in this case it must be given pride of place for it is the very foundation stone which will make it possible for politics and the economy to play their role too .
Mr President , the conflict in the Middle East is today sending shock waves through all the countries of the Mediterranean .
This subject will certainly be at the centre of the discussions in Valencia .
Sympathy for the colonised Palestinian people , which is felt well beyond Arab societies , is increasing in these countries in particular , due to the endless cultural , social and political humiliations and frustrations that the people suffer and for which they hold Arab and Western leaders jointly responsible .
That is why the desire for a dignified life where they and the law are respected is leading the people of these countries increasingly to take the dangerous path of anti-Western nationalism , be it Arab or religious .
This development , which is heightened by the international community 's inability to put an end to the massacre and restore respect for law in the Middle East , is detrimental to the cultural and civil dialogue called for by the Barcelona Process . It also demonstrates the urgent and important need for this dialogue .
In fact , the only thing the Barcelona Process can do - the challenge before it - is to provide the support it has hitherto failed to provide for democratisation in the countries of the Mediterranean .
If we do not suspend the Association Agreement with Israel , then not only will the Israeli tanks have crushed the territories , they will have also crushed Article 2 of this Agreement , as well as Article 2 of all the Association Agreements .
What would we be able to say in response to the constitutional coup d 'état of Ben Ali in Tunisia ?
How would we be able to respond to the aspirations of Algerian society , which has been taken hostage by two camps that are both enemies of democracy ?
The notion that economic development necessarily leads to democracy is absolute nonsense .
The aim of sustainable development , namely ecological development and development of solidarity , in the Mediterranean , cannot be reduced to the concept of the free-trade area .
Do we have any idea as to the consequences for employment , public services , and people 's lives , the consequences of the measures to liberalise this trade ?
From this perspective , democracy is certainly a condition for development .
The requirement for democracy is not only a necessity , which some people describe as neo-colonial , it is , in fact , a fundamental element of the relations that we must establish in this region .
Mr President , I should begin by saying how much I appreciate the excellent work done by Mr Esteve on behalf of the Committee on Foreign Affairs , Human Rights , Common Security and Defence Policy and how grateful I am for it .
Mr Esteve has presented a well-balanced document which is certainly positive whilst also taking account of all the suggestions made by the various groups
It is indeed vital for the European Union to give due consideration to the future role of the Euro-Mediterranean area as regards peace , economic development , democracy , energy provision and economic investment .
This report and the meeting to be held in Valencia to deal with these matters are therefore crucial .
It is nonetheless worth mentioning a number of issues giving rise to concern .
Firstly , as has already been stated , we have to come up with a decisive response to the situation in the Middle East . I refer to the military invasion of Palestine , and would point out that there has been no military incursion into Israel by the Palestinians .
If we fail to come up with such a response , I fear this conflict will dash all the hopes vested in European Union development in the area and put an end to it .
We should also keep Western Sahara in mind . That conflict is only simmering at present , but could boil over at any moment .
As we have always maintained , it is essential to recognise the decisions taken by the Security Council of the United Nations and hold the referendum on self-determination . It might then be possible to defuse a possible conflict in line with the conflict prevention strategy advocated by the European Union .
As has already been stated , it is important to make it quite clear that respect for democracy and human rights must be re-established in several countries in the area . The future of the region as a whole is being compromised .
Another worrying issue concerns the paradoxical situation whereby if investment in the area is made without preserving the necessary balance , undesirable consequences ensue . Unemployment increases unexpectedly and peasants flock to the cities .
They then fail to find work .
This in turn boosts emigration , illegal or otherwise .
We ought therefore to take these important issues into account .
I believe that the suggestion of setting up an Association Agreement for this area , along the lines of the one for the European Union , and allowing us to be involved is helpful .
It should however be worked on more energetically and with a greater degree of urgency . I therefore also recognise the importance of the latest proposal by the Parliamentary Assembly , crucial to the development of the region .
Mr President , Commissioner , I should like to endorse what the honourable Members who congratulated Mr Esteve on this report said .
I refer of course to the way in which the report was drafted .
As already stated it received the unanimous support of the committee . The content is outstanding too , and represents an improvement on the splendid proposal previously presented by the Commission .
I should like to focus on an aspect I believe to be of fundamental importance , namely political dialogue .
The relationships enshrined in the Barcelona Process can only flourish on the basis of political dialogue and political will . Both the Member States and our Mediterranean partners need to be involved .
Clearly , the rapporteur has put forward positive proposals in his report .
Clearly too , Parliament can and must play a key role where political dialogue and political will are concerned , to give credibility to our plan for integration .
We therefore very much welcome the initiative to set up a Euro-Mediterranean Assembly .
It is also clear that this revived dialogue requires a broader agenda providing for a whole series of issues to be taken into account . I have in mind challenges to governance , conflict prevention and important issues relating to democratisation and the defence of human rights .
In our view , the war on terrorism also has a significant bearing on this political dialogue .
Furthermore , this is clearly not the only approach . We are proposing a financial and economic partnership extending beyond commercial matters .
It should also take account of the opportunities for mobilising an ever-increasing flow of foreign investment . In addition it should promote integration processes within the Mediterranean partner countries and strengthen our dialogue in the field of economic policy .
In this connection , we believe that the proposal to set up a Euro-Mediterranean Bank could promote the dialogue and economic and financial partnership we are advocating .
Clearly also , priority should be given to setting up intercultural dialogue and establishing a genuine Euro-Mediterranean partnership in the social , cultural and human fields .
In conclusion , I should like to say a few words on the issue of financing . This is a key element insofar as there is a need for better recognition of the commitments made by the European Union and improved and more effective management of the MEDA programme funds .
This does obviously involve a greater capacity for absorption on the part of our Euro-Mediterranean partners and the decentralisation of those programmes .
Mr President , in my estimation the Euro-Mediterranean dialogue will prove a vital asset in overcoming the conflict in the Middle East .
I am also convinced that in life , in politics , in science and in society , it is important to have more than a superficial acquaintance with other people . Rather , we should strive to have a true understanding of those who are seeking the same truth , harmony and solidarity as we are , though they might be travelling along a different road .
Mr President , I should like to begin by saying how delighted I am that Parliament has reached a consensus on Euro-Mediterranean policy . It has done so by unanimously endorsing the policy summarised clearly and positively in Mr Esteve 's report .
At the same time , I am bound to say not just how disappointed but bitter I feel . I imagine there must by now be broad agreement that this Euro-Mediterranean process is like a game of snakes and ladders in which we have just gone down a very long snake and lost all the ground gained .
As regards the economic and social aspects , there is a clear tendency to estrangement and breakdown of the relationship between the European Union and our Mediterranean partners . There is shared responsibility here , but also purely European responsibility .
Above all , however , it is in the political sphere that the situation arising as a result of the dreadful events in the Middle East means at least that Euro-Mediterranean relations are exceedingly delicate , if not that the whole process is in danger .
I should like to take this opportunity to say that the Valencia Ministers ' meeting will undoubtedly prove a valuable opportunity to bring Israeli and Palestinian representatives together round a table . Nonetheless , attendance by the Palestinian Authority must be a condition sine qua non for the meeting to be held .
It should be remembered that President Arafat himself was present at the previous meeting .
The European Union could never be party to the mockery of bringing together Euro-Mediterranean countries whilst the Palestinian Authority 's seat remained empty .
Mr President , Commissioner , I must first congratulate the rapporteur , Mr Esteve , on his wide-ranging and detailed report , which covers each and every one of the concerns and uncertainties regarding Euro-Mediterranean cooperation .
Re-launching the Barcelona Process is more necessary than ever in the interests of peace and stability . This should involve strengthening Euro-Mediterranean dialogue .
We need to tackle crucial issues such as the need to promote democratic values and fundamental rights , so flagrantly disregarded in the conflict in the Middle East . Other factors to be considered include the terrorist threat and matters relating to economic cooperation , the environmental aspects of development , emigration and drug trafficking .
I shall focus on just a few areas in the short time available to me .
Setting up a free trade area might seem the obvious way of stimulating the economy and ensuring that the people of the southern shores of the Mediterranean are not dying of starvation whilst on its northern shores we are being killed by cholesterol .
It is important to ensure however that such a free trade area does not become a time bomb that would destroy all the efforts made by countries in southern Europe to achieve genuine convergence and genuine cohesion , something they do not yet enjoy .
The far-reaching changes anticipated within the European Union should be taken into account when establishing a free trade area . I refer to the reform of the common agricultural policy and to enlargement .
Trade in agricultural products is both necessary and useful , but caution is called for .
It is important to promote political dialogue amongst our Mediterranean partners , in addition to dialogue between them and the Union .
It does not seem logical to strengthen the Association Agreement without strengthening the South-South dialogue . Closed border situations in diplomatic relations cannot continue .
International agreements must be complied with for the coastal nations to be in a credible position in relation to the Union . This is certainly true of the potentially explosive situation in the Western Sahara .
Further , the need to combat terrorism should not be used as a weapon or an excuse for doing away with a political opponent or an enemy . Yasser Arafat has to be present as a recognised interlocutor if peace is to be achieved .
Following the attacks on 11 September , dialogue and mutual understanding have become essential .
Those attacks resulted in a deep divide between the two cultures . This has to be bridged .
Cultural and social exchanges must therefore be encouraged , through the promotion of mutual information by means of shared means of communication such as Euro-Mediterranean television .
In conclusion , the important role the regions in southern Europe are already playing and will continue to play with regard to Euro-Mediterranean cooperation should not be overlooked .
Mr President , I would firstly like to extend my heartfelt thanks to Mr Esteve for his opening remarks explaining the amendments .
I shall , of course , take note of these .
It is impossible to give thought to Euro-Mediterranean relations without contemplating concerted action to bring an end to the war in the Middle East , at a time when Israeli tanks are crushing the Palestinian population and Shimon Péres himself is speaking of massacre .
Sharon 's aggressive , murderous and colonial policy is leading not only the Palestinian people , but also all the people of the region - and that includes the Israeli people - towards a bloody and violent dead end .
We must condemn the crimes and the destruction of infrastructure financed by the European Union . We must call for urgent aid to be sent to the civilian population and for an international protection force to be dispatched to the region .

Since Mr Solana and Mr Patten claim - as they did yesterday in this very House - that acceptable boundaries have been crossed , the European Union must therefore take swift and objective action .
It has the resources that are needed . It can decide to suspend the partnership agreement with Israel .
The bombings and killings must stop .
The settlements must be dismantled . Israel must respect the United Nations ' resolutions .
These are all matters of extreme urgency . If the summit in Valencia can assist in achieving this , so much the better , but it would be totally unrealistic to think that everyone is willing to come around the table in a few days ' time - even if the Palestinian leader were able to leave the territories - if the European Union has not adopted a clear position .
The Mediterranean region is in need of peace so that it can contemplate its future .
Another conflict is also placing strain on this partnership , and on relations with North Africa , in particular , and that is the conflict in the Western Sahara .
The good relations that the European Union enjoys with Morocco should be used to break the deadlock in this situation and to apply the United Nations ' peace plan which provides for the self-determination of the Western Saharan people .
The situation that has come about since 11 September means that everyone , on both sides of the Mediterranean , must avoid any religion-terrorism equation and must work together to eradicate terrorism from its breeding grounds , which can only encourage the most violent forms of fundamentalism and nationalism .
At this point , I would like to mention the growing poverty , the pillaging of natural resources and the attempts to curtail and sell off national industries .
I am in favour , as Mr Esteve states in his report , of encouraging a dialogue amongst equals , which meets social needs by adopting measures to combat unemployment or which promotes trade between countries of the south .
I continue to believe , however , that the path towards shared prosperity has been blocked , for the time being , by agreements which are guided by solely economic and financial interests , thus denying the needs of the people who are already suffering from the burden of debt , the drop in the price of raw materials and the austerity imposed by structural adjustments .
How can we continue along the path of unbridled liberalisation , which is failing everywhere , without taking stock of previous agreements and ignoring the concerns that are growing in all parts , including the Mediterranean countries ?
Although one of the major objectives of the partnership is to improve the economic and social situation of our partner countries , it is now necessary , in addition to this , to satisfy basic and fundamental requirements in terms of health and education .
Unemployment figures , for example , or jobs that are directly threatened due to the abolition of customs barriers - namely , 500 000 in Algeria - illustrate how far off-target we are and would even tend to illustrate that other options must be explored , such as that of cooperation between public services .
Is it not also a good idea to take a bolder approach , for example , by establishing a Euro-Mediterranean development and cooperation fund , which would enable the people to define and monitor local projects ?
Lastly , the free movement of individuals should be the condition for an equal and fair partnership .
We wish to establish harmonisation in the area of immigration and asylum , but only if this contributes to the development of the country of origin and ensures that migrants , on our soil , enjoy dignified and fair treatment which observes human rights and is based on equal rights .
Mr President , the Valencia Summit is most likely to be remembered just for having been held .
Obviously , as both the rapporteur and the Commission stated , the Barcelona Process must not be confused with the Middle East peace process .
It is also obvious however that there can be no Barcelona Process without peace in the Middle East .
I should therefore like to congratulate the Spanish Presidency on its efforts to bring about peace .
To my knowledge , the Barcelona declaration is the most strongly worded declaration in existence on this issue .
The presence of the President of the Council at the Arab League Summit was a first . The mission to the Middle East did take place .
That was a success in itself . Further , it succeeded in retaining its dignity .
There was no meeting with Mr Arafat , but none with Mr Sharon either .
I should also like to say how pleased I am that the EU-Israel Association Council has been convened , as well as the Madrid meeting .
This process has to guarantee the security and viability of two states , the Palestinian State and the State of Israel .
Having clarified the relationship between the peace process and the Barcelona Process , I have to say that in my view the Commission is being unduly self-congratulatory .
True , progress has been made regarding the Association Agreement , the Agadir Process has been launched and a development process tentatively put in train . As I understand it , however , all this is simply a drop in the ocean .
A single statistic suffices to indicate the gap between what is required and the current situation .
The Commission has correctly stated that 45 million new jobs need to be created in the coming decade just to retain the present levels of poverty and unemployment .
If this is not achieved , the growth of fundamentalism will threaten the security of our southern borders , as Mr Morillon and other speakers pointed out .
Our internal security will also be compromised , due to the increased flow of illegal immigration .
I therefore believe that Mr Esteve has chosen the points to highlight in his report wisely .
I also believe that if we are to move on from words to action we must set up a Euro-Mediterranean Assembly .
This would serve as a spearhead , breathing new life into the process and speeding it up , which is urgently required .
I am glad more speakers from non-Mediterranean countries have taken the floor .
This has not often been the case when we have dealt with these issues in the past . It suggests that the European Union is starting to understand that it needs to look South as well as East if it is to ensure its own survival .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , Commissioner , as a speaker from a non-Mediterranean country - at least a country which no longer qualifies as such - I should also like to extend my warm congratulations to the rapporteur , Mr Esteve , and thank him for liaising with us .
The Barcelona Process is of tremendous significance for peace , stability and prosperity in Europe .
Unfortunately it is suffering as a result of the recent intensification of the conflict in the Middle East .
Nevertheless , we need to continue this process of rapprochement across the Mediterranean .
We even need to reinvigorate the Barcelona Process with the aim of making the Mediterranean a real mare nostrum for all of the countries on its shores .
The forthcoming meeting in Valencia - and I hope that it will be able to take place - should therefore be seen as a starting point for considering the creation of a new permanent and stable structure for cooperation and coordination .
I know that in many cases not even the existing agreements are sufficiently implemented , but it is precisely in the light of recent events - from the attacks of 11 September to the war in the Middle East - that a multilateral organisation embracing the countries and regions on both sides of the Mediterranean is essential .
Clearly the variable records on human rights are still an obstacle to this vision becoming a reality .
In fact , human rights need to be a central component of our dialogue .
We need to convince our neighbours , firmly and persistently , that respect for and enforcement of human rights do not stand in the way of or contradict the fight against terrorism , but are actually prerequisites for a successful war on terror .
However - and I should also like to draw your attention to this - we must not express our opinions self-righteously or arrogantly ; we must do so with a willingness to engage in an intensive dialogue .
Finally , it remains to be said that in the light of the huge social problems , to which various colleagues have already referred - above all unemployment among young people - it is going to be necessary to create many new jobs in the region .
To this end we need to fight a joint battle against corruption , nepotism and bureaucracy , but we also need to make it possible for increased investment to be made , in particular in small and medium-sized enterprises .
To do this we also need a Mediterranean Bank , in which the European Investment Bank should , admittedly , for logistical reasons , have a majority holding .
I might mention once more that the delicate political human rights issues on the one hand and the explosive social situation in this region on the other , in particular in the light of high population growth , are a volatile combination , which may affect all of us .
Mr President , this report on the Commission communication to prepare the meeting of Euro-Mediterranean Foreign Ministers in Valencia on 22 and 23 April is about furthering Euro-Mediterranean cooperation , the aim of which , in our view , is to impose the economic and political terms of the European Union on the other countries in the Mediterranean , using economic means and political blackmail .
Of course we have the usual pronouncements about peace and democracy .
Conditions on the ground , however , as experienced in Cyprus , where 37 % of the island is still occupied , or by the long-suffering people of Palestine , subject to a criminal all-out attack by Israel , unfortunately not just tolerated , but still being funded and armed by the European Union , are somewhat different .
For example , the adoption of the Euro-Mediterranean charter on peace and stability has been postponed because Euro-Mediterranean cooperation is not being used to serve the peace process in the Middle East , and we have the European Union to blame for that .
There can be no doubt that the Euro-Mediterranean cooperation which we are constantly hearing about is not intended to contribute to the viable development of third Mediterranean countries and the prosperity of their people , let alone democracy and peace in the Mediterranean ; its purpose is to promote the interests of the European Union 's multinationals .
That is why we shall continue to fight against this policy and for a radically different policy to make the Mediterranean an area of peace , mutual benefit and equitable collaboration and coexistence for its people .
Mr President , I should like to start by congratulating our rapporteur on his detailed and highly topical report .
However as he himself points out , our aim today is not to go over again the strategic targets set by the European Union in Barcelona . No , what we must realise is that the tragedy all around us , with the fight against international terrorism and attempts to establish peace in the Middle East , provide a perfect opportunity for the meeting of ministers in Valencia to demonstrate once and for all that the Member States of the European Union have the political will to put the policies of the Barcelona Process to proper , continuous and efficient use .
And both the nations of Europe and the nations of the Mediterranean need this process if we are to achieve an area of security , prosperity and peace for one and all .
And that is precisely why I feel that our rapporteur 's report is so valuable , because it focuses on the need for a deeper process with global policies which have prospects .
At institutional level first , the proposed annual summit of the countries involved in the Barcelona Process and the proposed parliamentary assembly , responsible primarily for monitoring Association Agreements , will provide a far-reaching tool which can last the course .
The involvement of regional and local society and the involvement of civil society and women in all three pillars of the Barcelona Process rather than just the economy , as the European Parliament recently pointed out in one of its resolutions , will put our efforts on a democratic footing , make our plans sustainable and offer protection for human rights , for which there is a dire need in the region as a whole .
Cross-cultural dialogue and a new Mediterranean Research Institute will provide a good basis for the mutual understanding , mutual respect between partners and greater mutual trust needed in order to face up to major challenges such as combating terrorism , managing waves of immigrants and resolving the Arab-Israeli crisis through dialogue .
In addition , the European Parliament must support the proposal to set up a European Investment Bank because , as has already been pointed out , it will not just strengthen the development process in the partner countries , it will also establish financial relations and other forms of cooperation between the partners and the European Union .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the fifth Euro-Mediterranean ministerial meeting will meet in Valencia on 22 and 23 April and will adopt an action plan containing proposals and measures designed to promote Euro-Mediterranean cooperation .
Luckily , the report by Mr Esteve has come along at precisely the right time , just before the ministerial meeting , giving the European Parliament a chance to express its views and , with its proposals and ideas , make a useful contribution to this cooperation , which is proceeding at a snail 's pace and has wandered hopelessly far from the spirit and needs which the Barcelona Declaration - and many more meetings and resolutions since - acknowledged and undertook to satisfy in November 1995 .
The Esteve report quite rightly gives its unreserved support to the Commission 's proposed new action plan under the Barcelona Process , which it has improved and enhanced with practical proposals and suggestions of its own .
There is one issue on which the Esteve report is lacking in my opinion and , unfortunately , it is the key to the success of any initiative concerning the approach to and unanimous cooperation with Europe on the Mediterranean side .
As I am sure you can guess , I am talking about the Arab-Israeli conflict , Mr President , the tragic and dangerous Israeli-Palestinian conflict which is again in the headlines .
Obviously , things had not reached today 's tragic proportions when the Esteve report was drafted and the rapporteur has referred diplomatically to the need to settle the conflict in a way which highlights the new cultural , economic , social , political and institutional approach .
But what worries me , although I unreservedly support this new approach by the rapporteur , is that , if the Israeli-Palestinian conflict is not settled this time under arrangements acceptable to both sides , I repeat , arrangements acceptable to both sides , this nightmare will simmer below the surface and keep on obstructing the Euro-Mediterranean cooperation wanted and needed .
The European Union must be proactive and move effectively in this direction , quite apart from any other initiatives which it takes .
Valencia is a unique opportunity and it must not be wasted .
Mr President , Commissioner , I too am proud of the work Mr Esteve and the Committee on Foreign Affairs , Human Rights , Common Security and Defence Policy have produced with total consensus .
With this report , Europe has unambiguously defined the two priorities of its foreign policy : a policy concentrating on eastward enlargement and a policy focusing on the Mediterranean area as fundamental in the creation of a future of peace and prosperity .
The Euro-Mediterranean Conference is now the only genuine , existing forum for dialogue between the Arab delegations , the Israeli delegation and the European delegation .
Providing that forum for work and dialogue with tools such as the Euro-Mediterranean Development Bank and the Foundation and pursuing the MEDA programmes will allow us to create and foster an area of south-south and north-south free trade , on the one hand , and an area of dialogue , knowledge , training and communication on the other .
Only thus will the common values of different civilisations be clearly revealed ; only thus will understanding of and respect for the cultures , religions and histories of different peoples grow .
Only thus , I feel , will we be able to create a far-reaching area of democracy , economic growth and emergence from poverty , which are essential conditions if we are to promote and uphold the need for an area within which there is a shared policy of respect for the individual and safeguarding of human rights , which is the prerequisite for the success of any peace policy .
Mr President , firstly I would like to congratulate Mr Esteve on his excellent report , as many others have done in this debate .
It clearly shows the importance that Parliament gives to the Mediterranean region .
I noted Mr Swoboda 's remark about his being the only non-Mediterranean participant in the debate - there is in fact more than one , but it can be looked upon as a strength of this Parliament that we have such commitment to and identification with an issue like this .
From the outset , let me just reiterate , if need be , the strategic importance of the Mediterranean for the EU .
On the eve of the next enlargement and in the face of the developing political situation this is truer than ever .
After a careful reading I must confess my satisfaction with the convergent approach between this report and the Commission 's communication .
More has to be done , but the Commission and Parliament are in broad agreement on the way we understand our political , economic and social relations with our southern neighbours .
Despite the serious political setbacks in the region - the current dramatic situation in the Middle East being one of them - and a certain scepticism at the end of the 1990s as to whether the Barcelona Process constituted the right means to make the Euro-Mediterranean partnership move forward , the process has stood the test of time .
We cannot ignore the implications for the process of the tragic development of the situation in Israel , Gaza and the West Bank .
This is not the occasion today to debate Europe 's role in bringing an end to that conflict but the situation as it is , and the continuation of this dreadful violence , stresses even further the need to continue with the development of the Barcelona Process as a means for Europe to make its contribution to the peace , stability and prosperity of the region .
One can always discuss how strong an instrument the Barcelona Process really is , but it is beyond discussion that this process is part of the solution and definitely not part of the problem , so we had better strengthen it .
In substance , substantial progress has been accomplished since 1996 .
All Euro-Mediterranean partners are now used to having a permanent dialogue and to working together .
The Barcelona Process is the only place where we can hold a 27-member discussion and , more importantly , where the 12 Mediterranean partners can regularly discuss and meet .
In the present circumstances , this is a meaningful indication of the resilience of the process .
We have also made substantial progress towards introducing a free trade area .
Most of the association agreements are already ratified , signed or initialled .
Intra-regional agreements , such as the Agadir Process , are being negotiated .
Yet , although our Euro-Mediterranean trade relations are progressing steadily in North / South terms , South / South trade is still stagnating at a mere 5 % of Mediterranean trade .
Macroeconomic stabilisation has indeed taken place successfully in most Mediterranean countries , but reforms related to the business environment are not progressing at a sufficient pace .
The challenge for the Mediterranean partners is to unleash the full potential of their economic forces , and in this regard the Barcelona Process has become the framework of reference for all international donors to relate to and further pursue .
In the cultural sphere , substantial work has been accomplished .
Some hundreds of regional projects have been financed and have promoted a dense network of human exchanges .
So what is the way ahead ?
How can we raise the profile of the partnership ?
How can it better be used to guarantee a common area of peace and stability ?
Politically , we must pursue and reinforce our support for the Barcelona Process as a tool for promoting understanding and political dialogue .
The road is well-paved , despite some potholes on its way .
A clear example of this dialogue is the senior officials ' meeting on terrorism just held on 27 March .
By the same token , the 27 partners have been able to come a long way towards an agreement around a set of priority actions on an issue as sensitive as Justice and Home Affairs .
We hope to reach a final consensus in Valencia .
Based on these priorities the Commission will launch this year a regional programme on judicial cooperation , the fight against terrorism and organised crime , and migration .
This success marks a milestone for the partnership and demonstrates its political capabilities and potential .
In particular , as far as migration issues are concerned , several of the requests by Parliament ( observatory on migration flows , network of contacts ) will be included in the coming regional programme .
At an institutional level , further efforts need to be made in order to promote the " co-ownership " of the Barcelona Process .
A feeling that the EU " imposes its agenda " exists among the southern partners and needs to be alleviated .
In this sense your proposal of launching a Euro-Mediterranean Parliamentary Assembly is more than welcome .
Economically , signs are encouraging .
The grid of association agreements is almost completed ; South / South trade integration progresses , notably in the framework of the Agadir Process - even if not as fast as we would like .
The Meda programme has dramatically improved its delivery - though given the starting point one might say that improvement had to happen - but still , it is happening with a ratio of payments to commitments of 53 % in 2001 compared to a mere 26 % for the 1995-1999 period . We are catching up .
Yet the economic situation of the region remains uncertain and demands supplementary efforts from everybody .
I am glad that Parliament supports our proposals to further this process , in particular in areas such as investments , environment , transport , infrastructures and energy .
As you know , the idea of launching a Euro-Mediterranean Bank did not receive the full assent of the Member States at the Barcelona European Council .
Nonetheless , a new European Investment Bank facility will be launched and a representative office of the EIB in the region will be created .
Finally , the social and human aspects of the partnership show today , more than ever , its relevance , creating bridges across the Mediterranean and promoting a better understanding of each other 's cultures and societies .
I noted that this aspect was given prominence in many of the contributions in the debate here today .
The Barcelona Process allows a unique and structured framework that allows this social and cultural dialogue at regional level - not only North / South , but also South / South and indeed South / North .
The European Commission has put forward a set of new proposals .
I am happy to see that they are very well taken by Parliament , in particular the Euromed Foundation and the cooperation between universities ( the Tempus programme ) .
As regards the launching of a new Euromed Foundation , the Commission is persuaded that it would contribute to the enhancement of the partnership .
However , some Member States do not seem to be as convinced as we are .
Some efforts of political persuasion will be required in the coming weeks .
The Commission has also proposed the enlargement of the Tempus programme on university cooperation to the Mediterranean .
The approval of this extension will be obtained at the Council of Education Ministers on 30 May .
Moreover , all existing regional programmes in this area ( heritage , audiovisual , youth ) will be pursued in the near future .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place today at 12 noon .
Mr Esteve , you asked for the floor .
. ( ES ) Mr President , I asked for the floor just to say that the thanks I expressed earlier for the cooperation received should now be extended to all the speakers for being so pleasant .
The difficulty is that the situation is not at all pleasant .
Quite the opposite is the case . All the speeches do indeed suggest that the situation regarding peace and development is difficult and challenging .
Consequently , Parliament 's main concern about the Valencia meeting at present should be that it takes place , not the outcome of the vote .
It is important to ensure all the participants attend and that proceedings are brought to a successful conclusion .
Other than that , it only remains for me to point out that Parliament 's role and involvement in the Barcelona Process is increasing . Setting up an Assembly would consolidate it , which would obviously be a most welcome development .
We shall now take the next item .
There will not of course be time to deal with it adequately prior to the vote .
We shall therefore open the debate and interrupt it for the vote . The debate will be concluded this afternoon .
The next item is the debate on the report ( A5-0076 / 2002 ) by Mr Graça Moura , on behalf of the Committee on Foreign Affairs , Human Rights , Common Security and Defence Policy , on the Commission communication on an EU Strategy towards China : Implementation of the 1998 Communication and Future Steps for a more Effective EU Policy .
rapporteur . ( PT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the first idea I wish to get across is that relations between the European Union and China are continuing to develop favourably , although not always at an even pace or at the desired speed .
In any event , the Commission communication on the development of a comprehensive partnership with China , presented to the Council and Parliament half way through last year , outlines a strategy and incorporates a set of principles , aims and methods which are wholly commendable , and it seems , incidentally , that China 's reaction to some - although not all - of the aspects this communication deals with is positive .
Similarly , the support that the People 's Republic of China has so readily provided for the international fight against terrorism is evidence of an attitude that we should note and applaud .
At the same time , we have seen China become a member of the WTO , which opens up considerable prospects for that country to play an even more significant role on the international stage .
There is a range of issues that have been on the table for a long time : the role of China in the Far East , its relations with the ASEM countries and other parts of Asia , its internal political situation and its political , trade and cultural relations with the European Union .
In this framework , we are still seeing a certain disparity between the various methods of cooperation already in place and the development , which we consider to be desirable , of areas related to the political situation , the establishment of the rule of law and respect for human rights . It could , nevertheless , be said that there are already signs , here and there , which give reason to believe that these things will gradually be achieved .
The experiences of Hong Kong and Macao , in particular , show that it is possible to ensure that these developments take place at the political , social , economic and cultural levels .
We must , therefore , deepen cooperation and dialogue whilst continuing to insist on the other objectives that go beyond the framework of economic relations and which could even , in some cases , have a harmful effect on them unless the People 's Republic of China finds a satisfactory solution to certain issues that we consider to be fundamental .
Some of the problems that require closer attention are raised in the specific chapters of the report .
These are : China 's entry to the WTO , the need for sustainable development , for better coordination between the strand of economic progress and the strands of political and social progress , concerns about the problems of employment that will ensue from China 's accession to the WTO and the need for the gradual conversion and modernisation of its economy , respect for the interests of its neighbouring countries , the need for environmental protection , the advantage of stepping up cultural exchange , particularly at university level , etc .
Our range of concerns about relations with Taiwan also falls into this category .
The European Union 's recognition of the ' one China ' principle cannot , under any circumstances , lead us to accept solutions involving force .
We all feel that there is no real alternative to dialogue on this matter , as difficult as this may prove to be .
Furthermore , we feel obliged to express our concern about Tibet , with regard to which it is also becoming necessary and urgent to pursue dialogue with a view to defining a new and real statute of full autonomy , with the only exceptions being foreign and defence policy .
Thirdly , whilst acknowledging that China seems to be making a degree of progress in the field of human rights , it should be understood that a vast area in which the situation is far from satisfactory is still wide open and this Parliament must , therefore , make this absolutely clear .
These points are covered in some detail in the report which I have had the honour of drafting and I shall , therefore , not go into them now .
Consequently , Mr President , a complex framework with countless positive possibilities is opening up for closer relations and cooperation between the European Union and China , but it also still contains countless problems that must be addressed frankly and an acceptable solution must be reached on the basis of democratic standards that will lead to the establishment of the rule of law , to the strengthening of civil society and to human rights being fully respected .
With regard to the 22 amendments that have been tabled , I should like to make the following brief observation : some , which simply replicate the contents of the text , should not be accepted , and there are also some amendments whose thrust would be more appropriate in a report on Hong Kong , which is why I am rejecting them at the present time . Lastly , there are other amendments , dealing either with the taxonomy of the text or with improving it , which I have accepted .
To conclude , Mr President , I am convinced that , by voting for this report , this House will be making both an institutional and a political contribution to the strategy drawn up by the Commission for the development of a comprehensive partnership between the European Union and the People 's Republic of China .
Mr President , my congratulations and thanks go to my colleague , Mr Graça Moura , for a balanced and thorough report .
China is a very important trading partner for the EU , not least for my own country , Finland . Nokia , for example , already employs more than 4 000 staff in the manufacture of mobile phones .
It is important that China joined the WTO at the Doha meeting . It is important for the outside world , but still more for China , which must clarify many of its laws and its rules over the next few years to be able to implement all the requirements for membership .
WTO membership will also lead to social and political pressures in China .
How China is to solve these problems fairly is of course an internal matter but I agree with the rapporteur that in the longer term programmes jointly implemented in cooperation with the EU , Japan and the United States of America will be desirable to solve the employment and social problems of the country 's vast rural area .
It is in our interest and that of the world as a whole that China should be a stable , open and prosperous society which we will support if and when it moves further towards democracy and a free market economy and embraces the principles of human rights and the rule of law .
We are pleased to welcome China 's involvement in the international effort against terrorism and the rapprochement between China and India .
I believe that the values we hold to be important here in Parliament - democracy , the rule of law , human rights , equality and pluralism - will also gain ground in China if we maintain a vitally interactive relationship and encourage China to open up in all respects and permit its citizens to enjoy the freedom of modern communications media and allow them the right to become unionised and freely express their opinions .
Mr President , Mr Graça Moura is entitled to more than the usual courtesies extended in the House .
I should like to thank him most sincerely for the draft resolution presented in plenary . Moreover , the draft has received almost unanimous support from the relevant committee .
I have been a member of the delegation for relations with the People ´ s Republic of China since 1986 , and I believe it is fair to say that this is the most balanced text ever presented in plenary on the issue .
Were the Socialist Group 's amendments to be included , it would indeed be almost perfect .
I have absolutely no doubt that , along with the introduction of the euro and enlargement of the European Union , the development of China will be remembered as one of the four or five milestones in the history of the world in the twenty-first century .
Hence the importance I attach to relations between China and the European Union .
I could comment on a great many issues , but I shall focus on just a few points in the interests of saving time and bearing in mind that other members of my group will be taking the floor .
I will start from the premise that in our culture drawing a friend 's attention to his or her shortcomings is not considered to be interference . On the contrary , we believe it is a friend 's duty to do so .
I have endeavoured to explain this to our Chinese partners on numerous occasions . For example , we speak out against the death penalty wherever it is in force , whether it be in the United States or in China .
Nonetheless , we consider both these countries to be our friends .
Mr President , it must be a sign of the times that the Chinese authorities have responded favourably to the Commission communication on which the report is based .
All the Union 's institutions agree that it is in China 's own interest , not just in that of the European Union , for the People 's Republic to become stable and prosperous and move towards democracy . This must go beyond holding municipal elections with more than a single candidate per post .
It is important to promote exchanges of all kinds .
Those of us unfortunate enough to have the experience of living under a dictatorship for many years realise that isolation tended to strengthen the dictator 's position instead of helping democrats striving to overthrow them .
Accession to the World Trade Organisation is a challenge the Chinese Government has been brave enough to rise to . It will involve risks and will have untold repercussions within and without the country .
In the short term , it has already caused restructuring and large-scale lay-offs in certain sectors of industry .
Turning to the major area of human rights , China still has a long way to go , in our view .
Under-development is no excuse here .
A moratorium on execution of the sentence on those already condemned to death must be achieved , prior to pressing for the elimination of these sentences .
We have received very many well-founded allegations of torture . Torture must be eliminated .
We welcomed a delegation from Tibet a few weeks ago , and feel that was a positive step .
They provided some useful information , but many questions remain unanswered .
The Chinese authorities should therefore be urged to pursue their recent policy of freeing Tibetan political prisoners .
These are moves in the right direction , and are bound to benefit China and relations between China and the European Union .
Mr President , I should also like to thank the rapporteur for a sound and well-balanced report which expresses the greater number of common interests there are between the EU and China today .
China is in all respects becoming a more and more important player on the world stage , and that also applies in the combating of terrorism where we must appreciate China 's active support for this serious struggle .
The Group of the European Liberal , Democrat and Reform Party wants to see a democratic China that respects the principles of a free market , human rights and the rule of law .
We also want China to fulfil the Copenhagen Criteria . There is no reason why these criteria should be confined to applying only within the borders of Europe .
The ELDR Group has tabled a list of amendments , all designed to tighten up the report a little .
The most important issue for us in this context is the One China policy .
We are all familiar with this , and we know why it exists .
As liberals , we are not proud of the One China policy , because it impedes development in a country that respects democracy , social pluralism and constitutional principles - namely Taiwan .
The ELDR Group believes that the will and desires of Taiwan must be respected and that the China policy is an obstacle to their being so .
We also believe that the European Parliament is the right place from which to send this signal , and it is therefore up to our governments to follow our advice .
Last year , the President of Taiwan , Chen Shui-bian , was awarded the Liberal International Freedom Prize .
Unfortunately , no EU country would also give him a visa so that he himself could collect it . His wife instead collected it , here in this House in November .
Nonetheless , we should like to express our dissatisfaction with the fact that the Member States do not comply with their obligations to respect the President of Taiwan 's basic right to travel freely .
The Olympic Games are to be held in China in 2008 . That decision has been taken and is not to be altered , but let us take this opportunity to demand that China use this opportunity to demonstrate that it will comply with all the international standards and conventions relating to human rights .
Recently , China has employed a practice whereby children born in mainland China are separated from their parents in Hong Kong .
That is an infringement of human rights that is very much to be censured , and we will therefore demand that the Chinese Government stop this practice immediately and begin reunifying families so that parents in Hong Kong can be together with their children .
I would again thank Mr Graça Moura for a thorough and well-considered report which aims at a more effective EU policy on the China issue .
Mr President , human rights organisations are unfortunately continuing to report atrocities committed against dissidents and minorities in China .
At the same time , there are continuing protests by workers about the fact that at least 25 million jobs have disappeared in state-owned companies as a result of liberalisation and privatisation .
In the old industrial areas in northern China , unemployment is estimated at 40 % .
In a study concerning the risk of instability in China , the Conflict Prevention Network observes that , if China 's Communist Party does not manage to guarantee provision for the increasing number of poor and unemployed at a time when others in the population are becoming rich , the party 's ideological legitimacy may begin to be called into question .
Things could then become unsettled in China .
In spite of a series of reforms , grassroots democracy has not seriously taken root .
China 's leadership is in a race against time , according to the CPN report which also observes that this is creating a dilemma for the EU .
Is the EU to support a repressive regime because it maintains stability or is the risk of instability to be incurred through promoting citizens ' rights ?
For the Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance , there is an obvious answer to this question .
Citizens ' rights and democracy must be promoted in all circumstances .
The Beijing Government must fulfil its promise and initiate talks with the Dalai Lama .
It is also necessary to continue the normalisation process with Taiwan without a show of arms , and China must comply with the content of the UN Conventions on Human Rights which have been signed .
It is not therefore acceptable for people to be imprisoned because of their religious convictions or ethnic affiliations or because they wish to form a trade union or political party .
Nonetheless , something is perhaps in the process of happening .
The latest issue of the Far Eastern Economic Review reports that there is a relaxation of the rules governing mass demonstrations under way .
A policeman has even had a letter published stating that the right to demonstrate is written into China 's constitution and that it needs therefore to become easier to obtain permission to demonstrate .
The CPN report says that the EU must be cautious in attempting to influence China .
Certainly we can be cautious .
However , that presupposes a constructive response from China in which the latter implements the conventions it has signed and in which Chinese representatives do not interpret each friendly criticism as undue interference in China 's internal affairs .
Mr President , I salute the rapporteur for his efforts .
Whenever the Union 's relations with the People 's Republic of China are assessed , economic interests are always to the fore .
This is certainly understandable ; after all , a market of around 1.3 billion people promises absolutely inexhaustible profits for those companies and banks active in it .
China 's accession to the WTO will further improve the terms for capital recovery .
It will also intensify competition between Pacific economic powerhouses like Japan , Taiwan and the United States on the one hand and the EU and its Member States on the other .
Everyone wants as large a slice as possible of this huge cake .
This is accompanied by constant reproaches from the political side that China should have more respect for human rights .
These overlook or underestimate the fact that China is trying to complement the economic reforms , which have been underway for years , with federal democratic structures , social security systems and economic regulatory mechanisms .
In acceding to the WTO , China is continuing this process .
Nevertheless , nobody should be under the illusion that this separation of the State and the economy will solve China 's immense social problems .
The much lauded market of global capitalism is - whether you like it or not - amoral and not a suitable vehicle for translating basic values such as social justice and solidarity into action .
It is and remains the state which is called upon here .
There is no other government in the world that bears responsibility for 1.3 billion people .
Seeking to establish a multilateral dialogue with China is all well and good , but in so doing nobody should put China under pressure or only have their own interests in mind .
Anyone who does put pressure on China should keep a sense of proportion , carry out a realistic assessment of their own potential to meet the same demands and have a clear idea in advance of the effects that it might have .
A dialogue is only meaningful and successful if a consensus is sought in the interests of all parties .
This also applies to the death penalty .
It is right to call for it to be abolished , but we should be just as consistent in calling for it to be abolished in the USA .
Relations with China are more than ever before of strategic political significance .
Uni-dimensional development , as is currently happening on China 's doorstep as a result of the USA 's strategic intentions , would not be very beneficial .
Instability would be the result .
As the EU enlarges , indeed precisely as it undergoes this process of enlargement , it is called upon to oppose any unilateral attempts to accumulate power , and to maintain and - if necessary - establish and consolidate stability by cultivating a balanced relationship with China .
Judging from the report on China and the Commission communication , a fresh start , appropriate to spring time , seems to be being made in relations between the EU and China .
Relations of the EU and its Member States with China are increasingly improving and being extended .
These are , in themselves , promising signs .
However , the Commission and the rapporteur will agree with me that quite a few difficulties have to be overcome before mention can be made of a true spring breakthrough .
Compliance with human rights , in particular , leaves a great deal to be desired .
Reports of torture , maiming and even killings are too systematic to be ignored .
Various groups in Chinese society are suffering such human rights violations , including , for example , non-registered Christians .
According to a reliable report issued by various NGOs , their persecution has , in recent years , even been ordered at a high level in the Chinese Government .
Since this persecution is hardly given any attention in the report by Mr Graça Moura , I have tabled a few additional amendments in this respect which I hope will find backing in the European Parliament .
The EU 's response so far to these abuses is , in my view , very disappointing .
According to the Commission document on China , ten rounds of political dialogue have already been held .
At the same time , the Commission realises that there is still a yawning gap between action and international standards .
Should we then not conclude that the ' critical dialogue ' is inadequate as an instrument ?
And would it not be preferable by far to link economic interests to China 's observation of human rights much more than is now the case ?
The critical dialogue should not be there to ease our conscience , while we in the meantime keep a keen eye on our own economic interests .
This will probably cost us something , but surely we should be prepared to go ahead nevertheless if human rights are so important to us .
We in the European Union cannot conceive of spring if in China itself it is still the middle of winter .
Thank you very much , Mr Belder .
The debate is now adjourned .
We shall proceed to the vote .
Mr President , I rise to raise an important issue for individual Members of this House relating to Council Question Time .
I was informed yesterday by the questions office of this House that my question relating to the Middle East would not be taken by the Council today because the matter I was raising , the Association Agreement between Europe and Israel , would be dealt with by the Council in debate yesterday .
The Council did not deal with that issue yesterday , so I contacted the office again today to have this question restored to the order paper .
I have now been informed that the Council will not deal with my question or ten other Members ' questions because it claims it has not had time to prepare its replies .
I do not think that is acceptable .
This is one of the few rights that individual Members have : to question the Commission and the Council directly in this House .
It is a display of contempt for the Members of this House for the Council to seek simply to push aside important questions which individual Members may want to raise .
I would ask you , Mr President , to make the strongest possible protest to the Council to ensure that my question and the other Members ' questions are restored and in fact replied to ; and to make it clear that neither this Council nor any other council is entitled to treat this House with such contempt .
Question Time is on the agenda at 5.30 p.m. this afternoon .
When we finish the votes I will try to communicate with the Council and revert to you on whatever it is I have discovered .
Your point is clear , well made and well taken .
I will convey that to the Council after the voting session .
The Commission can accept Amendments Nos 1 and 9 to 15 .
The Commission cannot accept Amendment No 3 .
While some of the other amendments - Nos 2 to 8 - could be accepted in principle , the wording of Amendments Nos 9 to 15 is far preferable .
Mr President , I have worked very closely with my colleagues in the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy and I feel that this compromise package of amendments , which we are going to vote on today , is the best outcome we could have hoped for on integrated coastal zone management .
As some of you will be aware , at first reading last year I proposed that this recommendation be strengthened to include a review which would lead to a further legal framework on coastal zone management .
The protection of our coastal zones is essential and I feel that stronger legislation is needed to ensure this protection .
At first reading , the report was adopted by a large majority of this House .
However , it was not possible for the Council to accept our amendments on the legal framework at that stage .
As rapporteur , I was very disappointed that we lost these legal framework amendments .
However , as I said , these compromise amendments are a very good step in the right direction and a clear signal that we are serious about protecting Europe 's coastal zones .
At my initiative , as rapporteur , I felt it was essential to reach a compromise with the Council on a second reading , and this package is exactly that .
I am delighted to say that we have reached a good compromise on the timetable of this recommendation .
Firstly , concerning the time in which Member States must report back to the Commission on their experience in implementing the recommendation - the Council can accept our suggested 45 months .
Secondly , the Council can further accept our suggested 55 months for the review of the recommendation .
In essence , we have gained an extra year on the timetable , which essentially means that further steps in protecting our coastal zone will come sooner rather than later .
I would like sincerely to thank the Council for its understanding on this significant point .
I would also like to take this opportunity to thank my colleagues in the Committee on the Environment who supported the compromise package and the Council for recognising the importance of this compromise and for putting the recommendation on COREPER 's agenda at very short notice .
I should also like to thank the people in the Commission responsible .
Mr President , I would like to thank the rapporteur for his constructive work on this directive which will ensure more security in maritime traffic .
As my colleague , Mrs De Palacio , said yesterday , the Commission can confirm its support for all the amendments tabled .
I trust that the Council will follow Parliament 's position to enable this directive to be adopted as soon as possible .
Mr President , on waste electrical and electronic equipment , the Commission can accept Amendments Nos 9 , 11 to 19 , 24 , 27 to 37 , 39 , 40 , 43 , 44 , 45 , 50 , 57 , 65 , 76 and 77 .
In Amendment No 23 , the Commission supports the new paragraph 1 and paragraph 1 ( b ) , last subparagraph in full and paragraph 1 ( b ) , third and fourth subparagraphs , as well as paragraph 2 in principle .
In Amendment No 73 , the Commission can accept the first part .
In Amendments Nos 1 , 3 , 5 , 6 , 7 and 10 , the first , third and fourth sentences can be accepted in full .
In Amendments Nos 10 , 20 , 21 and 41 , the first sentence can be accepted in full .
Amendments Nos 42 , 48 , 49 , 51 to 55 , 66 , 78 and 92 can be accepted in principle .
On restriction of hazardous substances the amendments acceptable in full to the Commission are Amendments Nos 3 , 4 , 10 and 17 .
Amendment No 5 can be accepted in part - i.e. the first paragraph .
Amendments Nos 2 , 6 , 7 , 8 , 9 ( the first paragraph of Amendment No 9 can be accepted in full ) , 13 and 15 can be accepted in principle .
Mr President , as my colleague Mrs Wallström explained during the debate yesterday , the Commission is unable to accept those amendments of Parliament which would extend the scope of the proposed directive to include a total and immediate ban on octabromodiphenyl ether - in short octaBDEs and decaBDEs .
This concerns Amendments Nos 1 , 2 , 3 , 7 , 8 , 9 and 10 .
The reason for the position of the Commission is that the risk assessment for these substances is not yet finalised .
Furthermore , the Commission is also unable to accept the amendment that would introduce a future total ban on decaBDEs from 1 January 2006 , should the risk assessments conclude that the substance causes concern .
This is Amendment No 4 .
The reason we take this stand is that the ban should be introduced much earlier than 2006 , as the risk assessment will be concluded during 2002 .
. ( DA ) Mr President , I should like to draw attention to an error in the English version of Amendment No 3 , in which the last word , ' status ' , should have read ' place ' .
I would therefore ask for this to be corrected in the original English text .
. Mr President , following consultation yesterday , I should like to propose an oral amendment to the end of paragraph 41 , adding a few words which take into account the actions taken by the political groups in response to criticism a couple of years ago from the Court of Auditors .
It would read as follows : " Notes the Bureau ruling on budget line No 3701 following the answers from the political groups to the Court of Auditors ' special report . "
That is the addition and it is also in the voting list .
Mr President , here is my own Amendment No 13 and the original paragraph 43 , to which the PSE Group wishes to table an oral amendment .
Paragraph 43 orally amended is much the same in terms of content as my own Amendment No 13 .
This being so I would ask whether the PSE Group could withdraw its oral amendment , as it might be overturned if twelve Members of Parliament oppose it , because Amendment No 13 is approximately the same as paragraph 43 orally amended by the Social Democratic Group .
Mr President , I can well understand why the rapporteur is asking this question .
On the other hand all that this is about is a different legal assessment of the relevance of the Financial Regulation .
We believe that our amendment is clearer on this point .
But it actually does not make much difference which of the two amendments is adopted .
That is why I would request that we first vote on the Liberals ' amendment and then on ours .
We believe that even taking into account the oral alteration we have a rather clearer amendment .
It will not , however , be of great consequence to either party , whatever is adopted .
. Mr President , this relates to the situation we have with the Council .
The Budget Control Committee requested information from the Council on the common foreign and security policy .
Initially , the Council was reluctant to provide this information which is why the text , as it stands at the moment , postpones discharge for the Council .
Late last night , however , following a meeting of the Council Finance Ministers , they agreed to answer the questions by Friday of this week .
Due to this change in the situation , and as I wish to avoid a clash with Council if at all possible , I would like to propose an oral amendment to Amendment No 4 , which has now not been withdrawn .
This amendment is almost identical to the oral amendment relating to Amendment No 3 : " Is grateful for the answers that , in principle , the Council has agreed to provide to questions relating to aspects of the common foreign and security policy within seven days " .
I would therefore urge that we first vote on Amendment No 4 , with the oral amendment , and if this falls , we then have to vote on Amendment No 3 And I wish to indicate that if this should happen , I withdraw paragraph 3e .
I am sorry if it is a bit complicated but it is because of the changing situation .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , we postponed the vote on this report from yesterday to today because we were waiting for an official response from the Council .
That was the reason given on Monday by the chairman of the PSE Group , Mr Baron Crespo .
We went along with that .
However , we still do not have an official answer now .
An unofficial , possible answer from the Council , which was given to me today in the form of an unofficial translation , is what I actually have in front of me as chairman of the committee .
I do not think that it is fair to either the Council or the committee , which has after all not even been able to examine this material , for us now to set about the discharge procedure and decide yes or no or whether to postpone a decision .
I think a reasonable course of action is to wait for the following year , for 2001 , where budget lines are already shown for the foreign and security policy and home affairs , and in the meantime to reflect calmly on the discharge problem both on our own and in discussion with the Council .
That is why I would ask that these matters be dealt with in a clear and transparent procedure in the committee responsible , so that we can also make a well-founded judgment .
I would therefore ask our rapporteur , and also the PSE Group , to abandon this very hasty , indeed perhaps over hasty , procedure .
Mr President , I should like to speak against the proposal , because it seems to me that Mrs Theato 's reasoning is full of contradictions .
You see , on the one hand she said that she wanted the report to be referred back to committee , because she wanted to grant discharge to the Council soon .
But on the other hand it is well known in this House that in her very group there are those who have serious reservations about doing this at all .
At the same time , Mrs Morgan has made a proposal that would take away a lot of the pressure and difficulties associated with this particular issue and would constitute an elegant solution to this problem .
Incidentally , I would point out that we also need to make decisions on a whole series of other institutions , and I do not think that , on the basis of this contradictory reasoning , we should throw away an opportunity to resolve this problem elegantly .
We would be quite happy to address the questions raised by Mrs Theato next year .
Mr President , the Group of the Europe People 's Party is of the opinion that Mrs Morgan 's approach , introducing last-minute changes , is not the best way to deal with such an important report .
The Council has undertaken to provide a reply on Friday .
Given the importance of this report , it would therefore be wisest to refer it back to the committee .
This would allow for further reflection , taking account of the Council 's response , with a view to reaching the best possible solution .
I urge Mrs Morgan to request that the report be referred back to the committee .
I have already tried to convince her of the need for this . The PPE-DE Group will not give way on this point .
It is opposed to the oral amendment .
. Mr President , if we send this back to the committee , I cannot promise in which form it will come back .
We could start a major constitutional crisis with the Council .
We have just got an answer from the Council on the common foreign and security policy .
We should acknowledge that as a major shift from the Council , which is why I am urging you to vote today in favour of the line that I have proposed .
Mr President , I would like to move a point of order regarding Annex 5 .
The Rules of Procedure state that , on decisions giving discharge , the House shall vote on the basis of a report by the Committee on Budgetary Control , regardless of whether discharge is refused or granted .
The report submitted by Mrs Morgan tended towards favouring a certain decision .
We cannot now recommend that the House take a different decision .
I fully understand Mrs Morgan 's objections .
This group was not responsible for initiating a dispute with the Council on this issue ; on the contrary in fact , we called for moderation .
Now we believe that , in order to bring this matter to a satisfactory conclusion , we must , in accordance with the Rules of Procedure , refer this report back to committee , or at least the part of the report that concerns the Council , and vote on the rest of the report .
But we must refer back to committee the part of the report regarding discharge to the Council .
This is the only solution that conforms with common sense and also with the Rules of Procedure .
Mr President , Mr Bourlanges said that he was moving a point of order , but he was , in fact , speaking in favour .
I wanted to say that we have played the sorcerer 's apprentice in this area and we now find ourselves in this situation .
Therefore , I firmly support the referral back to committee and I urge you to forge ahead , because we have important votes on the Middle East and on Chechnya that must absolutely take place today .
I have listened carefully to what you have said . I did not hear in any of it that you made any procedural proposal .
Many colleagues have indicated that they would like to speak .
I would ask the House - notwithstanding the intervention of Mr Poettering - not to reopen the debate .
We had the debate yesterday . So let us move to the vote .
I note that this resolution has not been signed by Mrs Muscardini and any reference to her as a signatory will be removed .
( Parliament adopted the resolution )
Joint motion for a resolution ( RC B5-188 / 2002 )
Our coastal zones have been in continual decline for many years now , and the efforts of Member States to tackle this phenomenon vary according to the policies that the governments decide to pursue .
Some countries , such as France , do not make land planning a political priority .
The decline of our coastal zones is often a result of this reprehensible wait-and-see policy .
The problems encountered , both on land , such as demography , road networks and housing , and at sea , such as oil discharges , excess algae for instance , are shared problems . Europe therefore has a duty to play a specific role in initiating and drive policy-making in this area .
We must , of course , take the various geographical areas into account .
No one coastal zone is the same as another .
We must urge the Member States concerned to carry out a national inventory , to put in place a genuine preservation strategy that is coordinated at local level and guided at national level and to apply Community legislation that has an impact on coastal zones .
( Explanation of vote cut short pursuant to Article 137 ( 1 ) of the Rules of Procedure )
It has been twenty-eight months since the sinking of the Erika and we are still debating measures to control maritime traffic . These measures are included in a package of legislative provisions entitled ' Erika II ' , which are designed to help prevent any similar environmental disasters .
We have not reached the end of the procedure , since new amendments tabled by the Committee on Regional Policy , Transport and Tourism have just been adopted in plenary .
Most of these amendments are unrealistic or call into question the national organisation arrangements which are perfectly satisfactory .
We are thus unacceptably prolonging the procedural time frames which are further delaying the application of the useful preventative provisions that this draft directive contains , such as the compulsory introduction of automatic identification systems ( AIS ) on ships and voyage data recorders ( black boxes ) .
Therefore , by refusing to support the realistic installation dates for transponders and black boxes , the European Parliament is delaying their effective introduction .
And by proposing a complex compensation process for ports which welcome vessels with difficulties , and disregarding the efficient national organisations that already exist , the European Parliament is heading for a dead end situation .
( Explanation of vote cut short pursuant to Rule 137 ( 1 ) of the Rules of Procedure )
Mr President , I will do my best to be serious in today 's explanations of vote .
The first concerns Mr Florenz ' report on the directive on the differentiated collection of waste electrical and electronic equipment .
I voted for the motion today and I was in favour of this report when I voted for it in the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy too .
I believe it is extremely important for the European Parliament to promote the improvement of our environment .
In particular , I would like pensioners to be employed in the activities of waste electrical and electronic equipment collection .
They will feel less like discarded waste than they are sometimes made to feel .
.
( NL ) The PvdA [ Dutch Labour Party ] Eurodelegation would like to state the following :
1 .
The PvdA delegation warmly supports the directives on electrical and electronic waste .
The environmental objectives should be paramount in these directives .
We therefore endorse all the amendments designed to reinforce the environmental objective .
2 .
The Netherlands is one of the few countries which has experience of collecting electrical waste .
Producers must be encouraged to design with the environment in mind , but this is much broader than recycling .
In addition , producers must be individually responsible . But different makes of TV sets , hairdryers , electric toothbrushes or hand blenders hardly differ in terms of recyclability .
Individual funding is , therefore , not obviously better than collective solutions .
Collective systems have , in fact , major advantages : they are less bureaucratic and more practical .
There is no need , therefore , to reserve collective systems only for exceptional circumstances .
3 .
My final point concerns the waste disposal fee .
In our view , environmental costs should be incorporated into the price of the product - but these are more transparent if it is mentioned separately .
Moreover , visibility enhances consumer awareness .
This is of major importance , for in order to achieve the environmental goals , the cooperation of the consumer is required .
Finally , a visible waste disposal fee is significant in connection with competition laws .
Today , waste electrical and electronic equipment , such as televisions and household appliances , are disposed of without these products undergoing any specific treatment .
Almost 6 million tonnes of waste are produced every year in Europe , an average of 16 kg per capita .
Yet , these products contain toxic substances that are harmful to the environment such as lead , cadmium and mercury .
I therefore believe that it is crucial to adopt legislation which will enable us to manage this waste more efficiently and to urge manufacturers to take an active part in the collection system .
Currently , consumers assume part of the responsibility by sorting their waste , which they are asked to do . Local authorities have also taken on some responsibility by providing specific equipment .
It is logical , therefore , that manufacturers play a part in this collective effort .
It is essential that manufacturers make an effective financial contribution to the collection system for their product ( s ) .
However , we must have realistic collection objectives so that they can be applicable .
We must also exclude from this system those products which seem particularly difficult to collect , such as incandescent lamps , for example .
This text offers a perspective for preventing electrical and electronic waste and for developing systems to recover and re-use this waste .
( Explanation of vote cut short pursuant to Rule 137 ( 1 ) of the Rules of Procedure )
. ( NL ) There is a conflict of interest between the industrial world and the world outside of industry .
Consumers and the environment benefit from sustainable products whose individual components can be re-used at the end of their life cycle .
Industry , however , benefits from competitive sales prices and minimum costs afterwards .
It also benefits from passing on problems to other parties , particularly governments , which then need to organise solutions by using tax money .
Industry has tried to turn the proposals to its advantage .
I too have been approached with reasonable sounding arguments .
Environmental fanatics would only want something that is costly and impractical , and the envisaged environmental benefits could also be achieved without compulsion .
They may be right in some cases , but to admit to them that they are right would offer scope to less well-meaning competitors who , with less responsibility and therefore lower prices , would like to take the markets by storm and expand .
This is why it is useful for regulations to be put in place for recycling , for ' orphaned ' products made by companies that no longer exist and for ' historical ' waste , in the case of which the manufacturer is not certain whether it was produced before or after the directive entered into force .
Exemptions for small companies are unfair , and certainly for those that produce military equipment .
Unfortunately , the Group of the European People 's Party and European Democrats is once again using the requirement of 314 votes to get its own way .
. ( DE ) On Amendments No 15 and No 41 , the delegation of the Austrian People 's Party voted in favour of an exemption for SMEs and in favour of a collective system .
A great deal of bureaucracy is to be expected at the introductory stage .
SMEs should be able to find and choose a functioning market .
The second directive on waste electrical and electronic equipment concerns the ban on the use of certain extremely harmful substances such as lead , mercury , cadmium and hexavalent chromium in the manufacture of electric and electronic equipment .
I fully support this directive too , both on my own behalf and as representative of the Pensioners ' Party , and I am thinking not just of the citizens who could be harmed by these hazardous substances but also and above all of the workers in the companies that produce electrical and electronic equipment containing these harmful substances .
I feel that it would be good to have much fewer people retiring because of occupational diseases caused by using these harmful substances and I hope that a directive or regulation or recommendation will soon be adopted stipulating that these workers should work six rather than eight hours a day in these toxic environments .
. Mr President , I fully support the move to make producers and consumers of electrical goods more environmentally responsible .
By compelling producers to participate in take-back schemes , this directive will be hard-hitting and effective .
Indeed , disposing of electronic waste has yet to be dealt with effectively and shifting the onus onto the producer may well prove to be an effective solution .
However , to ensure that manufacturers adhere to this directive and that it is successfully implemented , account must be taken of the peculiarity of some manufactured goods .
It should not end up being the case that some producers bear an unfair share of the financial burden that this directive implies .
The directive is also right to mention the role that consumers must also play in disposing of electrical waste .
Lastly , since some Member States are clear laggards when disposing of electrical waste , it is vital that there is ample provision of information about the new rules .
Mr President , I should like to explain my vote on the issue of the use of the official languages of the European Union in the European Patent Office .
I defend unequivocally the right of all the official languages of the Community to be used in all circumstances , particularly since in the near future there might be a tendency to renounce this principle , in light of the increase from 11 to 22 or more official languages when enlargement to include further states takes place .
I also believe that if a European Union language is to be considered the most appropriate as a working language , its universal dimension should not be forgotten .
By this token , I should like to remind you that the Portuguese language - including Brazilian and Galician Portuguese - is the third universal language of the European Union , following only English and Spanish .
This must be taken into account where patents and indeed any other issues are concerned .
We Swedish Social Democrats voted against Amendment No 2 which is about increasing the number of translations of patents .
Our reason for doing so is that we wish to keep down the costs of patent applications , and we therefore advocate a solution in terms of just one or two languages .
Amendments Nos 3 and 9-17 propose that straightforward national courts should function as first instance courts for Community patent litigation .
We believe that this would militate against the principle of a uniform Community patent .
Our view is that the first instance court to be set up by virtue of Article 225a should have regional or local chambers .
In that way , continued access to local expertise within the patent sphere is guaranteed in all Member States .
It also means that the parties are closer to the court .
Parliament 's vote on the Council regulation on the Community patent draws a definitive line under 18 months of work necessary in order for Parliament to adopt a position which a broad majority of Members supported today .
Along with the majority of Members , I felt that the proposed regulation aimed to ensure we combined three elements : efficiency , lowest economic cost and linguistic diversity .
The latter cannot be extended ad infinitum and it is good that Parliament realises this .
We will , in future , be forced to make other , even more painful decisions .
Despite the fact that I am convinced of the need for a Community patent , I voted against Mrs Palacio Vallelersundi 's report and the final resolution on the Community patent as I believe the conditions governing its implementation are unacceptable .
Since the fundamental aspects of this regulation relate to the linguistic arrangements , legal certainty and the role of the national offices do not meet the expectations of users .
In these conditions , the Community patent would not be profitable and there is a risk that those within the profession would not use it .
My group has voted against the opinion on the Community patent because the ELDR proposals have been rejected on three fundamental counts .
We need an affordable and uniform European patent system for the European market .
The discussion surrounding the language regime has illustrated the fact that , unfortunately , political sentiments have carried more weight than practical arguments .
Translation costs push up the price of the patent disproportionately , so that it will become too costly for European industry , the ultimate users .
That is why my group is in favour of a limited language regime and cannot endorse the ' Alicante ' regime of five languages ( Amendments Nos 31 and 32 ) .
In addition , a uniform application of the regulation is of major significance .
That is why my group has proposed that disputes surrounding the Community patent should fall within the central jurisdiction of the Community Intellectual Property Court , with the possibility of appeal to the Court of Justice ( Amendments Nos 26 and 29 ) .
Finally , together with my fellow liberal MEPs , I prefer to create our own Community patent system instead of adopting the Munich Convention .
A Community patent system would fall automatically within the structures of the EU .
This means democratic control by the European Parliament and the authority of the Court of Justice in the last resort ( Amendments Nos 23 and 24 ) .
I did not vote in favour of the Community patent .
As a fervent supporter of Europe , I had wanted to be able to vote in favour but I was prevented from doing so by the linguistic discrimination included in this draft text .
Respect for cultural and linguistic diversity is now one of the fundamental principles of Community law .
In law and in fact , this principle is not respected in this text or in the institutions of the Union in general .
This principle presupposes the equality in law of all languages .
I have no doubt that we need to make the technical adjustment to this equality , but this adjustment must not contradict the principle .
As a Catalan , I cannot accept the fact that my language does not enjoy the same rights as those that are currently the official EU languages .
The existence of patents prevents the unhindered utilisation of every invention which appears to have been devised before .
On the one hand , it is beneficial for intellectual property to be protected from profiteers who want to make a quick profit using what has cost others years of effort .
On the other hand , patents mean that countries in the developing world are not allowed to produce any medicines themselves to control common tropical diseases and that genetically manipulated plants or animals are introduced onto the market on which inventors ' heirs can raise some kind of tax .
Countries with a technological and economic disadvantage can most effectively overcome this disadvantage by ignoring the existence of patent rights .
In addition to national patent schemes , the pursuit of a world patent and the existence of a European Patent Bureau which is not subordinate to the EU , there has been talk of a Community patent , which is still controversial within the European Council , for the past 40 years .
And , in the final analysis , this proposal only pertains to the languages to be used , with English , French , German , Spanish and Italian being granted a privileged position compared to other official language of the current and future EU Member States .
So also in relation to 22 million Dutch speakers and , soon , 40 million Poles .
This proposal is thus in all respects not ready for any decision to be taken on it , as a result of which I shall be voting against .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I voted today against giving discharge to the Commission in respect of its management of the 2000 Budget .
My decision to do so was determined by the following considerations : EUR 11.6 billion , that is 14 % of the overall Budget , have not been paid out .
I take that as a clear indicator of the Commission 's mismanagement , and also as a trend , as the figures show an increase over 1999 .
The 20 % of the resources that have not been used in a regular manner is equal to double the previous year 's figures .
The Court of Auditors has , for the seventh time in succession , refused to issue a statement of assurance .
New charges in the so-called van Buitenen report have been known to the Commission since August 2000 , but no work has been done on them , and they have not been laid before Parliament , thus blocking my report on the Leonardo programme .
In the plenary debate yesterday , Mrs Schreyer , the Commissioner responsible , showed no capacity whatever for grasping the Commission 's shortcomings , preferring to shift responsibility for any irregular outflow of resources onto the Member States , something with which we are abundantly familiar .
The Treaty establishing the European Community , however , speaks of the clear responsibility of the Commission .
Mr Kinnock , the Commissioner responsible for internal reform , does , admittedly talk a lot about reform , but , as the Court of Auditors has established , the reform process can as yet point to no measurable progress .
The Commission under President Prodi is , for the first time , attesting on its sole responsibility to the management of the 2000 Budget .
It can no longer pray in aid of the misdemeanours of its predecessors .
I have therefore , as in the two preceding years , voted against the discharge resolution .
Mr President , how could I not vote for the discharge in respect of the implementation of the European Development Funds ?
It is to the European Union 's great credit that it is using the money - and a proper explanation has been given of how it is used - to provide communities in developing countries with practical aid .
I would , however , like to ask you , Mr President , whether you know how many pensioners there are at the moment who would like to go and work free of charge in these developing countries , to continue to feel useful through helping people who , through no fault of their own , live in countries so very distant from our own not just geographically but in terms of their standard of living too ?
I am sure that you , like myself , hope that many more pensioners will be used to provide practical aid to developing countries .
Mr President , this report - which I voted for - is on the subject of the European Coal and Steel Community .
I discussed the matter with a miner from the town of Gorno in the province of Bergamo , where I have lived for a long time , and he asked me why I was coming to Strasbourg today .
So I told him about this financial report by Mr Seppänen , and he asked me to tell the House - which , as always when I deliver my explanations of vote , is present in large numbers - that we must make sure we take greater care of those who work in the pits , as he does in Gorno , mining coal for example , so that they will live longer and be less afflicted by illness during their working lives .
I therefore hope that provision for this will be made in the ECSC budget too .
Mr President , my group has abstained in today 's vote on the discharge for the Parliamentary budget .
This was essentially for the following reasons : we share with the drafters of the reports and of the amendments the view that clarity , transparency and regularity must prevail or be created , specifically when the position and responsibility of the groups in Parliament are at issue .
We do believe , though , that this cannot be done within the scope of a single discharge resolution , but that it calls for in-depth discussion and negotiations .
The same is true of the legal status of the assistants and the protection afforded them .
Mr President , Mr Virrankoski has given us a breakdown of how the European citizens ' money has been spent on running Parliament .
I voted for the motion but I would like to point out that , one day , a vice-president addressed me as I was delivering my explanations of vote and said : ' Are you not aware , Mr Fatuzzo , how much each second of your explanations of vote costs ? '
At first I felt a bit guilty , but I would like to point out on this occasion how much the European Parliament saves every second when I do not speak , how much the European Parliament saves when I keep to the time limit , as I am doing now , and finish my explanation of vote within the sixty seconds allowed !
We approved the Virrankoski report on the implementation of the European Parliament 's budget for the 2000 financial year , as it makes a concerted effort to clarify the spending of the political groups .
As regards the assistants , we voted in favour of the amendment tabled by the rapporteur himself , which takes up our traditional position , calling on the European Parliament to assume direct responsibility for their administration . This means that MEPs will only be responsible for hiring and firing , and the right to determine their salary ( within the limit of the allowance available , obviously ) .
This approach will enable us to avoid many problems .
As far as Members ' salaries are concerned , we once again request that the main parliamentary allowance continues to be paid by the country in which the Member was elected , a request that runs counter to current plans to see this salary paid out of the Community budget .
It is a question of principle : Members must be paid by the people that they represent .
On the issue of allowances that are representative of expenses , we believed that it would be clearer to split them up into two groups , the first would be an exact representation of spending and the second would be a variable revenue according to the number of days that the Member attended Parliament .
The Member 's salary would then be made up of a fixed amount , from the national government , which would be subject to national tax , and a variable amount , drawn from the European Parliament 's budget and subject to Community tax .
( Explanation of vote cut short pursuant to Rule 137 ( 1 ) of the Rules of Procedure )
Having granted discharge to the Commission and to itself for the implementation of the budget for the 2000 financial year , the European Parliament has just referred back to committee the report on the Council 's discharge .
This represents a break with the traditional gentlemen 's agreement , whereby the Council turns a blind eye to Parliament 's budget - even when Parliament introduced federalist elements into the documents by including , for example , a heading for the funding of European political parties - and Parliament , in return , hardly looked at the Council budget - which , in any case , seems more natural , given that the Council has superior powers within the Union .
Today , the European Parliament is reneging on this agreement with a vengeance .
The official reason given is that the Council did not provide the Committee on Budgetary Control with sufficiently detailed explanations regarding the use of funds granted to the common foreign and security policy .
This is merely a pretext , however .
The Council has sole responsibility for the CFSP .
In reality , the European Parliament has convinced itself , over recent years , that it holds the greatest legitimacy in the Union , and it is pointing this out to the Council .
The Council must wake up and take this matter onboard since the Convention which is going to discuss the future of the Union is about to begin .
( Explanation of vote cut short pursuant to Rule 137 ( 1 ) of the Rules of Procedure )
Mr President , before I give my explanation of vote I would like to congratulate you on your handling of the vote on the Middle East resolution .
It was quite clear from the result that the majority in this House wanted that resolution passed today and it would have been an absolute tragedy if it had been deliberately scuppered .
I am very pleased with that .
Our group voted against the arms industry resolution because using more funds and resources to promote the arms industry in Europe goes against what the European Union should be about .
We do not need more arms in this world - we need less .
It is quite clear this is all driven by profit .
We are particularly concerned about depleted uranium because depleted uranium is a small-scale nuclear weapon .
It is very alarming that this Parliament , and indeed the EU institutions as a whole , have very little concern about the use of depleted uranium .
If we look at what has happened in Iraq , and even in Afghanistan , we can see that people still suffer as a result of the use of this weapon long after wars are over .
But it is easy to see that the arms industry as a whole is pushing the policy .
Apparently the Western European Union Assembly wants to be able to contribute to the Convention on Europe to ensure that the arms industry is boosted so that it can compete with places such as the United States .
When we look at the conflicts around the world we must realise that the production and sale of arms is one of the major factors contributing to global insecurity .
We should be helping communities and civilisation by putting resources into education , health and other important areas where money is needed , instead of using resources to boost the arms industry .
It is an absolute tragedy that the European Union is moving in this direction .
Mr President , pensioners and elderly people fought in the last war and their wives and daughters suffered the consequences of this .
They therefore remember well how horrible it is to be at war , and that is why they have had enough of soldiers and weapons .
However , they also know how important and necessary it is to have defence weapons and they hope - and are expressing this desire to Parliament through myself - that the European Union will have a defence army , a defence air force and a defence navy which are well-organised , well-equipped and capable of making people realise , not just in Europe but in places where there is conflict and war too , how important it is that there should be a European Union in the world with military equipment that gives it a genuine defence capacity .
The European Parliamentary Labour Party voted for this resolution , despite its opposition both to paragraph 8 and to the amendments to it .
We endorse the strong commitment of the British government to the evolution of the ESDP and to maintaining the integrity of NATO .
The Brok resolution is a good outline of the issues surrounding the ESDP .
Its merits are spoilt , however , by paragraph 8 .
Without an agreement on the use of NATO assets , there will be no ESDP .
We should welcome therefore all efforts to resolve this difficult issue , not criticise them .
This only undermines the credibility of Parliament .
The UK government has acted at all times in accordance with the wishes of the Council .
The agreement with Turkey was also endorsed by the Council and opens the way for making the ESDP a reality .
I speak in my capacity as Secretary of the SOS Democracy Group to explain our opposition to the two resolutions on defence on which the Chamber has just voted .
There is a range of views in this House about the military needs of the continent .
However one thing that ought to be uncontroversial is that the defence of Europe should be primarily governed by strategic rather than political considerations .
Yet this is the opposite of what is proposed in these resolutions .
The ESDP , and specifically the Rapid Reaction Force , does not extend Europe 's defence capability by one more soldier or one more bullet .
All it does is to transfer the line of command away from NATO in the national capitals towards the EU 's new politico-military structures .
At best this is a pointless and expensive exercise in duplication , at worst it leaves Europe weaker by cutting its links with the one NATO partner able to supply air- and sea-lift capability , advanced communication satellites and accurate missiles .
Again and again European defence ministers , including British ones , have been prepared to disregard the advice of their own generals in order to pursue joint European projects .
Perhaps the supreme example of this thinking is the Eurofighter , an aeroplane which is becoming operative years late , billions of euros over budget , and which is effectively already obsolete .
After all , in an age in which we are increasingly having to act out of area , what we surely need is an aircraft capable of operating from rough local airfields with low technological requirements for spare parts , capable of buddy refuelling and with a long loiter time .
What we are instead getting is a plane conceived in the early 1980s as a way to defend the skies of central Europe against a massed attack by Russian MiGs .
These two resolutions have nothing to do with making Europe more secure and everything to do with making it more integrated as an end in itself .
Hence our opposition .
The European Parliament has again adopted a resolution on European security and defence policy ( ESDP ) , despite the fact that the Treaties do not even mention the name of this policy .
Nevertheless , Parliament continues in its tiring attempts to bring about the creation of this policy in conditions that it set itself and which make its work virtually impossible .
We therefore have no sympathy for Parliament for the difficulties that it is experiencing .
The first obstacle appears as early as Recital A of the adopted resolution , which states that the so-called ESDP must lend ' credibility to a coherent common foreign and security policy ( CFSP ) ' which must serve ' the global interest and universal values , as these have been expressed in the Charter of the United Nations ' .
There is no mention of the interests of Europe or its Member States .
How can we expect people to take an interest in a policy which itself declares that it does not protect their interests ?
My second point , which was illustrated so well by my colleague Mr Souchet in yesterday 's debate , is that we cannot draft a common policy in conjunction with countries that have different , even conflicting , visions of this policy .
We must therefore break free from the rigid framework of the Community institutions and put variable geometry into direct action .
( Explanation of vote cut short pursuant to Rule 137 ( 1 ) of the Rules of Procedure )
. ( PT ) In order to ensure lasting peace and international security , it is necessary and clearly feasible to move from a security programme determined by military considerations to a system of civil security that targets the economic , social , ecological , ethnic and cultural causes of conflicts , and to adopt a preventive approach to neutralise and deal with the causes of predictable and acute situations of conflict in Europe and throughout the world .
This is not , however , the approach that the European Union has adopted in its current security policy .
Instead , it has maintained a position of taking a very close lead from the United States of America which , in turn , is using the threat of terrorism and the efforts to fight it to develop a unilateral policy and to strengthen its position in the world . Examples of this are the recent statements by President Bush on the ' axis of evil ' , which appear to herald new military operations in other parts of the world .
As stated in the motion for a resolution tabled by the Confederal Group of the European United Left , but which was not , unfortunately , voted for , it is now time to radically change the status quo , specifically by disbanding NATO and the WEU , by insisting on the development and the strengthening of the OSCE and by providing ourselves with the appropriate material and financial resources . These are clearly ideas that the majority of the European Parliament does not support .
Hence our vote against the motion for a resolution tabled by the Committee on Foreign Affairs , Human Rights , Common Security and Defence Policy .
I welcome active participation by the EU in crisis management , together with cooperation within the defence industry .
On a number of points , I do not however share the rapporteur 's view .
There are clauses concerning the CFSP and cooperation with NATO that are all too far-reaching .
The EU does not have the same basic objective as NATO , and I am therefore , for example , opposed to drawing up a White Paper on security in cooperation with NATO .
Furthermore , I am opposed to the creation of a European munitions institute .
There is already practical cooperation in the purchase of military equipment , and I do not believe that the creation of a European institute would contribute any added value .
. The British Conservative delegation voted against the Brok report on ESDP for the following reasons .
It regards ESDP as a fundamentally flawed concept , driven by the divisive and mistaken desire to provide the European Union with an autonomous military capability as an aspect of its political ambition to create a European state .
NATO should be the military security organisation of first resort not only for collective defence , but also for the full range of military crisis response operations .
Only in this way is the transatlantic security link properly guaranteed .
Adequate arrangements for the development of a European Security and Defence identity within NATO were agreed at Washington in 1999 and subsequently .
These enable all European allies to make a coherent and effective contribution to the Alliance and to act by themselves as agreed and required .
ESDP is a serious deviation from this concept .
Furthermore , there is no indication of any serious resolve on the part of EU Member States to increase defence expenditure or enhance their military capabilities in any significant manner .
We do not consider that meeting the requirements of the ERRF should be the " absolute priority " for defence procurement .
Instead , the priority should be to maximise the operational effectiveness of our own armed forces in the context of the full range of threats we now confront .
Defence procurement and defence budgets are essentially matters of national concern and should not become a Community responsibility .
The development of European defence industries should not be motivated by the desire " to compete with US industry " but by the need to provide our armed forces with the best possible equipment and to meet national security and industrial requirements .
This may involve partnerships with the US , as well as European and other companies .
I welcome active participation by the EU in crisis management , together with cooperation within the defence industry .
On a number of points , I do not however share the rapporteur 's view .
There are clauses concerning the CFSP and cooperation with NATO that are all too far-reaching .
The EU does not have the same basic objective as NATO , and I am therefore , for example , opposed to drawing up a White Paper on security in cooperation with NATO .
Furthermore , I am opposed to the creation of a European munitions institute .
There is already practical cooperation in the purchase of military equipment , and I do not believe that the creation of a European institute would contribute any added value .
Mr President , Mr De Clercq and myself have voted against the proposal because we did not think it was appropriate to be voting on the Middle East today .
We have also voted against out of protest against the weak stance adopted by the European institutions on foreign policy in general and in the crisis situation in the Middle East in particular .
Against this backdrop , to level criticism at the United States and its attitude smacks of arrogance .
Finally , I regret the prejudice displayed by a majority of MEPs with regard to the situation in the Middle East which means , inter alia , that the fight against terrorism cannot be maintained adequately .
Both as representative of the Pensioners ' Party and on my own behalf , I have been wondering why it is that we can combat terrorism after the massacre in New York by pursuing Afghan terrorists but we cannot do the same thing in the Middle East , in Israel , where the Palestinian suicide bombs have done just as much damage much more often ?
As representative of the Pensioners ' Party and on my own behalf , I wondered why it is that , if Yasser Arafat does not have the authority to stop the terrorists , he does not resign as President of the Palestinian Authority .
Lastly , why do we not speed up Israel 's application to join the European Union ?
I therefore voted against the resolution .
Mr President , I rise to speak on the subject of the Middle East so that I can dissociate myself from the motion for a resolution tabled by my group and the voting stance it adopted on the issue .
Having consistently criticised the United States for its one-sided approach which meant that it was exacerbating the situation by becoming part of the problem instead of part of the solution , I regret that the PPE-DE Group is putting itself in a similar position .
The failure of the PPE-DE resolution unequivocally to condemn the illegal activity of members of the Israeli defence forces and demand their prosecution is morally and politically indefensible .
Terrorism occurs not only when people engage in suicide bombing , but also when members of the security forces operate outside the law .
We must be consistent in our approach to terrorism .
Although I agree with the demand that the Palestinian Authority make every effort to prevent terrorist acts , the question has to be asked how can they act when their political , security and civil infrastructures are being destroyed in an incessant military campaign which has claimed many innocent lives ?
Furthermore , how can Yasser Arafat exert any authority when he is humiliated in this way by Ariel Sharon ?
A failure on our part to face political realities honestly and objectively undermines our ability to exert influence in bringing this bloody and terrible conflict to an end .
. ( EL ) After the humiliation suffered by the EU Council of Ministers over the last few days , culminating in the recent visit by Mr Solana and the Spanish Foreign Minister , Mr Pique , to Israel , the European Parliament has decided to defend the international role of the European Union by adopting a series of direct , clear , reasonable and realistic proposals to stop Israeli violence in Palestine and find a fundamental , long-term solution to the Palestinian problem .
The Council of Ministers should immediately adopt and promote these measures , as contained in the European Parliament 's proposal . They are as follows :


· to apply UN Security Council resolutions 1397 , 1402 and 1403 on the withdrawal of the Israeli army from Palestinian territory , including Ramallah ;
· to grant freedom of movement to and lift the house arrest on the President of the National Palestinian Authority , Yasser Arafat ;
· to support the Arab League proposal that an independent Palestinian State be declared and recognised by Israel ;
· to send an international peace-keeping force and observers to the area under the aegis of the United Nations ;
· to impose an arms embargo on the warring parties ;
· to suspend the EU-Israeli Euro-Mediterranean Association Agreement ;
· to demand that Israel guarantee EU media , diplomats and ambassadors free access to the occupied territory and undivided support for Israelis and Palestinians and the international organisations working for peace at all levels , including Israeli reserve forces refusing to serve in the occupied territories .
In my view , the European Parliament 's debate on the situation in the Middle East lacked objectivity , did not take a step back from events and was extremely biased against Israel .
I therefore refused to support the resolution tabled at the outcome of the debate , as this resolution also failed to be impartial .
In recent days , the Israelis have , admittedly , taken very harsh measures , but these have been in response to an extremely tense situation that has arisen as a result of cruel , indefensible acts of terrorism , which the Palestinian Authority has still not condemned in a clear and firm manner .
The underlying cause of this extreme situation is the failure to fully apply Resolution 181 , adopted by the United Nations General Assembly on 29 November 1947 , which provided for the creation of two states , one Jewish and the other Palestinian .
However , the second state has not been established , firstly because of the aggression of Arab states towards Israel and secondly , because these same states want the Palestinian people to continue to be disillusioned and resentful .
That is why we must revisit Resolution 181 , which provides for two states , both of them secure and recognised , in order to restore a fair and lasting peace in the Middle East .
Furthermore , the holy city of Jerusalem should be granted international status , and its governors should involve representatives of the various religions .
The draft resolution is unbalanced and does not say what the European public wishes to hear .
First of all , the resolution should state that the people are paying a high price for the folly of their governments , since the latest uprising was caused by General Sharon 's stroll - which was for purely electoral purposes - in the gardens of Dome of the Rock in Jerusalem . It should state that we are increasingly finding out what a fraudster Mr Arafat is ; a fraudster who is playing a double game , a warlord who encourages , organises and pays the terrorists while pretending to condemn them ;
Second , the resolution should state that we have twice come excruciatingly close to peace , first with Mr Rabin , who , sadly , was assassinated following a hate campaign by the Israeli right , then with Mr Barak , whose offers of peace were rejected by Mr Arafat with the consequences we are seeing today ;
Third , it should state that peace will not come out of suicide terrorism or state terrorism , and that where there were 20 or 25 candidates for suicide , there are now 200 or 250 if not more , as demonstrated by today 's attack ;
Fourth , it should state that Israel , which owes its existence to international law , cannot behave as if this law did not exist , nor can it ignore the Security Council resolutions .
I am not in favour of suspending the Association Agreement with Israel .
Europe has a moral duty towards Israel and cannot forget the responsibilities it has inherited from history .
I condemn the policy of the Sharon Government as well as the suicide attacks .
There is no military solution to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict .
We must follow the way prepared by Itzhak Rabin and Yasser Arafat , the way of negotiation and peace .
Europe must make its voice heard and exert more influence in the Middle East .
We complain that the United States is the only country that can do this .
That is because they are present in Israel and are guarantors of its security .
If Europe wants to contribute to the triumph of peace , if it wants a peacekeeping force under the aegis of the United Nations to see the light of day and help to ensure compliance with a peace agreement and the Security Council resolutions , it must be more present , not less present , among the Palestinians and Israelis .
Breaking the Association Agreement will not help Europe to play its part and become the key negotiator it would like to be .
The path towards peace is narrow and Europe 's role in this region is equally restricted .
Europe , however faltering it may be , must be of some use .
At its Strasbourg session , the European Parliament debated with unprecedented intensity in an attempt to achieve this .
It adopted a resolution that goes beyond mere good intentions , vigorously condemning indiscriminate suicide attacks and calling for an embargo on arms supplies to both Israel and Palestine , for a United Nations international peacekeeping force to be sent , for the convocation of the EU-Israel Association Council to be convened and the possibility of suspending the EU-Israel Euro-Mediterranean Agreement to be examined .
Europe is weak : it has no common foreign policy and no military capacity .
However , Europe is growing and starting to understand that it must speak with a single voice and try to influence the various players , beginning with the most powerful , the United States .
It is too early to say whether President Bush will choose double-dealing or inconsistency .
What we can say , however , is that he has chosen , in the end , to distance himself from Mr Sharon .
According to the Wall Street Journal of 5 April , this is because he has bowed to pressure from Europe , the Arab world and most of the media .
In Le Monde of 9 April , Patrick Jarreau adds that each of the three protagonists has , in effect , played a decisive role .
( Explanation of vote cut short pursuant to Rule 137 ( 1 ) of the Rules of Procedure )
.
( DE ) The resolution adopted by Parliament today is a step in the right direction , and we emphatically welcome it , for there is no reasonable alternative to a political solution , and the Sharon Government 's present bellicose response to the terrorist attacks by Palestinian fanatics , which are contemptuous of human life , is no longer acceptable .
As the resolution expressly states , Israel 's military escalation offends against international law and human rights .
In no way does it contribute to ending the terror , but is , rather , directed against the Palestinian civilian population and is destroying the Palestinian infrastructure .
We emphatically endorse Parliament 's call for the immediate implementation of the UN Security Council resolutions 1397 , 1402 and 1403 , and especially for the immediate withdrawal of the Israeli army from Palestinian territory as well as for the condemnation of the attacks against Israel by suicidal terrorists .
To place Arafat , a democratically elected president , under house arrest is wholly unacceptable .
We firmly welcome Parliament 's expression of support for an arms embargo on Palestine and Israel , as well as its call for the Council and the Commission to consider suspending the Association Agreement between Israel and the European Union .
It is , moreover , significant that Parliament is demanding free access for the media to the occupied territories and expressing its full support for Israeli , Palestinian and international organisations that are actively working for the restoration of peace in the Middle East .
We unreservedly support the condemnation in Parliament 's resolution of the many anti-Semitic attacks in Europe on synagogues , Jewish schools and cemeteries .
Explanation of vote cut short pursuant to Rule 137 of the Rules of Procedure .
. ( PT ) Today 's vote on the Resolution on the Middle East , which is supported by the majority of the political groups , with the exception of the PPE-DE , represents a major step in condemning the out and out war declared unilaterally by the Israeli Government and by Prime Minister Ariel Sharon against the Palestinian people and President Arafat in the Palestinian territories , which has already resulted in hundreds of deaths , a huge number of wounded and immense humanitarian problems and material damage , with the destruction of homes and of basic infrastructures .
As many speakers stated in yesterday 's debate , the actions of the US Administration have also been harshly criticised , because of its responsibility for the way in which the situation in the region has developed .
Equally important are the measures that have been put forward , specifically : the request to suspend the Association Agreement with Israel , an arms embargo and the possibility of sending a peacekeeping and monitoring force to the region under the auspices of the UN , with the aim of securing peace , an end to Israeli aggression and its withdrawal from the occupied territories . We must also demand guarantees for the free access of the media and humanitarian organisations to the Palestinian territories and we must support the struggle of the Israeli reservists .
The draft resolution is right to condemn the destruction of the Palestinian infrastructure , to call for an arms boycott and to keep the option to suspend the Association Agreement between Israel and the EU open .
For these reasons , and because a proportion of the Right who still do not grasp the full extent of the problem are voting against , I will be voting in favour .
The Right still sees Israel as an outpost of Europe and America in the heart of the Arab region and as a military base near the major oil wells and the strategically important Suez Canal .
This is precisely what inflames the surrounding Arab peoples .
Israel 's best chance of survival is to have open traffic connections with the surrounding area , to utilise Israeli expertise in the neighbouring countries and even to apply for membership of the Arab League .
The current Israeli Government is employing the fear of attacks as a means of pressing home its minority view .
It does not want to protect the safety of Israeli citizens as a priority . Above all , it wants to thwart the Palestinian regions in their economic development by destroying buildings , roads , the port and the airport .
The objective of such a policy , defended by an aggressive Right since time immemorial , can be nothing but a permanent colonisation of Gaza and the West Bank , with hardliners flown in straight from the US involved in Jewish settlements .
In this way , the Israeli Government puts the future of its own state at risk .
Vladimir Putin is being received today with great ceremony by Gerhard Schröder .
They will be talking about increasing economic cooperation between Russia and Germany .
One hundred thousand people have died in Chechnya and Grozny has been razed to the ground .
This is genocide .
In addition , today , our Parliament is threatening trade sanctions against the State of Israel !
While at the same time the European Union is negotiating agreements with Syria and Iran , which , as we all know , are champions of the democratic values we hold so dear !
Stop this hypocrisy ! Sanctions , threats , condemnation and formal demands for Israel but indulgence and a blind eye for the actions of the Palestinians .
Where is the unequivocal condemnation of an education system which glorifies shahid [ martyrdom ] and teaches a whole generation hatred and murder ?
Where do we mention , where do we condemn the financial support provided by Iraq , in particular , to suicide bombers and their families ?
There is not even a fleeting reference to the hundreds of weapons discovered at President Arafat 's headquarters .
We condemn the Israeli army for firing on an ambulance transporting a child , because they believed that the child was hiding a belt of explosives .
Children being used by the Palestinian militia , children carrying guns - there is nothing new about that .
I do not approve of the policy of the Sharon Government , I do not think that this military escalation will bring about peace . I call from the bottom of my heart for a return to the negotiating table .
( Explanation of vote cut short pursuant to Rule 137 ( 1 ) of the Rules of Procedure )
We are all deeply affected by the bloody events in the Middle East , following which hopes of peace are fading .
We cannot remain indifferent in the face of attacks that terrify the children of Israel , and we cannot remain indifferent towards the suffering of the Palestinian people , a people that has been oppressed and humiliated .
When Mr Rabin was assassinated , Mr Netanyahu established further colonies , and hopes of peace grew fainter .
When peace was given a second chance thanks to Camp David , let us not forget that Mr Barak made more concessions than ever , but Mr Arafat did not accept the extended hand of peace .
As Europeans , we cannot stand and watch this tragedy unfold , nor accept the insulting treatment to which the European Union delegation was subjected .
It is clear that the attitude of the Israeli Government marks a turning point in relations between Israel and the European Union .
Nevertheless , we must not abandon the Israeli people .
The aim of the draft compromise resolution submitted at the plenary session of the European Parliament is to examine the possibility of suspending the EU-Israel Association Agreement in the future , but I would emphasise that penalising the Israeli people may not be the best way to get through to the person we want to influence , namely Ariel Sharon .
( Explanation of vote cut short pursuant to Rule 137 ( 1 ) of the Rules of Procedure )
I have voted in favour of the motion for a resolution tabled by the Christian Democrats that form the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats .
In the final vote , I voted against the joint motion tabled by the Group of the Party of European Socialists , the Group of the European Liberal , Democrat and Reform Party , the Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance and the Confederal Group of the European United Left / Nordic Green Left . This was adopted by 269 votes to 208 , with 22 abstentions .
The fact that the resolution was adopted by so slight a margin makes it politically weak .
The truth is the only way to real peace , reconciliation and co-existence .
The resolution adopted chooses to criticise the State of Israel twelve times , but the Palestinians and the Palestinian Authority only three times .
Neither Hamas nor Islamic Jihad - organisations labelled jointly by the United States and the EU as terrorist - is mentioned or criticised in the resolution , and nor are the Hezbollah group and the al-Aqsa Brigade , designated by the United States as terrorists .
In the adopted resolution , the European Parliament instead threatens suspension of the Association Agreement by the EU ( paragraph 8 ) .
Reference is made to the fact that , at the border with Lebanon , there are clashes which could spill over to the whole region ( paragraph 2 ) , without its being stated that Hezbollah , which is supported by Iran and Syria , is launching rocket attacks against Israeli cities .
The resolution encourages desertion in the Israeli army .
The PPE-DE Group 's motion for a resolution was an important attempt to make the European Parliament and the EU significantly more relevant in relation to both Israel and the Palestinians by giving the most serious attention to the anxieties and suffering of both parties rather than of , mainly , just the one .
By adopting a resolution that is both unbalanced and irresponsible on the subject of Israel and Palestine , the European Parliament has once again discredited itself and provided proof , if this were necessary , of its inability to debate sensitive international issues in a serious , level-headed and effective manner .
The debate that our Assembly devoted to the events in the Middle East yesterday , including Commissioner Patten 's contribution , was marked by a failure to put current events into perspective , the obvious imbalance in the positions taken and the absence of concern for the long term .
Europeans cannot complain that they effectively carry no weight and are playing no part in the search for diplomatic solutions to the Middle East crisis , that their representatives are rebuffed , when they are doing all they can , at least as far as the European Parliament is concerned , to take a partisan position , allowing themselves to be guided solely by passion and emotion .
Do we seriously believe that recommending the suspension of the Association Agreement with Israel will help Europe contribute to an effective quest for peace ?
Should we turn an indulgent blind eye to the abuse of the Church of the Nativity in Bethlehem by armed partisans , or show that this type of abuse makes the need for international protection of Holy Places even more topical ?
( Explanation of vote cut short pursuant to Rule 137 ( 1 ) of the Rules of Procedure )
I have just come back from Palestine , with mixed feelings of anger and horror at the violence committed by the Israeli army in the towns declared military security zones : there has been a curfew for over a week , power and water cuts , the wounded refused treatment , countless humiliations , the list goes on .
The population has been taken hostage and is being increasingly ill treated - there are rumours of massacres at Jenin and Nablus - and the people are isolated , following the refusal by the Israeli army to authorise the presence of witnesses , journalists or internationalists .
We must act quickly .
We know that the people of the region will never know peace unless the Palestinians receive justice and their right to a state , with East Jerusalem as its capital , is recognised .
This means a complete withdrawal from the occupied territories , dismantling the settlements , and allowing refugees to return home .
A force should be able to intervene to protect the Palestinian people and ensure immediate compliance with the UN resolutions .
This was the message of numerous demonstrations of support for the Palestinian people all over the world , in which we participated .
I voted for the proposed resolution as it aims to break Europe 's silence of complicity , in particular by demanding the suspension of the EU-Israel Association Agreement .
This resolution is neither fair nor useful , yet Europe could make an important contribution - it does have the means to be credible .
To do so , it would have to continue to support the genuine development of the Palestinian territories , and of the Palestinian State in the future , laying down respect for fundamental rights as an absolute condition for its assistance .
There is no reason not to be fair .
We need a lot of pride to sanction Israel , its people , its civilian army and its democratic vitality , and although collective responsibility makes sense , I am not sure that our history or our recent past really qualify us to make such judgments .
When we ourselves were faced with similar difficulties , we did not react any better .
Can Italy , following police violence in Genoa , or Sweden , after police violence in Gothenburg , give Israel appropriate lessons in maintaining public order ?
Can France , whose troops camped outside Srebrenitza during the massacres ?
Can Spain , which as we know suppressed Basque terrorists , or England , which censored information during the Falklands war , teach Israel lessons in transparency ?
Rather than rushing to condemn Israel again ?
( Explanation of vote cut short pursuant to Rule 137 ( 1 ) of the Rules of Procedure )
Last Saturday , Mr President , I was a guest at the Transnational Radical Party Congress in Geneva .
While I was there , I listened very carefully to the Chechen Foreign Minister , Ilyas Akhmadov , who , like myself was a guest at the Congress too .
I was already aware of the tragedy taking place in Chechnya and the suffering of the Chechen people , so many thousands of whom have died , but the Foreign Minister 's speech further convinced me how important it is to remember all the people who cannot obtain independence through self-determination and who suffer such severe violations of rights .
I therefore congratulate the European Parliament on adopting the resolution .
At the risk of upsetting the harmonious unanimity in this Assembly , which , in any case , seems rather artificial to me , I would like to make two comments in relation to this debate .
First , I see that , once again , the European Union , in general , and this Parliament , in particular , are getting involved in other countries ' business .
As far as I am aware , the Russian Federation is not a member of the European Union .
So on what grounds , then , are we interfering in the domestic affairs of this sovereign state ?
The situation in Chechnya is certainly tragic .
However , war is always deplorable , in particular when it is started by seditionaries against the legitimate authority of a state .
Whatever upholders of humanitarian interventionism say , the operations carried out by the Russian forces in Chechen territory , and let us not forget that Chechnya is an integral part of the Russian Federation , are conducted by a regular army , under the authority of a democratically-elected president , and therefore concern the simple maintenance of law and order .
Unless Parliament wants to stand as a moralising policeman giving lessons to the whole world , it does not have the least authority to judge the behaviour of the Russian forces in Chechnya .
I have said this before and I repeat , today this Assembly is meddling in matters that do not concern it .
( Explanation of vote cut short pursuant to Rule 137 ( 1 ) of the Rules of Procedure )
Since September 11 2001 , in the name of the fight against ' terrorism ' , the Russian Government has stepped up its attack on the Chechen people .
A whole nation is thus being harassed and criminalised and the EU has shown no sign of condemning this .
The considerable importance of Russia on the world stage , the presence of oil and gas in the Caucasus and the fact that several oil pipelines pass through this area are perhaps the main reasons for the silence of the major powers with regard to Russia 's policy in Chechnya .
The Russian Government has offered to allow the American forces to be present in central Asia .
The US army also has 200 military advisers in Georgia , with Putin 's agreement .
The European Parliament must call on the Russian authorities to bring an immediate end to its ' cleansing ' operation .
A cease-fire must be declared .
The Russian Government must resume negotiations with President Maskhadov 's representative immediately and unconditionally .
The EU must let Russia know that the war in Chechnya is not compatible with the desire to build an open , transparent , democratic multi-ethnic society .
That is why I voted for everything that advocated this approach .
That concludes the explanations of vote .
( The sitting was suspended at 2.03 p.m. and resumed at 3 p.m. )

The next item is the resumption of the debate on the report ( ? 5-0076 / 2002 ) by Mr Graça Moura , on behalf of the Committee on Foreign Affairs , Human Rights , Common Security and Defence Policy , on the Commission communication on an ? U strategy towards China : Implementation of the 1998 Communication and Future Steps for a more Effective EU policy [ COM ( 2001 ) 265 - C5-0098 / 2001 - 2001 / 2045 ( COS ) ] .
Mr President , our fellow MEP , Mr Graça Moura , makes valid points in many areas in his report , which is very much worth a read .
For example , it covers topics such as the situation of fundamental human rights in the Communist dictatorship which China still is , the brutal cultural genocide in Tibet and the instances of torture and death penalties on a large scale , also directed against political dissidents .
Surely there is no comparison with the situation in the United States of America which , nevertheless , was likened to that in China by another speaker this morning .
One thinks of the brutal threats to independent Taiwan and the total lack of freedom of expression . The list goes on .
When a list of this kind is included in this report , we should , in fact , also dare ask ourselves what the concrete or tangible result is of so many years of international and intense dialogue regarding human rights in the Communist dictatorship of China .
What improvements have actually been made in that region over the past few years ?
Unfortunately , this is a rhetorical question .
It remains , therefore , unacceptable in my view that this dictatorship can count on so much tolerance and so much cooperation from the EU , but also from more or less the entire international community , even with regard to the organisation of the Olympic Games in 2008 .
For example , I remember a few years ago that South Africa had to settle for far less understanding .
The protest is only verbal and is never backed up by any action .
I notice that when , in recent times , governments in Austria and Italy which were not to the liking of certain European opinion formers in , for example , my country took up office in entirely democratic ways , a number of boycott campaigns were actually launched .
The self-same conscience of the world falls silent , however , or only deals in words when China is involved , which is something I regret .
I wish to begin by welcoming Mr Graça Moura 's report .
While I am not a member of the Committee on Foreign Affairs , Human Rights , Common Security and Defence Policy , I am one of the vice-chairmen of the Delegation for relations with the Peoples ' Republic of China and so take a considerable interest in what is happening there .
From my perspective , the most significant development in China of recent years is the move towards China becoming incorporated into the world trading system .
Not merely is this significant , as it takes China into the world community of nations , it also brings China into the evolving new system of decision-making in an increasingly interdependent world .
I would like to make two particular points which arise from this .
First , for Chinese membership of the World Trade Organisation to be a success , it is necessary for legal certainty and even-handedness to apply to commercial relations between Chinese business and firms from outside .
If and when these relationships go wrong , and it is bound to happen from time to time , there is an overriding requirement for there to be in place proper legal processes to deal even-handedly and fairly with outstanding causes of disagreement .
I know that steps are being taken to enable this to occur and I very much support and welcome them because without them WTO membership cannot be a success .
Secondly , it is a characteristic of current developments in international relations that the traditional demarcation between domestic and foreign policy is breaking down .
Regardless of whether human rights issues in the past may have been treated as purely domestic considerations , increasingly now they are not .
Regardless of the situation in classical international law , these things are important to people outside China . They will and do take them into account in making policy , be it political or commercial .
The same equally applies within the European Union .
How these aspects of life are handled domestically in China now has , and will continue in the future to have , repercussions on the way in which relations between China and both foreign countries and foreign businesses develop .
Mr President , we cannot overemphasise the importance of EU-China relations , which have developed significantly in recent years , as we all know , specifically in the areas of political dialogue , trade relations , and scientific and technological cooperation .
We must now step up these relations and extend them to other areas in a way that suits both parties .
The Commission communication , which warrants the support of Parliament , presents a strategic framework for such a process and proposes elements for practical action .
Along these lines , we also hope that account will be taken of the ideas put forward in the excellent report by our colleague , Mr Vasco Graça Moura .
Because of the limited time available to me , I shall emphasise only three aspects : in addition to cooperation in the fields of trade , industry and technology , made possible by China 's recent accession to the WTO , cultural dialogue between Europe and China must be stimulated .
For example , the development of exchanges at university level is something we can easily achieve , specifically by extending the scope of the TEMPUS programme . Secondly , I wish to state that Macao and Hong Kong , in addition to being particularly important points of international contact in the economic and financial spheres , could also become centres of intense cultural exchange .
The success of these two autonomous regions will benefit China , but would also be important for Europe . Apart from anything else , it could provide a good example of what can be achieved when international relations are geared towards peaceful interaction .
Lastly , the issue of human rights is still a matter of huge concern if we wish to deepen cooperation with China .
As the rapporteur states , we hope to see some more positive and more significant indications by China so that , by the time the 2008 Olympic Games are held , China 's image on the international scene will be an entirely positive one .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , my group shares the rapporteur 's opinion that it is of the utmost importance for both the EU and China to strengthen relations between themselves .
The EU can help a country such as China , with a population of 1 250 million and the world 's seventh largest GDP , find its niche in the international community in terms of political , economic , social and cultural relations .
China 's accession to the World Trade Organisation last November in Doha is of crucial importance .
It is now impossible for China to pursue political goals with economic sanctions , as it did before .
Accordingly , economic sanctions , such as those directed against the Netherlands as President of the EU in 1997 because it drafted a UN resolution about the human rights situation in China , are now a thing of the past .
China will need to observe the letter and spirit of the regulations of the World Trade Organisation .
As chairman of the Interparliamentary Delegation for relations with the People 's Republic of China , I should like to underline that the European Parliament can play quite a substantial role .
In addition to the various summit meetings at government and official level , an open and transparent political dialogue between the European Parliament and the National People 's Congress can help further develop democracy and respect for human rights in China .
The human rights situation in China has greatly deteriorated in the past year .
The increasing number of political executions spring to mind , as well as the ban on the Falun Gong movement and the recent escape of the Tibetan Karmapa Lama to India .
China must unconditionally observe the UN Treaty concerning civil and political rights which , after all , it signed itself .
Actual steps must be taken in order to ensure that this is done .
The European Parliament will continue to insist on democratisation and the observance of human rights in China and will also continue to devote attention to the problems involving Taiwan and Tibet .
A remarkable result was achieved two weeks ago during our dialogue with a delegation from the parliament of the Tibetan Autonomic Region in Brussels .
A pledge was made on this occasion that the Red Cross will be allowed to visit prisons and work camps in Tibet .
We welcome this with open arms and hope that this will actually be done .
In June , the China delegation will be visiting China and Tibet .
In this way , the European Parliament will be able to do its bit towards further strengthening relations with China , for we can learn a great deal from each other .
Mr President , I would like to start by expressing my congratulations to our rapporteur , Mr Garça Moura , but will only be speaking to the part of his report that deals with Tibet .
I have known Tibet for over twenty years , even its furthest-flung corners , and it must be borne in mind that Tibet is the largest highland area in the world , about as large as the whole of Europe between Gibraltar and the Urals .
Tibet possessed , and to some extent still does possess , an independent culture , religion and way of life , and it is now high time for the Council to appoint an EU Special Representative and for Tibet as a whole to achieve an agreed autonomy .
For not all is yet lost while the old culture still lives on the fringes of present-day Tibet , in Kham and Amdo , which are today no longer considered part of the autonomous province of Tibet .
The opening of negotiations between the central government and Beijing and within the government-in-exile in Dharamsala must be encouraged .
Nobody wants the old monastic state back , but Tibet can defend its culture as an autonomous region in China if human rights are guaranteed within it .
Let me close with something that is very close to my heart . Tibetans , both those in exile and those in Tibet , who have for 50 years used peaceful means to press for their rights , never resorting to terrorist actions of any kind , should not , in times like our own in which globalised terrorism predominates , be branded as terrorists , but are owed a tribute of respect for their peaceful approach .
Mr President , I wish to begin by offering my congratulations to the rapporteur , Mr Graça Moura , for a very balanced report .
He has raised a number of issues which merit further consideration .
I agree with his observation that while the human rights dialogue could indeed be useful , unfortunately up to now it has not produced tangible results .
Human rights continue to be abused , political activity is suppressed and , according to Amnesty International , there were more State executions in China last year than in all other countries combined .
On the issue of Taiwan , I also condemn President Jiang Zemin 's threats to use military force .
Only peaceful negotiations carried out in an atmosphere of mutual respect will bring about progress .
Furthermore , the cowardice of EU Member States in refusing a visa to President Chen Shui-bian to visit Europe is self-serving and counterproductive .
Turning to other matters , the EU needs to review how the 1989 arms embargo is being implemented , especially since Member States are being allowed to interpret the rules themselves .
In Ireland , for example , military goods can be exported to China , as long as they are not sold directly to the military .
There are no end-user checks in place to ensure that they do not end up in the hands of the military or security services for purposes of which the EU would strongly disapprove .
The UK continues to have a flourishing trade in British-made military goods .
As the rapporteur for Hong Kong , there are a number of issues about which I have concerns but I feel it is inappropriate to raise those concerns now .
I hope that in the very near future - possibly in the autumn - the Committee on Foreign Affairs , Human Rights , Common Security and Defence Policy will take an initiative and we will have a much more comprehensive report to deal with the many concerns which this House and indeed I myself , as rapporteur , have relating to Hong Kong .
Mr President , whichever way you look at it , Mr Graça Moura 's report is a good report , because it deals with questions of political strategy , leaving topical or daily issues out of the equation .
There have been huge changes in China over the last decade .
Ten years ago , we witnessed the dramatic events in Tiannamen Square ; today we are witnessing a solution - of sorts - to the problem of both Macao and Hong Kong , improvements in Taiwan , involvement in the World Trade Organisation and , after Greece , the next Olympic Games in 2008 , which all goes to show that progress has been made .

Does that mean that it is all good news ?
By no means .
China is not doing at all well when it comes to human rights .
And it is not doing well it comes to human liberties .
However , when you evaluate questions of political strategy , you have to decide on a cut-off point .
And our cut-off point has to be a democratic China , a pole of stability in a multipolar , peaceful world .
And that is what our political strategy should be geared towards .
Accusations and one-sided relations do not bring about policies , which is precisely why the whole point of political strategy is to look to the future and not get bogged down in day-to-day issues .
Moderation , stable objectives and efficiency are the common ground for joint action in such cases .
China has worked with us in the fight against terrorism and that is a peak on its development curve .
Our relations are improving constantly and , more to the point , I hope that we shall have more improvements in the future .
Anyone meeting Chinese delegates nowadays will find a new generation of people , very young people , 30 , 40 , 50 at most , with a good level of education and a good grounding in world affairs and that is most encouraging .
China itself has found a formula for progress , calling the change ' market Communism ' and shying away from the term ' market policy ' in both economic and social relations .
That is how it is developing and I think that we should help it by persuading it to correct its bad points .
And there are a lot of them !
Nevertheless , we must not be subversive in our persuasion .
I think China is on the right path because , for better or for worse , it is one of the lucky countries , a lucky nation with a long history of culture and civilisation and the heritage to match .
And in the changes being made to the ideological and political values which every society craves for the sake of its own cohesion , China 's history and culture carry great weight and , as far as I know , it is precisely these cultural elements which derive from Confucius , from humanitarian values and so on , which efforts are being made to restore as social values in China , which is a good thing because they will help bring about a balanced and humanitarian society .
Having said which , I trust that when we come to vote on Mr Graça Moura 's report tomorrow , subject to a few improvements , we shall set the European Union 's strategy towards China on the right political course .
Mr President , we have talked about China many times in this House , and it is excellent that there is now an extensive and overarching report on the EU 's cooperation strategy for the region .
I want to congratulate Mr Graça Moura on a very sound report . It is a really good piece of work .
China is a huge country of growing importance in the world .
The consequences of the economic , social and political transformations faced by the country are unforeseeable .
In connection with China 's membership of the WTO - supported by the Group of the European Liberal , Democrat and Reform Party - there will be many opportunities for the EU and China to deepen their cooperation .
Economically , socially , culturally and politically , we must have an extensive dialogue with China .
WTO membership will make demands when it comes to software piracy , environmental issues , trade unions etc , and we can perhaps be of help .
It will be no surprise to you , Mr President , that the ELDR Group is very concerned about the issue of human rights .
We genuinely want to appeal to the Commission to increase the pressure on China where these issues are concerned .
Commentators throughout the world are agreed that the human rights situation is deteriorating overall .
It seems as if China , just like Russia in the case of Chechnya , is using the fight against terrorism as an alibi in order to commit atrocities against minorities .
The ability to practise one 's religion freely in China is strictly limited .
Catholics report systematic persecution , and mosques are burned down .
In Tibet , there is severe oppression of the Tibetan people , especially of monks .
We are also anxious about the torture and persecution of democracy campaigners , trade union activists and dissidents , and the attempt to limit freedom of expression on the Internet is of course unacceptable .
The daily arrests , torturing and systematic persecution of Falun Gong practitioners is also very worrying .
Even though the Chinese regime appears resolved to break this movement , it will not succeed , and a dialogue must therefore be brought about on this issue .
China also executes more people than all other countries put together and , in this area , we must exert pressure in order to bring about a moratorium .
These issues must be given the highest priority in our cooperative relations with China .
We had hoped that there might not perhaps have been any 2008 Olympic Games in China but , now that these are in fact to take place , we must use them as a means of exerting pressure .
I have stood on this platform many times and talked about human rights in China , and many telephone calls have been received from the Chinese Embassy .
That will continue .
As long as there are Liberals in this House , we shall stand up for human rights in China .
Mr President , Commissioner , I can tell the Liberals that they will not be alone in this fight .
China has decided to join the World Trade Organisation .
This means that China has made a conscious choice in favour of openness , and this will not only be in the area of trade .
China will , as a result , go through major changes that will have a huge impact on society .
We will conduct that dialogue with that enormous country and we will need to build that dialogue not only on economic interests , but we will , through our electorate , through our values , through our institutions , founded on democracy and human rights , be forced to put this dialogue on an ethical footing , and it is useful to spell this out to the Chinese authorities from the outset .
We heard about the large-scale repression of Catholics and Muslims earlier on .
Without being familiar with any of the intricacies myself , I should like to warn against the large-scale repression of those who practise Falun Gong .
They are a peace-loving people who are thrown into prison in their thousands . We have received blood-curdling accounts and testimonies on this score .
Human rights and international law are at the moment clearly the weak point ; democracy will gradually take root in Chinese society and find its own way .
And the Chinese Government should not react to this with large-scale repression .
I should also like to mention the increasing concern we have in this Parliament for Tibet and for other regions in that giant country which are asking for a certain level of autonomy and which want to be able to go their own way , culturally speaking .
To respond to this simply with repression is criminal and , in my view , all those who in the near future have contact with the Chinese authorities should make it clear to them that we and our communities are not only concerned about money matters .
Mr President , Commissioner , unlike the lady who spoke before me , I am not sure whether membership of the WTO will automatically lead to political change in China , but that is something I shall return to shortly .
I think it was a good thing that the People 's Republic of China joined the WTO .
It was not a straightforward thing for the Chinese to do , as it will mean major processes of internal restructuring for them , but I consider it urgently necessary from the point of view of China 's interests that these processes of restructuring should start now .
I also believe that it represents a good starting point for an improvement in trading relationships .
I wish , though , to appeal to the Commission to keep a careful eye on how China meets the obligations it has entered into by joining the WTO .
The behaviour of China , which had made promises , for example to open up the insurance market , has not been very encouraging in recent years .
Promises were made , but attempts were made to evade them .
In this respect , I hope that China will give real and positive acknowledgement of what the consequences must be - and it would be interesting if the Commissioner were to make a statement on the line the Commission will take on this .
As regards political dialogue , my fellow Members have all made reference to the human rights issue .
These human rights apply universally ; they are not European human rights that we want to enforce on China , but universally recognised human rights that we demand , and they include the rights of minorities , be they religious or cultural .
My fellow Members have already had something to say about Tibet .
I would like to take up another example , the persecution of the unofficial Catholic Church in China , which has to exist underground because the government does not recognise the Catholic Church which sees itself as linked to the Vatican .
That is not acceptable .
Turning to Taiwan , I hope that the People 's Republic of China will open political dialogue without setting prior conditions .
It is only political dialogue of this kind that can lead to reunification , and then only if this is on the basis of human rights and of democracy in a constitutional state .
We in Parliament should play our part in promoting contact between the two states .
We should likewise maintain contacts with members of the parliaments in the People 's Republic of China and in Taiwan .
Commissioner , I hope that the Commission will soon set up its office in Taipei , so that the Commission , too , may support dialogue between the two states by means of its missions in Beijing and in Taipei .
Mr President , the rapporteur has , in my view , presented an outstanding report which , in all its comprehensiveness , indicates the importance of relations with China and the importance of a fruitful dialogue with China .
In my view , the chairperson of the China delegation , Mrs Plooij-van Gorsel , has made some very valid points on this score .
Nevertheless , we must be careful in our relations with China not to avoid the truth .
The previous speaker has already alluded to this , as others have too . If the Chinese emperor is not wearing any clothes , then we should tell him .
This would not be the first time .
In common with some fellow MEPs , I am thinking , for example , of the situation with regard to Taiwan and the way in which we , and particularly our Foreign Affairs Ministers , deal with this situation as the European Union , for it is really hypocritical the way we go about this .
Take Taiwan 's observer status in international organisations , say the World Health Organisation , which is now being discussed .
This situation is ridiculous .
As a democratic country , Taiwan should be able to take part in such organisations .
Surely Taiwan is not the PLO from the sixties and the seventies .
It is a country with which we have good relations , at a political level too , and which has experienced a tremendous , democratic development , yet it is being treated like a pariah .
This is unacceptable .
Why is it that an elected leader such as Chen Shin-lian was unable to receive his freedom prize here ?
His wife was here , which was a feat in itself , but the man around whom everything revolved was absent . This , while the Chinese leader is currently on a glorious tour of the European Union .
I welcome the fact that he is on this tour . This enables us to talk to him about what is happening , including the positive developments in China , but it remains a hypocritical situation .
For let us be clear about this : China does not meet one single democratic criterion .
Hong Kong is the most telling example where , recently , so-called ' elections ' , conducted in an entirely undemocratic way , were held for a new chief executive .
If that is the shape of things to come in Taiwan , should it form part of China again , then it is not very inspiring .
I should , of course , also mention the human rights situation over there , and in particular mention should be made of capital punishment .
Needless to say , it is absolutely impossible for us , as the European Parliament , to condone capital punishment but , unfortunately , China beats everyone hands down when it comes to executions .
Between April and July 2001 , more than 1 700 people were executed , which is more than the combined total in the rest of the world during the previous three years .
The torture and abuse of suspects are also common practice .
In my view , it is useful to add these critical observations to this excellent report .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I , on the other hand , do not welcome Commissioner Nielson .
I do not know why he is here ; China would not appear to be part of his remit .
In my opinion , Commissioner Nielson concerns himself too often with things which are none of his business - and I think he understands what I am trying to say - and so I do not know what he might have to contribute in this area .
Ladies and gentlemen , on the subject of this report , I want to say that , two hours ago , we adopted a document which is extremely critical of Israel and regarding which there were opposing positions in the House .
I voted against this document and I saw that , when it wants to , Parliament is capable of raising its voice .
Two hours later , Mr President , we are presented with a document on China , a country with 1.2 billion inhabitants which oppresses hundreds of millions of people , ethnic and cultural minorities and ordinary citizens who are advocates of freedom and democracy , yet Parliament is incapable of doing more than - in point 10 - timidly raising the issue of human rights , after making complimentary comments about China and its development , referring to trade with the European Union , of course .
We do not support this .
We radicals condemn this approach , we condemn these double standards of the European Parliament , which is ' forceful ' or tries to be forceful with those who are in a position of weakness , as Israel is now , under attack from a ferocious terrorism which , again this morning - and nobody has mentioned the fact - caused at least eight deaths , the deaths of innocent people , of course , in an Israeli bus , and then , the same day , expresses its satisfaction with the dictatorial Chinese regime which is oppressing hundreds of millions of people , rewarding it with a blank cheque .
We condemn this behaviour .
We feel that Europe will only become great when it succeeds in adopting an unambiguous attitude towards human rights , the rights of individuals and the rights of minorities , and so we will not vote for a text which has been described as hypocritical , a view I share .
There are parts of the text such as the section relating to Taiwan which we support , but we reject the overall line it takes .
We feel that the message Parliament and the European Union send to that country should be very different .
The Commission welcomes Mr Graça Moura 's report on the Commission 's Communication on an EU strategy towards China .
I am very happy to note that overall Parliament and the Commission have reached similar conclusions on EU-China relations over the past three years and how they should develop in future .
Despite several differences on some important issues , the EU and China have reached , in the last few years , a wide understanding on areas where the development of their relations is mutually beneficial .
This has been amply demonstrated by the successful annual summits in 2000 and 2001 , and , most recently , by Mr Patten 's official visit to China which I will report on in the following remarks .
He was extremely well received , as a representative of the EU , wherever he went and had intensive meetings with President Jiang Zemin , the Deputy Prime Minister , Qian Qichen , five senior ministers and other policy makers .
All of his interlocutors spoke frankly and openly about EU-China relations .
Some strong messages he received during the visit were : a recognition of the increasing role of the EU in the world , an appreciation for the recent , rapid progress in EU-China relations ; and a genuine will and commitment to continue the development of EU-China relations and cooperation at all levels .
During his visit , Mr Patten put across the messages that all EU Member States were committed to the EU 's China policy , that not only had trade and investment cooperation been impressive , but also that very strong progress was being achieved in other bilateral and transnational areas of concern , for example immigration , the environment and science and technology .
Dialogues on regional and international issues , such as the Korean peninsula , ASEM , Afghanistan , and international terrorism were proving to be increasingly beneficial to both sides .
Returning to the report , I note that it rightly picks out the importance of the events of 11 September and the launch of the fight against international terrorism , and China 's entry into the WTO .
These events will help define , to some extent , the parameters for EU-China relations in the international arena for the foreseeable future .
More specifically , like Parliament , the Commission welcomes China 's support in the international fight against terrorism and China 's undertaking to assist in the reconstruction of Afghanistan .
The report congratulates China on its accession to the WTO and expresses support for China 's continuing economic and social reforms .
We agree with this .
It took China 15 long years of arduous negotiations to join the WTO .
China also came a long way in that period .
From being a rather isolated , inward-looking , centrally planned economy with a slightly open door , it is about to remove - we hope - many of the remaining great barrier walls to free trade .
It is therefore that it has joined the WTO , but we will now need to ensure that China fully adheres to its commitments .
We also welcome the fact that WTO accession will accelerate reform , but are conscious that the required reforms will bring with them serious challenges because of unemployment , urban drift and so on .
We will do all we can to help to assist China during this delicate transition .
The human rights situation in China has , in some respects , improved in the last few years , notably in the field of social and economic rights .
But we remain deeply concerned about the general human rights situation .
We remain committed to the human rights dialogue .
However , while we are conscious that the way ahead will be a long-term process , we nevertheless believe that improvements in political and civil rights are needed in China , also in the short-term .
Chris Patten raised human rights issues in detail during his visit , particularly with Foreign Minister Tang .
The report draws the attention of the Chinese Government to the importance of respecting and protecting the religious and cultural heritage of Tibet , and the identity of the Tibetan people .
Chairman Re Di , the leader of the delegation from the National People 's Congress of the Tibetan Autonomous Region that visited Parliament last month - whom some of you met and also referred to today - gave assurances that the Chinese Government pays a lot of attention to the protection of minorities and to their religious freedoms .
We attach great importance to these issues and were happy to note these assurances , but we will of course continue to be vigilant about Tibet and will continue to call for a direct dialogue between Beijing and the Dalai Lama .
Mr Patten also discussed these issues with Foreign Minister Tang and Vice-Premier Qian Qichen .
As regards the issue of our cooperation with China I will take the liberty of informing Mr Dell 'Alba that we are cooperating at a level of about EUR 50 million annually .
We started from a traditional situation where we were funding quite a wide range of different activities .
We are now at a point that is quite important , having approved in the Commission on 1 March this year a country strategy paper which brings our cooperation with China into the same mainstream as our global development policy , and which , is the responsibility of the Commissioner responsible for development cooperation .
The future priorities of our cooperation in China will be support for the social economic reform process , sustainable development and environment , and the promotion of good governance , human rights and the rule of law .
We have singled out these issues from an analysis of what is needed in order to use our basic general principles of fighting poverty in a manner that fits China 's situation .
Alongside the different aspects I have singled out here , there are several other issues to which we attach great importance , such as relations with Hong Kong , Macao and Taiwan , and international issues such as global warming and illegal migration that , unfortunately , I do not have sufficient time to comment on today .
However , I welcome the report 's reconfirmation that the EU has a profound interest in a stable , prosperous and open China , which embraces democratic practices , free market principles , human rights and the rule of law , and that the EU must pursue policies which will help China further its endeavours in this direction .
That is what we fully intend to do through our increased dialogues and cooperation across the board .
Lastly , I would like to reiterate the observation that for China some of our desired goals will take longer to achieve than others .
As ever , there is a Chinese proverb that neatly encapsulates this very point , which is : " You won 't help shoots grow by pulling them up higher " .
Thank you , Commissioner .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon .
The next item is the debate on the report ( A5-0071 / 2002 ) by Mr Fatuzzo , on behalf of the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs , on the Commission communication ' Supporting national strategies for safe and sustainable pensions through an integrated approach ' [ COM ( 2001 ) 362 - C5-0012 / 2002 - 2002 / 2017 ( COS ) ] .
Mr President , I would like to start by congratulating the Commission , represented here by Mrs Diamantopolou , who I am afraid has to turn round in order to be able to hear me .
I would move to a different seat in front of her so that I could see her while I am speaking if I had more time , for I do not like to see her having to perform contortions .
That said , I would like to inform you that this report places on the table the issues and the importance of elderly people in Europe .
Without a doubt , there will soon be as many as 100 or 120 million people in Europe and , in the near future , in the enlarged Europe , and so this report concerns a very large number of European Union citizens .
I am stressing this because , when pensioners and elderly people stop working , I regret to say that they are considered by governments , particularly the Ministers for the Budget , no longer to exist , to be citizens of which there should be as few as possible in a country , to be people who are a burden on the public purse , whereas , clearly , we are all agreed that being old means having worked for a lifetime , having suffered for a lifetime and having built up everything around us .
It would therefore be appropriate for elderly people to be able to enjoy their lives more than young people .
I have to say that , in the meetings and discussions held within the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs with all the group representatives , there was complete consensus on the objectives : we all want Europe to do something , if possible , to improve the lot of pensioners .
It is extremely important that we do this first .
There may be some disagreement as to how we go about this , but that is democracy and it is the right way to address such important matters .
At this point , I want to focus , in particular , on the bone of contention .
It is better to get the bad news over with first , if possible , and I will therefore start by making it quite clear that I personally do not support the statement of the Barcelona European Council , which , in the space of a day , without warning - nobody expected it - called for the average working age of citizens throughout Europe , of workers throughout Europe , to be increased by five years by 2010 .
Together with the opposition groups and , in particular , the shadow rapporteur for the Group of the Party of European Socialists , Mr Cercas , among others , we have drawn up an amendment opposing this decision , on which the European Parliament was not consulted .
I must also say , moreover , that I am totally against this decision ; two amendments have been tabled by a group on the other side of the House , opposing this decision , and I personally cannot do anything but vote for these amendments , for I feel that citizens should be able to continue working on two conditions .
What I mean is , after they have paid enough contributions for a pension and have worked for a sufficient number of years of their lives , people must only continue to work on two conditions : the first being that the decision to work is voluntary , in other words that they are not forced to work for 45 , 50 or 60 years of their lives - and the Commission states this in its report - and the second , I would add , being that there are no young people out of work .
As long as there is a young person who is unemployed , I feel that the elderly who have been able to work and can now draw a pension should leave their jobs for the young people .
I have now run out of time but I reserve the right to continue in my explanation of vote on this report .
Thank you , Mr Fatuzzo .
To tell the truth , you have an excellent track record when it comes to explanations of vote !
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the rapporteur has mentioned that it was not exactly easy to draw up an opinion for Parliament .
It contains a diversity of ideas , and I would like to pick up two main points , which refer to the procedure involved .
I can see the danger in the open coordination process being conducted only by officials and so-called experts without public discussion .
This topic is far too important to be permitted to be left exclusively to a closed circle in which far-reaching options are decided on .
We MEPs must therefore be involved in this issue as representatives of the public interest .
I will take this opportunity to reiterate the demand that we should have an interinstitutional agreement on the method of open coordination .
In conclusion , addressing the Commission and the Member States , I will repeat that we must achieve definite progress on the problems that bear down on Europe 's people .
Pensions are one example of these .
We need a speedy revision of Regulation 1408 / 71 on the coordination of social security schemes .
We need simple rules on the transferability of occupational pensions .
We need solutions to the taxation of occupational pensions , which cannot be founded on open coordination alone , so Parliament must be brought in to represent the interests of Europe 's people .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , first of all , I should like to thank Mr Fatuzzo warmly for the report before us .
It is very important that , when citizens reach pensionable age , they can count on a reasonable and fair pension scheme , whether they live in Finland or in Portugal .
That applies to men and women alike .
I should like to home in on this latter group and present three points which affect women , in particular .
First of all , the pension schemes must be designed effectively to prevent poverty and social exclusion .
In many of the current schemes , it is still too often the case that mainly older , single women live far below the poverty line .
Often , through their choice to devote themselves to their families and not to develop a professional career , they hardly have individual pension rights .
I would therefore expressly call on the Member States to review their schemes in such a way as to ensure that women , but also men who , through family circumstances , are not active in the labour market , are nevertheless able to build up individual pension rights .
Part-time work , mainly done by women , makes it difficult to accrue pension rights and , in this area too , there should be scope for building up additional rights .
Secondly , in its communication , the Commission notes that , in order to keep pension schemes affordable , it is essential for total participation in the labour market to increase , as Mr Fatuzzo pointed out a moment ago .
In Laeken , a target figure of 60 % was mentioned for women by 2010 .
An impressive target , but I would cast doubt on whether women , as is the case in some countries , would be prepared to increase their premium contributions for their pensions thanks to the so-called actuarial factors .
The fact that , statistically , they have a longer life expectancy should not lead to discrimination .
This is precisely where the principle of gender solidarity should come into play .
I call on the Member States to give due consideration to this point .
Thirdly , the Commission suggests using the open co-ordination method to back the national strategies , and this requires gender-specific data and indicators .
This too must be borne in mind .
Finally , for the future of an ageing Europe , it is of the utmost importance for safe , adequate and affordable pension schemes to be set up which guarantee that retired men and women can lead dignified and independent lives and can take a full part in social and cultural life .
Commissioner , Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I think we are all aware that retirement provision with a secure future has become one of the greatest challenges to budgetary policy , social security provision , our policies in the social sphere , and hence to humanity , in our time . This is due to demographic developments , that is , the fact that the coming years will see around one-third of the population past pensionable age , and by reason of the fortunate increase in life expectancy .
We , the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats , are right behind the Commission in its three main proposals for doing everything possible in order to achieve an appropriate level of pension , to ensure the financial sustainability of public and private means of retirement provision and to modernise pension systems , so that , in future , they too will be able to offer security despite changed overall conditions .
We are always talking about a great deal of mobility and flexibility , and about the internal market .
Today , it must also be said loud and clear that mobility , flexibility and a functioning internal market presuppose social security - security for people when they are required to be mobile .
As a group , too , we are very clearly in favour of extending the three-pillar model , meaning public systems , occupational systems involving both employers and employees , and private or individual schemes .
What we are dealing with is the way in which all three pillars of the retirement provision system relate to each other .
The load cannot be left to rest on one pillar alone .
Reference should also be made in this context to the differing competences that we have at present .
Responsibility for the systems , for the way the pillars relate to each other , for tax law , for labour and social security law , falls on the nation states .
Responsibility for the internal market , for mobility , for cross-border activities , lies at the European level .
We therefore favour greater coordination , but not to the exclusion of politics and Parliament , bypassing us , as it were .
Yes to coordination , but with codecision for those with political responsibility and for the citizens ' representatives .
We are responsible for occupational retirement provision , and on a cross-border basis .
This is an important aspect of the Action Plan for Financial Services .
Again , in the Barcelona Final Document , there is the call for the second pillar to be regulated also on a European level .
In July 2001 , Parliament set out our position with over 460 votes .
To this day , we are waiting for the Council 's Common Position .
Things have come to such a pass that the Commissioner responsible said yesterday , in an interview with the ' Financial Times ' , that he was withdrawing the Commission proposal , despite our calling on him for there to be a regulation in Europe , and even though Barcelona puts us under pressure of time .
Of those who are competent and bear responsibility , we demand that they do what they have undertaken to do and set themselves a time limit . Let them at last act , or else new reports and resolutions will not help us , for action will be dragging its feet on the way to the political objectives .
Do something , Council !
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen . My first request is addressed to you , Mr President .
I should first of all like to say that this report comes at least one month , maybe many months , too late .
This report should have been ready to take to the Barcelona Summit , where pensions were on the agenda .
Parliament has , as it is , such a modest role in the open method of co-ordination that we must urgently find ways in this Presidency of improving our response time as Parliament .
If not , we will lose any credibility in this debate .
I hope , Mr President , that you will be able to inform the Presidency of this and that you will also find a solution to the problem .
I should now like to thank the rapporteur , Mr Fatuzzo , for the fact that , in this report , he has consistently adopted Parliament 's line and the views we expressed in the report by Mr Cercas Alonso , for that is very important for my group .
After years , the silence has at long last been broken in an important debate such as that on pensions .
Silence is a very relative concept . For , since forever and a day , the ECOFIN Council has been working on pensions , but viewed from the angle of the Stability Pact and the broad economic guidelines and , thus , only from the point of view of the fundability of pensions .
It is therefore a huge achievement on the part of the Commission , the Social Protection Committee and my own Minister , Mr Frank Vandenbroucke , under the Belgian Presidency , to have placed this issue on the agenda whilst adding the social dimension .
For let us be quite honest : if we want to safeguard our European social model , if we want to preserve the solidarity between , and within , the generations in pensions , if we want pensions also to form part of a strategy against poverty and in favour of guaranteed income , then this debate should clearly be placed on a social footing .
Although this issue mainly falls within the remit of the Member States , that does not mean that we cannot reach agreement at European level about the social objectives of the pension system .
And this is why this report is so important , in my view .
My group is also of the view that the objectives are currently still vague and general , but this is exactly why we need reports of this kind in order to ensure that this open method of co-ordination becomes more concrete in years to come .
And I am therefore particularly anxious about , and particularly surprised at , the attitude of the GUE / NGL Group on the one hand , and that of the PPE-DE on the other which now - at this of all times - wants to back-track and scale down a number of our positions , not only on the open method of co-ordination , but also on the social objectives of the pension system .
This is really the limit .
If we champion rights in the second pension pillar , then I fail to grasp why we should not do so for the statutory pension systems .
This is , in fact , another cause of my concern .
I have the impression that some reticence has crept in recently in the Council too .
Following the panache that was displayed under the Swedish and Belgian Presidencies , I have the feeling that the Council under Spanish Presidency is taking a bit of a back seat . And that , indeed , respite is being given to countries that do not have their pension plans ready and that no more work is being done on indicators which can make this open method of co-ordination more concrete .
And that moreover , Barcelona was merely a summit where some of the preparatory work was done .
Finally , let there be no mistake : my group too is convinced of the fact that more people will need to enter employment in order to make future pension schemes affordable .
But let us also be quite clear about these social objectives ; let us spell out clearly that this is not about raising the statutory retirement age but about introducing incentives which encourage people to stay in the labour market and about a resolute fight against any form of age discrimination within the labour market .
I hope that we will be able to demonstrate in our vote that this is what this is all about for us .
And I also hope that the PPE-DE will not play any games with this open method of co-ordination and will join us in voting in favour of Mr Fatuzzo 's report .
Mr President , I wish to begin by congratulating Mr Fatuzzo on his report on a subject I know is close to his heart .
I have two points to make , and they are in actual fact the same two points Mr Kuckelkorn touched upon , one concerning the open method of coordination for pensions and the other concerning the internal market for supplementary pension schemes .
Open coordination , through which the Member States set common objectives and guidelines for future policy in the pensions area , analyse developments and exchange experiences , is in many ways a fruitful form of cooperation .
It is especially heartening that the debate on future pensions is no longer concerned only with national finances and with how expensive it will become over the next ten years because of the many pensioners .
It is a good thing that the Member States are talking together about how we ensure that good , secure conditions for pensioners can be afforded in the future .
However , I wish nonetheless to highlight the problem that exists with open coordination , namely the democratic deficit .
The objectives and guidelines agreed by the Member States for future pensions are initially drawn up by so-called ' high level ' representatives in the shape of officials despatched by the governments of the Member States . The agreements are then confirmed by ministers of the Member States who , it must then be assumed , have popular mandates .
It is a case of having to ' assume ' because there is no democratic debate on this matter here .
When we adopt legislation in the EU , there are public debates in the Member States , that is to say in the national parliaments .
There is a system for consulting special interest groups so that the politicians have an objective basis for making decisions .
Here in the European Parliament , we have our open debates so that the public can hear and understand what the arguments are behind our decisions and so that special interest groups can make their presence felt in the debates .
Open debate and this basis for decision-making are totally absent when countries cooperate by means of open coordination .
If we are serious about this cooperation and want to see it reflected in actual policy , then the doors must be thrown open when decisions are made concerning objectives and guidelines .
The national parliaments must be far more actively involved , and local authorities and special interest groups must play their part .
The European Parliament can also play a positive role in this cooperation , for it is in this context that we of course bring all cultures together and look at things in their overall context .
It cannot be emphasised enough that efforts must be made to democratise open coordination , and I would urge the Council to address this subject .
Cooperation on a subject such as future pensions , in particular , demands transparency , for this is a subject that deeply affects us all , and I believe that a lot of the fear concerning the possible implications of pension reforms could be exorcised through greater openness .
The second point I wish to mention briefly is that of calling upon the Council and the Commission to bring about the speedy adoption of the Directive on Supplementary Pensions .
It must , of course , be the right form of directive that we adopt .
We must avoid constricting rules that hamper existing schemes .
With that in mind , however , it is important to get things moving . By means of common rules , we can make life easier for employees in companies that operate across borders and can promote competition and efficiency on the part of pension providers .
Mr President , I also would to thank our rapporteur .
We all know that this is subject on which he feels very strongly - at last he has got his five minutes on it .
I would agree with much of what has already been said in this debate .
When we are looking at safe and sustainable pensions , it is a particular problem for women .
There is a very strong gender dimension to the pension issue .
We see many severe disparities , especially in relation to occupational pensions and even State pension entitlements , where women are effectively penalised for taking on domestic responsibilities ; for having worked part-time or flexibly .
As new working patterns become more common , it is clear that we need to ensure that pension provision is guaranteed for both men and women in those different working environments .
Perhaps , as is usually the case , once more men start working flexibly , we will suddenly see much more interest in pensions keeping up with different forms of work .
That is maybe cynical if truthful .
It is also , as Mr Van Lancker has said , an issue , which touches very strongly on poverty .
We already see in far too many countries , pensioners with an inadequate basic pension unable to participate fully in society and often unable to meet their basic needs .
The key , of course , is decent State pensions , and funding them is a political choice .
My group does not believe that pension costs will necessarily destabilise economies or society , if such choices on spending are made carefully .
Indeed , the cases of people playing by the rules and investing either in their companies - with the Enron example before us or indeed in Equitable Life in my own country - and making private pension provision , show that you cannot trust the markets any more than you can sometimes trust governments .
The democratic deficit in open co-ordination is also becoming even clearer .
This is obviously an issue we need to address extremely rapidly .
Mr President , the backdrop of the debate on the development of pensions systems is the new demographic context in Europe , a true challenge which has arisen due to the constant increase in the number of people reaching retiring age , which is linked to rising longevity .
In this context , the Commission and the Council have often called for pensions system reform in the name of the Stability and Growth Pact and combating state deficits .
Whilst national competence with regard to pensions is not called into question , the open method of coordination , an integrated approach serving national strategies aiming to ensure safe and sustainable pensions , is being proposed and this is the subject of Mr Fatuzzo 's report .
We must find out the reason for this type of cooperation and how the objective of safe and sustainable pensions will be achieved .
The issues of retirement age , guaranteed rights , the payment of pensions , in other words , retirement conditions , are all the more sensitive as they arise at the end of a lifetime of professional and human endeavours and are a guarantee of positive relations of mutual support between generations .
It is good that Mr Fatuzzo 's report recognises that the debate on pensions must not be restricted to financing problems , but that rights must also be guaranteed .
It is also good that he proposes to strengthen the open coordination method by democratic will , involving NGOs , the social partners , the candidate countries and the European Parliament in defining effective indicators and mechanisms with a view to assessing reforms and achieving modernisation .
However , the report does support the Commission 's basic plan for a universal pensions system , although it waters them down by asking for collective systems of funded pensions to be promoted over individual financial pension and savings schemes .
I do not know whether that will answer Mrs Van Lancker 's question , but the report basically supports the Commission 's desire to move towards more ad hoc reserve pension funds and not to use state spending within the framework of compliance with the Stability and Growth Pact .
Nevertheless , we are all thinking about the Barcelona European Council which called for Member States to raise the retirement age by five years by 2010 .
Clearly , the question of financing arises .
The development of the contributory system cannot be considered in the new demographic context without an increase in funds .
That would be irresponsible .
New resources must therefore be found .
We believe that there should be greater focus in two areas : the development and creation of quality employment for new contributors , and alongside that , making financial income subject to social security contributions at the same rate as wages and salaries , as advocated by an amendment tabled by my group .
Mr President , I too would like to congratulate Mr Fatuzzo on a report on which he has certainly worked with passion and on his devotion to the subject over many years .
The report certainly has good points .
For instance , I especially welcome the emphasis placed on the link between the labour market and social protection .
As long as rigid labour markets prevail in Europe , as long as employment rates , particularly among the youngest and oldest members of the active population , are prevented by corporate and protectionist policies from rising above their current low levels , as long as the labour market is organised in this way , it will be difficult or even impossible to guarantee to today 's and tomorrow 's pensioners conditions which are both dignified and sustainable in the medium and long term .
I feel , however , that certain points need further emphasis .
The issue of pensions is not an easy question to deal with , and it is not one that can be resolved without cost .
There are legitimate , quite specific interests involved .
There are interests that are protected and interests that are not .
On the one hand , we have powerful lobbies - and quite rightly so - including politicians and pensioners who vote , who belong to trade unions , and on the other , we have a lobby which has absolutely no power at all because it does not vote and does not belong to a trade union , namely the younger generations .
I feel that the arguments surrounding the issue of pensions are first and foremost - for that is how things are - representative of a battle of interests between generations .
At this stage , it is the poorly represented younger generations who are losing the battle , and who should be represented differently in Parliament and , I feel , in this report .
The labour market and pension reforms were intended to avoid the explosion of this intergenerational dispute .
There are few guidelines to be followed for the reforms that are necessary , the first certainly being the need to raise the retirement age limit .
We are familiar with population trends , life expectancies and the quality of life of elderly people , and so we must not continue to work with pension parameters that were appropriate maybe thirty or forty years ago .
In conclusion , Mr President , we need to eliminate corporate privileges and make increasing use of second- and third-tier funded schemes , leaving public welfare expenditure with the sole task of guaranteeing the minimum level .
All the rest must be entrusted to funding mechanisms .
Mr President , I in turn would like to thank Mr Fatuzzo for his report , presented as always with a great deal of passion , which is situated in a demographic context , as indeed the United Nations Secretary-General has just emphasised at the Second World Assembly on Ageing , currently being held in Madrid .
He reiterated on this occasion that in 2040 , there will be more people in the world who are over 60 years old than there will be under fifteen .
The forecasts for European demographic change are even more significant , as 40 % of the European population will be 65 or over in 2025 , according to Eurostat .
Therefore , the consequences for the balance of pensions systems , in particular , of this ageing of the population - which is in fact an undeniable sign of progress in terms of health and social aspects - give cause for concern , as the current proportion of four workers to one pensioner will only be two workers to one pensioner in 2030 .
That is why the European debate particularly welcomes the Commission 's communication , which aims to guarantee safe and sustainable pensions through an integrated approach to the strategies of the Member States , whose pension schemes , especially state schemes , are managed at national level .
It should be noted that many countries of the European Union have begun to take bold steps to perpetuate their pensions systems .
This is not the case of the French Government , which has not implemented the urgent and essential reforms , and , what is more , the national debate with which we are faced in France is evidence of this .
What I would like to point out here , in particular by referring to the Fatuzzo report , is that although the organisation and financing of state pensions must remain the responsibility of the Member States , the open coordination method proposed in this field by the Gothenburg Council should certainly encourage national reforms and enrich them with experiences of other States .
In this regard , Commissioner , we look forward to the presentation of the first national plans in the autumn , while insisting once again that the European Parliament should be more closely involved in this procedure .
Also from this perspective , unlike others , I am delighted that the Barcelona European Council of 15 and 16 March 2002 committed , on the one hand , to stepping up efforts to provide mature workers with greater possibilities of remaining in the job market , for example by means of flexible gradual retirement programmes and guaranteeing genuine access to education and life-long training , and , on the other , to gradually increasing the average retirement age in the European Union by about five years by 2010 .
It seems to me that we should be able to offer , in the current context , an approach of free choice , based on employees ' individual careers and their various life stages , which sometimes require them to keep working past retirement age , as obligatory retirement can lead to an immeasurable waste of human resources .
Mr President , Commissioner , this is a big day for Mr Fatuzzo , as the pensioners ' ambassador par excellence .
The main aim of today 's report is in fact to investigate how we can help national pension systems achieve the three basic objectives of retaining their capacity to achieve the social objectives which they have set , staying financially viable in the long term and responding to society 's changing needs .
To put it plainly , they are being asked to adapt without reducing the level of protection or standard of services which they provide .
Consequently , as our political group sees it , collective state pensions systems still take priority over purely private systems and are still one of the main ways of redistributing wealth , which is why they must continue to be funded by society as a whole .
As I see it , the amendments proposed by the PPE-DE undermine this basis and the balance struck in the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs .
Proposing that only health care and social protection should be funded from the state budget , with workers ' pensions paid for solely out of workers ' and employers ' contributions , does away with any notion of solidarity .
Similarly , expecting Member States to include the positive impact which reducing the pension burden on contributions would have on the cost of labour and increasing pro rata contributions would have on auxiliary pension funds in their strategies means , to all intents and purposes , that the entire burden of pensions is shifted on to the workers .
On the contrary , the whole point of the reform should be to broaden the base of contributors and extend alternative forms of funding .
Likewise , the proposal to ensure the reforms are democratically legitimate , by giving the European Parliament a more active role in commenting on national strategy reports and indicators to evaluate results and by extending the social dialogue to include representatives of pensioners , non-governmental organisations and women 's organisations , is fundamental to the success of the reform process , which is why I feel that Amendment No 17 should be withdrawn .

Mr President , it is a pity that our opinion is only being submitted after Barcelona , thus limiting the scope of tomorrow 's vote .
At Barcelona , the Council set itself the objective of increasing the retirement age by five years by 2010 , without any conclusion from Parliament or the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs on the subject , and , most importantly , without taking account of the expectations of the citizens and the social partners , for whom this idea is completely unacceptable .
The European Union , which is not competent to decide on matters of social protection but which , in fact , is exercising this competence in the name of establishing the single market in funded pensions , should play a greater part in extending the public debate on the future of pensions .
How should this be done ?
First of all , by noting , as the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs has done , that this is essentially a social challenge with financial aspects , and not the other way round .
Second , this challenge will only be taken up if we accept that the determining factor will be the employment rate rather than population ageing .
We already knew that pension funds do not affect the key choices that have to be made by society : what is this question ?
What is this choice ?
What proportion of overall wealth do we want to allocate to pensioners ?
In the past , we upheld the contributory pension system as a collective system of inter-generational support that creates a social link .
Now , we should be completely immune to capitalisation , in view of the Enron affair and the situation of British insurers who are begging their clients to use contributory pension services .
For many companies , employment remains a factor in cost adjustment .
The oldest workers , who are also the best paid , often pay the price of company exclusion policies .
Under these conditions , we cannot pretend to be astonished that those under threat of unemployment and poverty choose early retirement .
An entirely different goal would be necessary in order to achieve modernisation that takes in to account developments in work and life stages and to create a genuine right to gradual retirement .
Mr President , one of the central issues in the whole approach to the social security system is the need to ensure that the new method of open coordination guarantees the right to pensions that enable pensioners to live a dignified and independent life and does not impose reforms on the system that are designed to privatise it , albeit partially , and I am referring here specifically to pensions funds .

It is certainly important , as stated by the rapporteur , Mr Fatuzzo , that we guarantee the right to adequate pensions , regardless of the problem of financing , and avoid the risk of making workers and pensioners responsible for any imbalances in pension systems , since maintaining a fair system is more a problem of distribution than of demographics . It is , therefore , important that we guarantee a public and universal social security system , which is able to combat poverty and maintain a satisfactory standard of living for all pensioners , as we proposed in the amendments we tabled .
It is not acceptable that , on the pretext of the budgetary consolidation stipulated in the Stability Pact , we move towards laying down rules and recommendations which , in practice , threaten the right to pensions that enable pensioners to lead a dignified and independent life and to participate in social and cultural activities .
Hence the importance of expanding the base of contributors , of exploring alternative forms of financing statutory pension systems , for example , by extending social contributions to financial profits , and by conducting a thorough review of some legislative initiatives , specifically the directive on the activities and prudential supervision of institutions for occupational retirement provision .
Of equal concern is the approach outlined by the Council in the conclusions of the Barcelona Summit , proposing a progressive increase of around five years in the effective average age at which people stop working in the European Union by 2010 .
We are opposed to any attempt by the Member States to take the Council conclusion to be a starting point for increasing the legal retirement age or for extending the periods in which contributions are made in order to acquire full pension rights .
We therefore hope that the proposals we tabled are approved so as to improve the content of the report .
Mr President , I too would like to join my colleagues in congratulating Mr Fatuzzo on his report .
When he first came into this House and made his maiden speech , he spoke about the rights of pensioners and the duty that each of us had towards them for the future .
A lot of people derided him or laughed at him because of what he had said .
However , all I can say to Mr Fatuzzo is : " veni , vidi , vici " .
The issue of pensions , future contributions and necessity of securing pensions , is partly financial , no matter what anybody says .
Of course , first and foremost , we have a social obligation and social concern for the most vulnerable within our society .
Unless we put in place a proper financial model and basis for securing universal pensions for all , the system is bound to fail because of demographics and other priorities that may arise .
I think that each of us has to come to this debate and to this argument from the basis of guaranteeing maximum opportunities for employment , maximum opportunities for social protection and maximum opportunities for forward-planning with regard to pension needs .
Many people have spoken about how best we can deal with this .
I would point Members to the example of Ireland , my own country , where over recent years , we have been putting aside one percent of gross national product to deal with future public pension provision for the year 2025 and onwards .
We do not have the same demographic problem in Ireland as there would be other countries , but we have taken that decision now , even though at the moment we could use the money for other things : infrastructure and so on .
But we have given that commitment .
That is one of the issues that has to be looked at : making a tough long-term political choice rather than a short-term political choice with regard to how we use funding .
The final point I will make , Mr President , is that I agree with the rapporteur when he says that the pension system should include individualisation of pensions , social security and taxation systems .
However , we should be opposed to a harmonised and uniform system across the Union .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I should like to begin by congratulating Carlo Fatuzzo on his excellent work , and in particular on his efforts to introduce the many amendments suggested .
In my view , the stereotype of old age has itself become old and outdated . It bears no relation to contemporary society .
If asked to think of someone aged 60 or 65 , one does not conjure up a picture of a decrepit individual whose physical and mental capacities are significantly impaired .
That longer life span , extending well beyond the age of 65 , represents a considerable achievement as regards culture , society , health and economics .
Nonetheless , this achievement may become a problem if we fail to appreciate its deeper meaning and adapt accordingly . It is important to take advantage of its full potential .
It has been said that ageing is the most far-reaching social phenomenon of the beginning of this century .
As Mrs Hermange already stated , the ratio between the potentially active population and that over the age of 65 , currently 4 to 1 in many Member States , will become 2 to 1 towards the year 2050 .
It is essential to adjust to such changes so as to minimise their negative aspects .
Achievements in the areas of culture , society , health and economics mean senior citizens should be able to enjoy a good quality of life at that age too , and society should benefit from their experience and wisdom .
It will therefore be necessary to provide for a combination of public pensions and offer older people the opportunity to work if they so wish .
Flexible working patterns and equal opportunities are very important in this connection and need to be promoted .
Women often work on a part-time basis , or may have done so in the past . Sometimes they join the labour force later in life , or return to it after perhaps bringing up a family .
I believe the best approach is an open method of coordination . This makes it possible to approximate legislation on social matters between Member States .
It also makes it possible to ensure that these people do not endure poverty at that stage of their lives . In addition , it facilitates mobility by recognising that pensions can be exported , as stated just recently at the Barcelona Council .
Further , it also allows the skills of the so-called third age to be put to good use through social ventures and voluntary work , though not exclusively in these areas . Above all , it means senior citizens can be encouraged to be actively involved in the workplace , by promoting the policy of gender equality , as I said earlier .
Mr President , this Parliament is today debating a subject related to an issue that is of concern to everyone .
At this very moment , the second United Nations World Assembly on Ageing is taking place in Madrid .
I therefore congratulate Mr Fatuzzo on having drafted this report , which highlights just how crucial it is that we come up with a solution to the problem of the future sustainability of pensions systems .
The European Union is facing an enormous challenge in the forthcoming decades as a result of the increased ageing of the population , which is related to the falling birth rate and to greater life expectancy .
The ageing of the population and the reduction in the number of people of working age requires innovative and effective policies to be drafted and implemented .
It is crucial that the Member States of the European Union undertake a speedy reform of their pension schemes , which will require changes in the organisation of labour , the creation of more and better jobs , specifically for older people , and a redrafting of demographic , birth and immigration policies .
If it takes too long to implement these reforms , as the rapporteur states , the European social model and the growth and economic stability of the European Union will suffer serious consequences .
In this field , one of the most important measures is the promotion of policies that foster the idea of active ageing ; in other words , every citizen must have the option to retire or to remain in the labour market on a full or part-time basis .
Incentives must therefore be provided for later retirement , lifelong learning must be promoted and health systems must be improved .
Legislation regulating social security systems falls within the sole competence of the Member States , as we all know , which explains the considerable differences between these systems .
The importance of this issue and its economic and social effects , however , require a global approach and global strategies .
The European Union must , therefore , play a leading role in supporting national strategies , by means of an open method of coordination , setting common objectives and working methods , and by promoting the exchange of experiences and of good practices in addition to undertaking an ongoing and coherent evaluation of the progress that has been made .
Another aspect that should be emphasised is the considerable proportion of elderly people in the Member States who are victims of poverty and social exclusion .
Pension schemes must contribute to eliminating such problems and to maintaining standards of living that are worthy of the third age .
Lastly , I feel obliged to state that current pension schemes are particularly unfavourable to women , and the Member States must , therefore , give priority to gender equality and European legislation that effectively guarantees the principle of non-discrimination on the grounds of gender in pension schemes must be promoted .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , no one disputes that the subject of today 's debate lies at the heart of one of the biggest challenges facing the European Union if it is to update its social model and achieve the Lisbon objectives .
And the size of the challenge is matched by our responsibility at European and national level to achieve these targets and reform our pension systems .
Parliament 's Committee on Employment and Social Affairs , Commissioner , supports your efforts to highlight the importance of these reforms and their financial as well as their social implications and it supports the initiatives being taken to coordinate pension policies through joint objectives , joint working methods and joint monitoring and evaluation of the progress made .
We maintain that these policies must be cohesive and must complement coordinated policies on employment , social exclusion and poverty .
Because these policies are so sweeping and so important to Europe both now and in the future , they have to be democratic and they have to increase the involvement of the social partners and of social and regional agencies and women 's organisations because these social reforms are particularly important to women ; and , come what way , the method of open coordination must guarantee that the European Parliament is fully involved .
But that alone is not enough .
The reforms needed will only be viable if they are supported by the whole of society .
Public opinion is unprepared and uninformed .
I think the European Commission urgently needs to organise information campaigns in liaison with the national governments and social partners .
This is particularly important in Member States which have neglected or do not have the courage to implement suitable reforms and in order to prepare the candidate countries .
I should like to congratulate our rapporteur , Mr Fatuzzo , on a serious and detailed report which has our full support .
Mr President , to our Committee on Employment and Social Affairs - less so , though , to our highly-committed rapporteur , Mr Fatuzzo , who was sent to Parliament by the Italian Pensioners ' Party - I would like to say that less would have been more .
That , though , is the fault of - among other things - the over 200 amendments that our rapporteur had to deal with , the final result of which is the interminable resolution containing the relevant and the irrelevant along with , unfortunately , several contradictions and repetitions .
Despite that , this report is important because we indeed do not want to be left out of the European dialogue on safe pensions , not least because of the effects that unsustainable pension schemes could have on the value of the euro , quite apart from the pensioners ' standard of living .
If the euro is weak , we all suffer from it .
Time means that I must , unfortunately , limit myself to a few fundamental principles . One is that , even if the decision-makers at national level retain responsibility for pension systems , it is still for the EU to call on them to introduce in due time reforms to secure the long-term sustainability of their systems , in order to guarantee pensions that are adequate and safe .
It is for that reason that one should also welcome the Commission 's effort to monitor and promote these processes of reform through more in-depth cooperation between the Member States and on the basis of an open method of coordination .
We can agree to the three guidelines on safe and sustainable pensions , as endorsed at Gothenburg .
We may therefore expect the Member States to help to bring about a consensus capable of sustaining them in the solution of their common problems .
We know that reforms of the pension systems have been introduced too hesitantly in various Member States , because they shrink from politically unpopular decisions .
We therefore hope that the non-binding method of open coordination can contribute to the setting of common objectives and to speedily turning these into national policies .
As a woman - and , having been the youngest Member by far in 1965 , I have since , unfortunately , become the oldest female in this House - I of course welcome the call , in the communication from the Commission , for pension systems to be examined with a view to their modernisation , with priority being given to the removal from all three pillars of all existing discrimination on the grounds of gender .
That should have been done long ago in view of the directives from the 1970s on the equal treatment of women and men , which are still current .
The Member States must of course ensure that women , and also house-husbands , who are for family reasons not represented in the labour market , as well as spouses who help out in family businesses , get opportunities to accrue individual pension entitlements .
I would like to make particular reference to the spouses helping in businesses ; there is a report on them by me dating back to 1995 , and the Commission has still not yet responded to it .
Mr President , if you would allow me , as the oldest woman in this House , to say something further , it will be to those who have today resisted the idea that we , in view of our longer life expectancy should , of course , be able voluntarily to work for longer .
I would like to add to that that they should perhaps take me as an example of how work and commitment are excellent ways of preventing premature ageing .
Mr President , Commissioner , the speech we just heard was in fact an excellent bridge to mine .
Mrs Lulling represents my older female colleagues here , whereas I am the youngest female member of the PPE-DE Group .
I can fully endorse what Mrs Lulling said in her speech just now .
This shows that there is no generation gap in the European Parliament at least .
If the post of EU liaison officer for senior citizens were to be created the rapporteur , our colleague , Carlo Fatuzzo , would be the most likely candidate for the job .
I am sure that young people in Finland , at least , would support his election .
The way in which he devotes himself to his work is unequalled .
Pleasantries aside , however , Mr Fatuzzo has focused his efforts on defending the interests of senior citizens in Europe .
For several decades he has had professional experience of elderly people 's issues , which is also evident from this thorough and very professionally prepared report .
The report is based on significant social phenomena .
The growth in the number of pensioners , which is due to increased life expectancy and relatively early retirement , will eat away at the funding of the present pension schemes unless essential and sufficiently radical reforms are implemented in good time .
We need solutions at both national and Union level .
There are such considerable differences between pension systems in the various Member States that the responsibility for regulating the organisation and funding of statutory pensions must be that of the Member States alone in the future also .
At Union level we can participate , instead , in defusing the pensions bomb by promoting the development of cross-border personal pension and savings schemes . Firstly , these will be sustainable in terms of their financing ; secondly , they will provide the capital companies need in the form of investments ; and thirdly , they will serve the changing needs of individuals better than universal statutory schemes .
Unfortunately , the Member States are shrinking from making the decisions necessary for all this to come about .
The drafting of the directives on the activities and supervision of institutions for occupational retirement provision in particular has been painfully slow .
It is hardly far-sighted to bury one 's head in the sand .
Like my colleagues , I too urge the Council to face up to the challenges of our population growth at long last and take the necessary decisions , while Spain still holds the Presidency , that would enable institutions that offer supplementary occupational pensions to operate constructively in our internal market .
The guarantee of a secure old age has played a key role in different cultures throughout the ages and all over the world .
Care of the elderly is a yardstick of a civilised society .
Making the decisions in good time is above all in the interests of the younger generation as every wasted day increases the costs of reform and aggravates the problem .
Mr President , I should like to bring a slightly different dimension to the debate and bring in the experience of Parliament 's Committee on Petitions where pensions and social security issues constitute 20 % of the petitions brought to the committee 's attention .
I add my own congratulations to Mr Fatuzzo and his own way of pressing the needs of pensioners .
Pensioners across Europe have reason to be grateful to him for the work he has done .
The issue that tends to be raised most with the Committee on Petitions is increasingly that of people who in their working lives exercise their right to move across and work in various countries in Europe and then retire elsewhere .
I well remember the case of a German citizen , married to a French woman , who had spent much of his working life in Belgium , had then retired to Spain and wanted to know who was going to help him in filling in his pension claim forms .
There was also an Italian citizen who worked much of his time in Luxembourg and then retired to Italy .
He pointed out that the arrangements ( in place at the time ) made it possible to accumulate benefits , but nevertheless penalised migrant workers who found themselves having to deal with any number of national pension schemes .
In another case earlier this year we considered a petition from a British citizen , on behalf of 40,000 British pensioners living in Spain , who complained that the British Government was refusing to pay them the winter fuel allowance .
His argument was that it was paid to all pensioners living in Britain , regardless of means , regardless of how cold or warm it was in the part of Britain they lived in .
I represent the Isle of Wight - the sunniest part of the United Kingdom - but the same winter fuel allowance is paid to people living in the cold north of Scotland ; the British Government refused to pay this to the UK citizens in Spain .
These citizens appealed to the European Parliament and I am delighted to say that as a result of that petition , the winter fuel allowance is now to be paid to British pensioners wherever they live .
The point I make is that British pensioners have to look to the British Government , German pensioners to the German Government and so on .
I do not disagree that it is the responsibility of national governments , but the point that needs to be made , is that more and more thousands of citizens who are pensioners , who work in different countries in Europe , will retire to different countries in Europe .
It is very important that the Member States that have responsibility for pension schemes bear in mind the needs of citizens who use their European rights to work and retire in different countries of the Union .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , Mr Fatuzzo 's report paints an unvarnished picture of the thoroughly problematic retirement provision situation in all the European Union 's Member States , in particular of the problems that already exist , and will certainly get worse in the future , in financing the national systems for providing pensions and other benefits .
It is quite beyond dispute that the EU needs to be active in this area as well as in others and to make its contribution to a possible solution of these problems , but it must do this within the framework of the legal bases in the Treaty establishing the European Community .
Social security systems differ very widely from one EU Member State to another .
More so than nearly all other legislative areas , they have grown from historic roots and have therefore evaded harmonisation of any kind at the European level .
My criticism is directed at the method of so-called open coordination for pensions that the Council has introduced , a method that the Fatuzzo report welcomes .
This procedure would lead to the European Union appropriating for itself , without any basis in the Treaties and , so to speak , cold-bloodedly , a legislative authority that belongs to nations .
Council resolutions cause Member States to subject themselves to ever more restrictive and more detailed demands , the result being a quasi-legal obligation and liability .
We have , indeed , already been able to observe this development in the area of policy on the labour market and employment .
We are in favour of a clear demarcation of legislative competences between the EU and the Member States , that being the only way to guarantee the citizens of Europe comprehensibility and transparency , in short , legal clarity .
In addition , the most fatal side effect of what is termed open coordination is that the only institution of the European Union to have any democratic legitimacy , namely Parliament , is completely sidelined .
The Council has announced the extension of open coordination to other highly sensitive areas such as health provision and care for the elderly .
It is therefore high time for Parliament to show the Council where the lines are drawn and take a position on this , above all in defence of its own interests .
The CSU delegation within the European People 's Party , because of its substantial misgivings about open coordination , will not be voting in favour of the Fatuzzo report .
I would like to see wide-ranging discussion on this issue in Parliament in the future - with specific reference too to the legislative work of the Convention .
Mr President , I should like to thank Mr Fatuzzo for his report and to express my admiration for his enthusiasm and staying power on the subject of the reform of pensions systems .
Monetary Union and the increasingly integrated economic policies of the Member States of the European Union undeniably give all policies a European dimension , even policies which were strictly national until just a few years ago .
In December , both the ECOFIN and the Social Affairs Council agreed on joint objectives and working methods for pensions .
The fact that both Councils - both ECOFIN and the Social Affairs and Employment Council - are taking an equally categorical and focused approach to the issue of pensions is an important political step .
As we have said time and again in this Chamber , this is not an economic issue , it is a social issue with economic implications .
In today 's report , Parliament has , I think , put an optimistic foot forward on the road to cooperation between the Council , the Commission and Parliament , a new , ambitious programme of cooperation on the subject of pensions .
The Commission presented its report on pensions in June 2001 .
Let me reiterate what transpires from both the Commission report and the European Parliament report , because I think it is important . Pension systems cannot be reformed in a vacuum .
This issue does not impinge on just one type of legislation .
It impinges on a set of policies whose repercussions will be felt by the pension systems .
I need only mention policies to resolve Europe 's demographic problem .
The demographic problem was initially aired at the Madrid conference on the ageing population , which discussed the twin problems of the rise in life expectancy and the European countries ' inability to make up their populations .
A second important chapter is employment and I would remind you of the important steps taken by the European Council on specific objectives and on the involvement of older workers in the job market .
There is an important point to be made here .
We cannot simply focus on increasing age limits , justified as they are by the rise in life expectancy and economic problems .
No , that is not enough .
We also need to present and implement a set of policies to keep and motivate older workers to stay in the job market .
It is extremely difficult for people over 50 to stay in or find work in numerous industries in the private sector .
So we need investment and specific policies in the employment sector to train these people and to ensure that the education system and the training system commit to specific quotas for older people .
Policies on poverty and social exclusion also need to be mentioned here .
Several Members defined the connection between policies on poverty and the reform of the pensions systems and the Commission is currently working on new indicators for pension adequacy in relation to data on poverty .
Ladies and gentlemen , the question of pensions is , of course , a question of national policy ; in numerous countries it is a question of regional policy .
The European Union has no desire - and it would , I think , be impossible - to intervene in national systems or issue guidelines as to which is the best system and which is the worst .
However , it is clear , both for reasons of mobility - several members referred to numerous new problems with worker mobility in the European Union - and because there are common causes for the problem of viability , that there is a need for cooperation .
This need appears to be met by the method of open cooperation .
This method is a new tool which we have tried in policies on employment and policies on poverty and exclusion and now we are really putting it to the test with pensions .
Are there democratic lacunae ?
Indeed there are !
Is there more room for cooperation with Parliament ?
Indeed there is !
I should like , if I may , to reiterate where exactly the European Parliament fits into the method of open cooperation on employment .
Every year Parliament 's presence is more keenly felt , greater account is taken of its proposals and it has a very important role in the application in question .
The cooperation method on pensions has only just begun .
In September , the Member States will submit their first reports .
Parliament will be able to contribute to the Commission 's joint report .
And may I say I have no objection to sending all the reports to the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs , so that we can really work together right from the start .
Finally , two issues with a European and a specific dimension .
The first is the dimension of gender equality which , because of the acquis communautaire and European legislation , have to be mainstreamed in all reforms .
The second , as has quite rightly been stressed , is that enlargement and the candidate countries must be included in any plans .
The conference which you have organised in May with authorities from the candidate countries is a good starting point for cooperation , given that the candidate countries will have to take part in this joint exercise in two years ' time .
I think the agreed joint report with its three basic lines of approach and eleven points which all the countries must use as a basis for reform contains two important victories : the first is that the economic and social dimensions sit side by side and the second is that it gives maximum European added value to national policies .
Thank you very much , Commissioner Diamantopoulou .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon .
The next item is the report ( A5-0091 / 2002 ) by Mrs Damião , on behalf of the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs , on the proposal for a directive of the European Parliament and of the Council amending Council Directive 83 / 477 / EEC , on the protection of workers from the risks related to exposure to asbestos at work ( COM ( 2001 ) 417 - C5-0347 / 2001 - 2001 / 0165 ( COD ) ) .
Mr President , I should like to begin by congratulating the Commission and by saying that this initiative can be criticised only for its lateness and for the modesty of its ambition .
Nevertheless , it has the merit of focusing on the groups of workers currently at greatest risk and also of including sectors that it would have been quite unjustifiable to exclude , such as the shipbuilding and aeronautical industries .
The Commission rightly affirms the need to expand protection for workers who are subject to risks of asbestos and also the need to increase the effectiveness of monitoring and prevention , especially in the civil construction industry , for certain tasks , such as the repair and removal of materials containing various types of asbestos .
I congratulate the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy and its rapporteur , Mr Meyer , on the proposals he has presented us with and which the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs made the effort to include , despite the limited prospect of their becoming law .
We also feel that this is , in fact , a public health issue , which should be looked at on the basis of Article 174 , in another context .
I should like to draw your attention to the efforts made by the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs and to emphasise that my colleagues have helped to ensure that this report is today a more ambitious , more wide-ranging report , which also makes greater demands for the follow-up process .
We hope that the Commission and the Council will take account of these efforts .
Amongst the proposals are new limits , a new organisation to oversee risk prevention and a greater effort by all parties involved , specifically by employers , who are asked to provide more training , and who are asked not to shirk their responsibilities by hiring workers without proper contracts , or who are subcontracted .
There must be guarantees that workplaces subject to risks of asbestos are properly protected and that every precaution is taken to prevent the diseases that can result , which are serious diseases and as a rule carcinogenic , with a high mortality rate , which must be eradicated .
In order to eradicate these diseases , the Member States , the public authorities , must also be required to accept other responsibilities ; specifically , when local authorities , civil protection services , and site inspectors are consulted , before demolition or maintenance work , hiring workers or opening a work-site begins , they must verify whether or not the legislation of the Member States and Community guidelines in this field is being complied with .
This is the rigorous evaluation we needed in order to make a legislative proposal that can , once and for all , put an end to certain arguments , which have more to do with vested interests than with what should be guiding us , which must respect the primacy of people 's integrity at work and in society .
This being the case , we would like the Commission to provide this Parliament with epidemiological studies that clearly show the consequences of each asbestos fibre for the health of workers , which groups are at risk , to supply statistics that will enable a reliable study to be conducted and also to prevent some countries in the Union , six to be specific , from maintaining higher limits than those now being proposed .
Enlargement will , furthermore , lead to discrepancies between the preventive practices of the various countries in the Union .
Compensation for accidents and diseases is another issue that we would like the Commission to look into .
Compensation paid to victims , specifically to fatal victims , is lower than that paid out for road accidents , which we do not find acceptable .
We also think that the Commission , regardless of the fact that the Member States clearly bear full responsibility in this area , must steer this debate in such a way that companies that cause their workers , by means of concealing the truth , to contract these diseases are punished and that the compensation paid out is , in light of all the criteria , acceptable and socially fair .
The Commission must also take advantage of this range of packages - which it presented to Parliament in good time - to review the legal and conceptual criteria of hygiene and safety .
There are striking differences between the organisation that is proposed for this directive and the directive on building sites and others and , we hope , therefore , that the Commission supports this revision in order to establish best legislative practice in this field .
Mr President , in the 60s and 70s , asbestos was considered a universal remedy in construction , in industry and as a subsurface for roads .
Meanwhile , many victims who have inhaled asbestos dust have died from it .
Long after it was known how destructive asbestos is in people , this relatively cheap material was still used in different countries .
Even now that its use will end in 2005 at the latest , we will still be contending with its harmful legacy for a long time .
In the next 30 years , half a million people will become disabled and die prematurely in western Europe alone , because the illness often does not become apparent until long after infection .
The demand for damages , other forms of compensation , disability pension and widows ' and orphans ' pensions is only right and proper .
Asbestos is used in buildings , appliances and vehicles in numerous locations , and it must be disposed of expertly .
In the Eastern states that wish to join the European Union , the problem is even greater , partly because , in the countryside , houses there are built using roofs and facades that are entirely made of asbestos sheets of Russian origin .
The Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy has , in 15 additional amendments , mainly attempted to draw attention to people who have never worked with asbestos themselves , but who can become infected , such as family members , residents of dwellings that contain asbestos or people in the vicinity of asbestos-removal activities .
We must assume that every building from the asbestos era contains asbestos unless , on the basis of independent evidence , it is proven otherwise beyond any doubt .
The proposals which I support are also aimed at making registers for all Member States and candidate countries compulsory , together with inspections of authorised scrapyards and a restriction on the transport of disposed asbestos to a distance of 500 km .
In addition , the European Commission is invited to make proposals before the end of 2003 for the compensation and protection of victims who are not exposed to asbestos through their work , also in those cases in which the source of contamination is unknown or the company responsible no longer exists .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I should first like to thank Mrs Damião very much for her work on such a sensitive aspect of health in the workplace .
Discussion on improvements in the labour market and on a better quality of work within the culture in which stable work was an underlying principle of labour law usually focuses more on what is now termed health in the workplace and used to be referred to as health and safety in the workplace .
There is a tendency to overlook a fundamental issue . Work always entails a risk .
No situation is free from risk . Worse , that risk is sometimes hidden , not immediately obvious , does not strike us at once , and is difficult to detect .
This , I believe , is the situation in which those who work with asbestos find themselves . Working with asbestos can be dangerous .
It can result in very serious illnesses such as lung fibrosis , pleural fibrosis or mesothelioma . A number of doubts and unanswered questions still surround the use of this substance .
These concern for example the effect of inhaling small doses on the risk of cancer , the limits below which one can be certain that cancer will not arise and the carcinogenic properties of various types of amphibolic asbestos or chrysothile asbestos . Then there are the many jobs in which asbestos is or has been used , jobs undertaken by small and medium-sized enterprises with inadequate personal safety equipment .
Further , the equipment is often incomplete or is incorrectly used . I refer to jobs such as maintenance , repair , overhaul or refurbishment of buildings , and also to the repair or scrapping of vessels , motor vehicles or industrial equipment .
Another equally significant uncertainty relates to the length of time it takes for the disease to manifest itself . This has a bearing on establishing responsibility for it , and on the need for preliminary or regular medical examinations for workers at risk from asbestos .
As was stated previously , preventive measures are also needed for those who happen to live in the vicinity and may be indirectly affected .
I have to say in this regard that we do not agree at all with the rapporteur that the directive should cover more than the protection of workers . I should like to be very clear .
I mean all types of workers at risk of contracting asbestos-related diseases . This is because in our view a different legal basis is called for .
We do not believe either that the onus of proof should be reversed automatically in cases where the cause of the pathology is in doubt .
On the other hand , we do totally agree with the rapporteur on the need to change the culture on risk prevention in the workplace in general and on prevention of risks related to asbestos in particular .
We agree on the need to raise awareness at all levels that is , at state level and amongst employers and workers . We also agree that more training and information would be useful and indeed necessary .
In short , we do feel it is time for a change of culture .
I appeal to the Commissioner on this . The change should be set in train and promoted by the Commission and the Council .
We agree too on the importance of social dialogue as a way of achieving an effective policy on health in the workplace . We would also encourage administrations to collaborate amongst themselves .
We would possibly ascribe less importance to a third interlocutor , namely the state . This is because the state clearly has a great many other concerns , and a large number of new regulations are not what is needed in this case , unless new risks become apparent .
Action at a non-regulatory level will prove much more important . In conclusion Commissioner , I feel the Commission could make a significant contribution in this area .
Mr President , we all know that asbestos is one of the biggest threats of all to the health of workers in the EU .
It is estimated , as a previous speaker has also said , that getting on for half a million deaths over the next 35 years will be directly linked to the serious illnesses caused by asbestos .
The history of asbestos and the debate we have had about it show , in my view , how incredibly important it is that we take the precautionary principle seriously .
For many years , asbestos was used without a thought for the harmful effects it might have and , as a precise consequence of this , the asbestos problem will dog us for many years to come .
The proposal tabled by the Commission will ensure better protection of workers who are in danger of being exposed to asbestos in the course of their work , and it is on the whole a really sound proposal .
The proposal reduces the limit value for the number of asbestos particles to which workers may be exposed .
In view , however , of the danger presented by asbestos , it is good that the rapporteur try to have the limit value reduced further .
What is crucial is that the employer be obliged to provide a relevant training programme for everyone at risk of being exposed to asbestos in the course of their work .
Workers must be clear about how to protect themselves and others .
In accordance with the Commission 's proposal , common guidelines concerning the content of the training programme must be set up , and these must be as precise and exhaustive as possible .
I should like today to call upon the Member States to go still further and set up proper , formal training schemes for working with asbestos .
I would also comment on the ban on asbestos . The 1999 directive bans chrysotile , which is the last type of asbestos it is permitted to use .
The total ban on all use and marketing of asbestos is to be implemented in all the Member States from January 2005 .
I learn , however , that it is apparently uncertain whether the ban also applies to the export of asbestos to countries outside the EU .
If the ban is indeed uncertain , the problem should be tackled .
It would be ethically quite wrong if the EU were to export asbestos for use in third countries .
It would be contrary to all the principles on the basis of which we normally proceed .
I do not know how we are to approach the matter legally . I will adopt a political approach to the matter , and I should like to take the opportunity to ask the Commissioner to give an account today of the Commission 's interpretation of this problem .
Is it uncertain whether the 1999 directive does in fact ban exports to countries outside the EU ?
It would be interesting to be given an answer to that question .
I also wish finally to say a big thank-you to the rapporteur , who has done an incredible amount of work to get this report up and running .
I am entirely in favour of the report .
Mr President , every year 100 people die in my West Midlands constituency of asbestos-related diseases .
Every year 4,500 people die in the UK from these diseases according to the trade unions , and studies predict , as Mrs Thorning-Schmidt said , that in excess of between 250,000 and 500,000 will die cross Western Europe in the next 35 years .
The evidence is there .
The facts are clear , based on scientific studies .
Exposure to asbestos can maim and kill and asbestos workers have to be protected .
Manufacturing of asbestos has been banned in almost all Member States , but there are still millions of tonnes of asbestos left in Europe 's buildings , industrial plants , railway carriages that were built in the 1950s and the 1960s , etc .
I agree with the report that the presence of asbestos has to be presumed in a building if it has not been proved otherwise .
Workers will continue to be exposed for many years because of demolition , removal , refurbishment and maintenance still having to take place .
That is why I sought further tightening of exposure levels in committee by proposing an amendment , which was accepted by committee , which would effectively halve the exposure allowed .
Instead of the eight-hour exposure limit , it was opting for a four-hour exposure limit .
It would also reflect the current working patterns within an industry because shifts are a lot less than they are in other sections of the industry .
An eight-hour reference period will allow higher levels of exposure over a shorter period like one to two hours , which to my mind is unacceptable .
I would like to see this limit for all workers who are exposed to asbestos , with the exception of people working in asbestos cement .
I genuinely believe that is a separate case .
It is important we do not have different exposure limits , however , depending on the type of work , as Amendment No 21 has , but this will be dealt with in conciliation .
I urge you to vote for Amendment No 21 and for the last six words of Amendment No 42 .
My understanding is that if Amendment No 21 is accepted then we can vote for the last sentence of Amendment No 42 which deals with asbestos cement , but we need clarification on that from the President .
I urge you to vote for this excellent report .
It is one example of an EU directive where there is compelling scientific and medical evidence that it is needed to save lives across the European Union .
Commissioner , Mr President , rapporteurs , ladies and gentlemen , I should first of all like to thank the rapporteurs , both Mrs Damião and Mr Meijer , for yet another important building block that has been added to the edifice of - in this case - legislation concerning conditions at work at European level .
In my view , this will be a constant process , and so it should be . I will return to this point in a moment .
Prevention is what is desperately needed in activities of this kind , and we are all too aware of this .
In the past , I too handled asbestos when making and connecting pipes and tubing .
In retrospect , I probably consumed incredible amounts of fibres , and I am unsure of the end result , but I must stress at this point that it was in the context of DIY .
And this is exactly where the problem lies for , at the moment , we can ascertain quite clearly that , although we are drafting decisions on behalf of workers , we are doing too little for all kinds of related factors : subcontracting has been mentioned , DIY is a factor , and there is the problem of people living in the vicinity of asbestos .
I would therefore call on the Commission , possibly via the Environment Commissioner , to lay down additional legislation which we could use .
I will overlook for a moment all the other elements which demonstrate the importance of this legislation , including these half million people , for everyone has mentioned them .
I would like to return to what Mrs Lynne mentioned a moment ago , namely the aspects relating to asbestos cement and air-placed asbestos .
These have , in fact , been mentioned by Mrs Smet in the past .
I have noted that what is important here is the handling of asbestos , air-placed asbestos or asbestos cement , the processes they undergo and the amount of fibres released per cubic centimetre .
This must be measured , and certain substances should not be excluded for no apparent reason .
Mr President , I too should like to congratulate Mrs Damião on the report .
I find it gratifying that , by means of its proposal , the Commission is now tightening up on the arrangements for protecting workers against the dangers of exposure to asbestos , which is of course a particularly dangerous substance , and I am therefore also able fully to support all the other features of the amendments designed to tighten matters up .
As Mrs Thorning-Schmidt pointed out , there is still an unsolved problem in connection with the legislation on asbestos .
This was highlighted at the meeting of the Employment and Social Policy Council of Ministers on 7 March 2002 .
The problem is that the ban , which is to be introduced in the EU from 2005 , does not apply to the production of asbestos for third countries .
I know that quite a few countries , including Denmark , Germany , Sweden and Finland , wanted the ban to be incorporated into the directive , but unfortunately there was only a minority at the meeting of the Employment and Social Policy Council of Ministers who endorsed that approach .
I also know that the Commission has been reluctant to incorporate a direct ban into the directive itself on the grounds that to do so would not be to follow the normal procedure and might therefore cause legal problems .
That is at any event what I have heard .
If this is the case , I would urge the Commission to find another solution so that we can also obtain a ban on the production of asbestos for sale to third countries .
When our own workers are required to take special precautions , the EU cannot of course defend exports to third countries which do not have the same resources to take their own precautions .
It is , to put it bluntly , immoral , and I quite simply do not understand those Member States who cannot appreciate this .
The EU should naturally cease such production .
Moreover , workers involved in production for third countries would be exposed to asbestos whether the product were sold within or outside the EU .
The EU is already notorious for its ambivalent rules in relation to third countries .
A change to this directive so that it also includes a ban on production for , and exports to , third countries could be a good way to begin changing this state of affairs .
Mr President , it has long been acknowledged that asbestos is likely to cause serious diseases , including various types of cancer .
This material is a danger not only to workers who are exposed to it , but also to public health in general .
The Commission proposal , which is to be praised , and which seeks to amend this directive for the third time , has come about because of the need to strengthen existing orders so as to safeguard the health and safety of workers , especially in sectors where the risks of exposure are today acknowledged to be more dangerous .
The proposal also seeks to ensure greater clarity in the definition of various types of fibre , because many doubts still remain about these and about the risks inherent in the minimum dose of exposure .
The rapporteur , Elisa Damião , has adopted a balanced position on a sensitive and highly technical issue , on which I congratulate her .
We can only welcome the emphasis she gives to prevention and to reducing exposure by workers to the minimum , particularly in activities involving the renovation , maintenance , upgrading or demolition of buildings .
However , the measures envisaged for limit-values for exposure appear to be excessive where transite is concerned , since this is a substance that contains only 10 % of fibres and , consequently , involves a lower degree of risk .
Professional training provided by employers , improving financing methods for small and medium-sized enterprises and self-employed workers , is another much-needed measure and is to be applauded , as is the preservation of registers and medical case-notes for a period of 40 years .
Amending this directive not only provides greater protection and safety for workers , but also avoids imposing unnecessary conditions on employers .
Mr President , as the rapporteur has made quite clear , this directive does not require us to debate the hazardous nature of asbestos but to start from the certainty of that fact .
Although further scientific research is necessary to completely clear up the remaining doubts regarding the risks of asbestos exposure to human health , the number of victims of asbestos-related diseases in Europe is such that the majority of the Member States have implemented the ban on the marketing and use of products containing asbestos .
The problem is now also responding to the shift of asbestos-related risks from one sector to another : from the traditional risks in the production sector - which , although significant , are controllable - to the risks in the sectors in which asbestos has to be handled because removal , maintenance , repair , or demolition work is carried out .
The latter are potentially high , predictable risks , with regard to which it is becoming essential to base proposals squarely on the precautionary principle when setting exposure limits .
Furthermore , the risks posed by asbestos extend beyond the workers directly exposed to it . Others , such as the families of workers and persons living near work sites , may also be at risk , albeit to a much lesser extent , namely the families of workers and persons living near work sites .
Although Italy is fortunate in that its legislation is more advanced than the proposed rules , it is important that we support the rapporteur now and adopt the report , for we need to make it absolutely clear that standards of safety at the workplace cannot be lowered .
We must never forget that a high level of competitiveness is based partly on high quality social conditions and that quality of work is an important production factor .
In conclusion , over and above the general political considerations mentioned , which , as we socialists see it , cannot be ignored , we must remember that the internationalisation of the economic and social costs of occupational diseases , both those already diagnosed and those still to be so , as well as accidents at work , should convince everybody beyond any doubt that high standards of health and safety in the workplace are , in addition to being a right of the workers , also beneficial to the companies themselves and to the economy in general .
Mr President , it should be noted that the Commission has been unable to suggest a maximum limit value on the exposure to chrysotile , mainly because it has been impossible to prove that any deaths have arisen from the use of products containing white asbestos .
Yet this committee knows better . It thinks that the precautionary principle should apply .
The only way to protect workers is a policy of zero risk .
To demonstrate the absurdity of this stance , you should note that a human being on average breathes in 20,000 white asbestos fibres a day ; up to 2 million exist in the lungs of healthy individuals , and they are all from natural sources .
In fact , although occupational exposure to massive levels of white asbestos may pose some risk , as indeed does exposure to any dust at high levels , even the UK 's own risk-averse Health and Safety Executive concedes that there is a negligible risk from exposure to products made from white asbestos .
Yet the inclusion of white asbestos in this directive is estimated by none other than our own Trade Union Council to cost GBP 80 billion for the UK alone and up to GBP 500 billion throughout Europe , without possibly saving a single life .
At the very least , therefore , this Parliament should pause for thought and refer this legislation back to a committee for a full evaluation of its costs and consequences .
Mr President , a year ago I visited an asbestos factory in Poland where , during the Communist period , it was known that every fourth employee was affected sooner or later by lung or pleural cancer .
However , the information was classified , and the factory was only closed after the Communist system had collapsed .
There now remains a huge job of cleaning up to be done .
Moreover , former employees are in constant anxiety about whether they will be affected by cancer in the future .
As I see it , there are three flaws in this otherwise excellent report .
First of all , it is proposed that national registers be set up of companies suited to the task of removing asbestos .
It would be much better if such companies were to be issued with certificates of competence that could be referred to when contracts were tendered for .
Registers are bureaucratic and difficult to manage .
Secondly , it is certainly possible to require a reverse burden of proof in the case of suspected asbestos-related illness in the form of asbestosis and mesothelioma but , however , quite impossible when it comes to what may be a link between asbestos and bronchial cancer or cancer of the digestive system .
Once , perhaps , many years have elapsed following exposure to asbestos , it is not possible to weigh up the role of asbestos against that of smoking and other factors which may have contributed to the illness .
On the other hand , the link with asbestosis and mesothelioma is very strong .
Thirdly , I shudder , as a doctor , at the thought of the EU 's beginning to lay down criteria for diagnosing illnesses .
We have a worldwide system of diagnosis drawn up by the World Health Organisation , and the World Health Organisation ought also therefore to be responsible for assessing this system .
If the EU is to establish diagnostic criteria , we are entering the area of health care , and the EU would then quite simply lack the power to decide on legislation .
Mr President , Commissioner , we have just heard various positions on asbestos , which is a genuine public health problem , that are all based on the same observation but arrive at different conclusions , namely that asbestos poses a highly significant risk that must not be underestimated , that the data are not conclusive enough , and that we must certainly not risk making companies pay too many charges .
This is not very responsible .
The said conclusions , which underestimate a risk as significant as exposure to asbestos , are clearly to be given as much consideration as the grounds for applying the precautionary principle .
The original Community legislation prioritised this protection within the context of the manufacture and processing of asbestos .
This legislation has borne fruit , but a total ban on production has not yet been implemented in certain countries .
Today , the question of the upkeep and maintenance of asbestos found by chance during building works requires a new framework for intervention and new legislation .
This amendment was necessary but the goals of the directive thus amended are not yet truly equal to the seriousness of the problem .
Mrs Damião 's report , which has genuinely tried to give workers greater protection , is absolutely remarkable .
However , I would like to highlight two points .
First , the problem of derogations : the proposal for a directive does not meet our expectations on this point , so we shall vote for Amendment No 21 , which we consider to be a minimum ; second , the question of responsibility : as shown by the latest judgments passed recently by the French courts , the wording of the text must allow the broadest possible responsibilities to be envisaged as the concepts of project managers or site managers are not specific enough to be completely effective .
I would like to end with a clear warning to all those who do not wish to support all the minimum specifications proposed here , and who would therefore be willing to take responsibility for the significant health risks that would affect many workers in Europe .
This underestimation of the risks of exposure to asbestos and failure to apply the precautionary principle , a procedure which may well be costly but is less costly than human life , could lead to considerable responsibilities for employers .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , Commissioner , and Mrs Damião , to whom many thanks for this very balanced report , I think it was not very easy to develop an approach for the future - which is what your report , my dear Elisa , has nevertheless done - from the many and various national regulatory arrangements in the EU .
It is precisely because asbestos is one of the most hazardous materials to work with that the most harmful types of it have been banned in almost every country in the world .
All the same , we occasionally have to contend with difficulties , and indeed with the dangers being minimised , even on a worldwide scale , as for example at present in the WTO with Canada .
From 2005 , there will be a ban in Europe on the use and marketing of all types of asbestos .
That notwithstanding , Commissioner , we see your initiative for reform as necessary , as reform was overdue on specific points and aspects .
I therefore do not understand the position of the PPE-DE Group as just put forward by Mr Pérez Álvarez .
Of course it is sensible to extend protection to users and residents as well as workers .
We all know schools , sports facilities , and even European Union buildings , that have had to be closed due to contamination with asbestos and then laboriously and expensively renovated .
One important new essential is prevention , that is , education about the dangers of asbestos , and the greater responsibility of employers - not only the major employers , but also the small ones , including subcontractors , with atypical employment relationships of course included .
That too I see as being necessary .
Europe should set an example in the development and use of alternative materials .
That , rather than the export of asbestos to the rest of the world , is where our future lies .
Mr President , I wish to begin by welcoming and thanking Mr de Miguel , State Secretary for European Affairs of the Spanish presidency .
I would like to thank him for his understanding .
We ran out of time , but sometimes things are very difficult .
I want to congratulate Mrs Damião on her excellent report on such a sensitive and technically difficult dossier as asbestos .
In order to complement the prohibition of marketing in the use of asbestos and products containing it , it is necessary to amend and update the provisions of the existing directive in order to focus the preventive measures on today 's most exposed workers , namely those carrying out repairs , demolition and maintenance activities .
I would like to congratulate the House on the quality of its amendments .
I very much understand why you so much insist on the need to increase the levels of protection , not only for workers but also for the general population and the environment .
Unfortunately , this is not possible within the scope of Article 137 of the Treaty , which is the basis of this proposal .
I am going to reply to the Members ' proposals through my comments and my justification for rejection or approval of the amendments .
The Commission can accept in full Amendments Nos 1 , 11 , 17 , 18 , 19 , 22 , 31 , 32 , 34 and 39 , since they improve on the quality of the text and / or clarify its meaning .
Although I can agree to the ideas behind Amendments Nos 2 , 4 , 7 , 8 , 9 , 12 , 13 and 14 , the Commission cannot accept them for reasons of legal coherence and legislative technique .
The Commission has to reject Amendment No 16 and the second part of Amendment No 25 , because the employers ' responsibility is clearly established in the framework of Directive 89 / 391 and any further qualification would introduce legal uncertainties as regards where this responsibility lies .
As regards the limit value , the Commission cannot accept Amendments Nos 15 , 21 and 42 , because they would introduce two different limit values , implying different protection levels for workers carrying out different activities .
In addition , the expression of the limit values as a time-weighted average in a period of four hours instead of eight hours has to be rejected because it would create confusion when compared to the same values in international standards which use a reference period of eight hours .
Amendments Nos 5 , 10 , 27 , 38 and 40 cannot be accepted by the Commission because Article 137 , on which the proposal for a directive is based , does not allow for the recognition of and financial compensation for occupational diseases and concerns only the protection of workers .
In any case the compensation issue is a subject of subsidiarity .
In accordance with the principle of subsidiarity , the Commission cannot accept Amendments Nos 30 , 33 , 35 , 36 and 37 .
Amendment No 29 cannot be accepted since Directive 89 / 391 imposes an obligation on the employer to provide adequate training for workers and not merely to make training available .
Amendment No 41 , cannot be followed by the Commission because it would introduce , in the case of activities involving sporadic and low-intensity exposures , unnecessary additional bureaucratic burden on enterprises and national administrations without any additional benefit .
Finally , the Commission considers that Amendments Nos 3 , 6 , the second part of Amendment No 23 , Amendments Nos 24 , 26 and 28 are already contained in substance in the different articles of the proposal and therefore cannot be accepted .
Before summing up , there is a real political question : will this directive as it stands now prohibit any export to third countries after 2005 ?
The answer , unfortunately , is clear : no , it cannot .
It is one of the main issues of discussion between the Commission and the Council .
A total ban could be the answer but , in that case - and the Commission has no objections to this approach - you must admit that it is a very complicated problem because in the case of a total ban we must take into account not only the problems of demolition or maintenance - and the workers who are exposed to these activities - but also the fact that there is a list of different products which contain very small amounts of asbestos which is not dangerous , and we must see how we can solve this very complicated internal market problem .
There was a question about the exclusion of asbestos cement .
As my colleague , who is an expert on this issue , tells me there is a real problem with this product so we cannot exclude it .
At least it is not something less dangerous than the others which we exclude .
Finally , to sum up , the Commission can accept in full Amendments Nos 1 , 11 , 17 , 18 , 19 , 22 , 31 , 32 , 34 and 39 .
It can accept in part Amendments Nos 20 , 23 and 25 .
It rejects Amendments Nos 2 , 3 , 4 , 5 , 6 , 7 , 8 , 9 , 10 , 12 , 13 , 14 , 15 , 16 , 21 , 24 , 26 , 27 , 28 , 29 , 30 , 33 , 35 , 36 , 37 , 38 , 40 , 41 and 42 .
It was a very interesting debate and there is no need for me to refer to the substance of the directive because everybody agrees that this is one of the most important directives concerning health and safety in our legislation .
Thank you very much , Mrs Diamantopoulou .
We are aware that the debate has run over , and apologise . It is unfortunately often the case .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow , Thursday , at 12 noon .
Mr De Rossa has asked for the floor on a point of order .
I trust he does in fact wish to make a point of order .
You have the floor .
Mr President , you will find that it is a very real point of order .
It relates to question No 33 which I was informed , yesterday , was being removed from the list to be replied to today by the President-in-office .
I protested about this earlier today and Mr Cox , the President of Parliament , has written to Mr Pique I Camps requesting that my question and nine others be restored to the order paper .
What I want to know is whether or not that request has been acceded to before I proceed with what I might like to say .
Could I ask if that is the situation ?
Mr De Rossa , honourable Members , without prejudice to any information Mr de Miguel might wish to provide on behalf of the Council , I am bound to explain to you that there is a difference of opinion between Parliament and the Council . It concerns the date and time by which questions should have been submitted in order to receive an answer .
I am simply saying that such a difference of opinion exists .
I am not making a value judgment , just stating facts .
Parliament 's deadline is 1 p.m. on 26 April .
Council 's is 1 p.m. on 25 April .
The situation is that in any case the last ten of the series of questions to be put to the Council would not have been answered orally , because they are at the end .
That being so , the Council may decide to provide a written answer , further to the President 's letter . This is what would have happened anyway .
Alternatively , the questions may be transferred to the next part-session . That would be the worst scenario as far as Parliament is concerned .
I trust Parliament and the Council will come to an understanding and the questions will be answered . Let us show some optimism for once .
Should you wish to provide further clarification , Mr de Miguel , you have the floor .
Full understanding between our respective institutions and compliance with existing agreements between us are a prerequisite for Question Time to the Council to be properly conducted .
This particular case concerns deadlines for questions to be submitted .
As you already stated , our opinions differ .
Nonetheless , the time available to the Council , though it is the minimum required , is always very limited when it comes to drafting replies and having them approved by the Member States . I cannot provide any replies in Parliament unless they are approved by the Council in advance .
Further , on this occasion normal working time was disrupted by the Easter celebrations .
All the institutions shut down for several days . The Council would like to ensure that there is no repetition of situations such as the one we are confronted with today .
We would therefore appreciate it if both institutions could come to an agreement . It should then be able to avoid similar situations in the future , especially when holiday periods intervene .
At a stage when our Presidency is making an unprecedented effort to achieve interinstitutional understanding - I must stress that there has been nothing like this in the past - I really do not want this matter to be blown up out of all proportion .
There is no need to make a mountain out of a molehill . There simply has not been enough time .
There have not been enough hours in the day to produce replies , and there has not been time either to have the replies approved by the Council and by Council delegations .
I suggest we provide written replies .
These questions would anyway have been replied to in writing . Let me remind you that it is almost 6 p.m.
We were already half an hour late starting , so we will not even be able to reply to all the questions agreed to , let alone the additional ones .
I should also like to point out , because I feel it is relevant , that the question Mr De Rossa has particularly in mind relates to Palestine .
You will recall that an important debate on the situation in the Middle East took place in the House yesterday afternoon .
There was no reason why Mr De Rossa could not have put his name forward and asked his question yesterday .
Both the High Representative and I were present on behalf of the Council , and we would have been delighted to answer it .
I shall give the floor to you all , but I must ask you to ? Mr De Rossa , please calm down and resume your seat .

Let me remind you that Members wishing to ask questions should not be prevented from doing so .
We have only an hour left , and that ought not to be devoted to a general debate on relations between Parliament and the Council regarding questions .
I shall give you the floor so you can express your opinion briefly .
On the basis of my experience over the years , I do not think the first thirty questions could have been replied to in one and a half hours , even if that time had been available . Consequently they would in any case have been dealt with in writing .
If they do receive written replies , that will be the end of the matter . If they do not , Parliament will invoke the necessary measures to ensure they receive oral replies during the next part-session .
I do however have a lot of faith in interinstitutional dialogue and in precedents where agreements have been reached .
I shall not take up the points made by Mr de Miguel , because I do not wish to start a debate .
Mr De Rossa , do you wish to raise a point of order ?
Regarding Palestine , I can tell you straight away that usually , when an issue is debated during a part-session , questions on that issue are withdrawn from Question Time . That decision is taken by the President of Parliament in consultation with his Office .
In this case , the President took the decision to retain these questions .
This does fall within the President 's competence , and as President of this sitting , I abide by his decision .
You have the floor , Mr De Rossa .
Mr President , on a point of order , could I assure you that I am very calm , but I am not any less angry for that .
I thank the Minister for his consideration in undertaking to reply to the questions in writing .
I presume this means he will reply in the normal way and within the normal period .
I should like to point out to him that unfortunately I am not the master of whether I get the opportunity to put a question to him , or any other minister in this House , during the course of the debates - it is the group which decides who takes the floor .
If I had had the opportunity yesterday to put these questions , I would have done so .
The reason I am raising the matter here , by way of question , is because the content of my question was not dealt with in your statement yesterday .
You may submit a supplementary question when the time comes for Mr Crowley to ask his .
Mr Crowley has the floor on a point of order .
Mr President , it is not actually on my own question but on behalf of Mr Gallagher , whose question is No 10 .
He had to leave earlier this afternoon and he forgot to sign a letter asking for me to take his question on his behalf .
He rang me before I came into the Chamber asking me if it would be possible to do that ; it is in your hands .
There is no precedent for this if a letter from the Member in question has not been received .
I am sorry to say that the question must therefore lapse .
Nonetheless , as it is part of a joint reply , you may submit a supplementary question if you so wish .
Question Time should now commence , as the President-in-Office of the Council is scheduled to leave at 7 p.m.

Question No 1 by Bernd Posselt ( H-0166 / 02 ) :
Subject : Concept of marriage in the EU
In the Polish Sejm , Joanna Sosnowska of the ruling Democratic Left Alliance ( SLD ) declared that EU standards would be taken into account in tabling a draft law on unmarried couples in long-term relationships .
Are there any EU standards on this subject , or is this not a matter , together with the definition of marriage and the family , for Member States ' legislation in accordance with the principle of subsidiarity ?
This declaration was made in the Polish Parliament , though the Spanish translation states it was made in a Polish city .
Mr de Miguel has the floor .
I should like to confirm to Mr Posselt that there is no EU definition of a couple .
Further , national legislation provides for the right to marry and start a family and regulates the exercise of such rights . There is no EU definition of a couple , however .
Mr President , thank you for this clarification . I really would like to ask that you reiterate your assurance to us that the Council will make it clear to the Member States that it cannot be acceptable for certain ideological groups to attempt to sell things to them as acquis communautaire when they do not form part of it .
There is an increasing impression in the Member States that regulations would be foisted on the candidate states in the areas of family life , abortion and bioethics with the claim that they are part of the acquis communautaire .
I would like to ask you to confirm unambiguously for the benefit of all the candidate countries that these subject areas are not covered by the acquis communautaire .
This situation seems to be as appropriate as any other for me to reiterate something the Council and certainly the Spanish Presidency have repeated ad nauseam , namely that the Treaties on which the Union is based are attributive in nature .
By definition , the acquis is to be found exclusively in the primary legislation agreed in the treaties , and in secondary legislation which must be based on primary legislation .
As Ferdinand of Aragon , a former King of Spain once said way back in history , whatever is not in writing does not count .
Similarly , anything not contained in primary or secondary legislation is meaningless as far as the Union is concerned .
Question No 2 by Camilo Nogueira Román ( H-0170 / 02 ) :
Subject : Power of large states in the EU 's future : the Blair-Schröder document
What is the Council 's position on the document signed by the British Prime Minister Tony Blair and the German Chancellor Gerhard Schröder on the power of states , particularly large states , in the EU 's future ?
Mr President , the joint communication from Prime Minister Blair and Chancellor Schröeder refers to a whole raft of measures . It offers an interpretation of the measures aimed at ensuring optimum results from work in the Councils .
It does not refer only to the European Council but also to councils deriving from it . In addition , it sets out to improve the efficiency of the European Council and other councils , notably the General Affairs Council .
Implementation of the suggestions contained in this communication would not require amendment of the Treaties .
The suggestions largely coincide with the proposals put forward by the High Representative , the Secretary-General of the Council at the Barcelona European Council . These are intended as a contribution to the current debate on improving the working of the Council with a view to preparing it for enlargement .
The honourable Member is doubtless aware that the Seville European Council is to rule on a series of proposals presented by the Secretary-General , the High Representative of the Council , at the Barcelona European Council . These proposals are aimed specifically at improving and making more efficient the work of the European Council and sectoral Councils .
The Schröeder-Blair document is therefore just one more contribution to this debate , along with that of Prime Minister Persson of Sweden . The debate is open , and should culminate at the Seville European Council .
The changes it is hoped to introduce will not of course affect the Treaties .
That is solely within the competence of the Convention and the subsequent Intergovernmental Conference .
Mr President , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , I see that you are not going to give me a straight answer on an issue that the European public has been debating for several weeks , and which concerns a political matter that must now fall within the competence of the Convention , the institution that will be addressing this and other fundamental aspects of the future Constitution of the Union .
My question , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , is whether or not the issues that are to be addressed at the European Councils will be referred at this historic moment to the competent institution , which is the Convention chaired by Mr Giscard d 'Estaing ?
It is an extremely serious matter that the Spanish Presidency , which has regrettably said nothing yet about the political future of the Union , is remaining on the sidelines of a debate that deals with an issue to which , furthermore , it is going to be difficult to find any democratic solution that respects national and European diversity except through the existence of a government of the Union and of a European Parliament with full legislative powers .
I repeat what I have said before : first of all , the Council has sovereign powers to equip itself with the means to achieve greater efficacy , greater transparency , greater effectiveness and greater order in its deliberations , provided it does not touch the Treaty provisions .
Nobody , therefore , can stop the Council from adopting internal rules , provided these rules conform to the terms of the Treaties .
I have also said that if , in the end , the European Council considered that some of the Treaty provisions needed amending , they would immediately be referred to the Convention so that it could prepare them for the Intergovernmental Conference .
I should like to repeat to Mr Nogueira that nobody upholds the preservation of the institutional balance in the famous Council-Parliament-Commission institutional triangle more firmly than the Spanish Presidency .
He can therefore rest assured that during the Spanish Presidency there will never be an attempt to upset this balance , nor will the Council adopt any measure affecting primary legislation , because that is solely the competence of the Intergovernmental Conference .
Mr President , Europe is , after all , about unity in diversity , and so I would like to put the following question . How do you think the right of veto will develop ?
This is a major and very important area for the smaller States .
Do you believe - and this also relates to the Convention - that the Council will in future consider the retention of the right of veto in certain areas indispensable ?
This is a matter for the Intergovernmental Conference , and I hope the Convention will deal with it in preparing the Conference .
Let me say , however , that you are talking of the right of veto and I am talking of unanimous decision-making .
I want to remind you that in the most democratic societies decisions can be made either by simple majority or by qualified majority or by unanimity , and the fact that we have unanimity when making decisions in the Council does not imply the use of a right of veto ; it merely means we have to try harder for everyone to agree .
Moreover , you will agree with me that there are still areas subject to Community decision-making which , because they are politically sensitive , require the Council to try hard - as hard as is needed - to unify what we all want .
That is the positive explanation I give for the fact that unanimity still exists in just a very few aspects of decision-making in the Union .
It will continue to exist , provided that it is politically necessary , in order to maintain balances , which I believe are a major fact of life in all the countries that make up the Union .
First of all , I should like to say to the President-in-Office of the Council that King Ferdinand of Aragón was not a Spanish king , because Spain did not exist at that time ; he was a king of Aragón .
Secondly , I want to point out to him that Ireland 's refusal to ratify the Treaty of Nice and Denmark 's reluctance in the past are proof that the small Member States are afraid that the large States - the superstates - may impose their own criteria and interests on them .
I should therefore like to ask him if the best solution for the smaller States ' fears might not be to grant the European Parliament full legislative competence in all Community and European Union matters , without exception , and to demand the presence of the governments of the historical nations , federal states and constitutional regions in the Councils of Ministers , providing a more balanced position for the Council 's decisions , which would not be so centralising but rather more balanced and better distributed from a territorial point of view .
I was not interested in wearying this Parliament with history lessons or particularly in wearying Mr Ortuondo Larrea with some reference showing him he might need to brush up on Spanish history , although I am hardly surprised that he does not know it because he is not interested in doing so .
With regard to his second question , this is a matter for the Convention and the Intergovernmental Conference and it is not a subject for debate in Parliament right now .
The Council cannot give an answer .
I should just like to reject the way Mr de Miguel jumped to conclusions saying that I am not interested in knowing Spanish history .
I am interested and I do know it .
I am not going to judge now whether I know it better or worse or the same or more than Mr de Miguel .
I ask the Members and all the institutions that we should focus on the debates before us .
I am going to act as if I were a Finnish President who knew nothing about the history of my country and not intervene in any way .
Question No 3 by Brian Crowley ( H-0172 / 02 ) :
Subject : Peace in the Middle East
Will the Council outline what initiatives it has taken in recent weeks aimed at establishing new contacts with Mr Arafat in the context of the continuing and growing violence in the Middle East , and will it further state what influence the Council can have or intends to use with regard to its relations with Israel in order to halt the rising and alarming number of deaths in the area ?
Even though there was a debate on this subject yesterday which lasted more than two hours , I understand this question is being maintained .
I therefore do not mind answering that in its Declaration on 16 March the European Council clearly stated that the bloodshed must stop , that there can be no military solution to the Middle East conflict , and that peace and security can only be achieved through negotiations .
The Council is keeping in constant touch with the two sides and other important players , particularly through the High Representative for the CFSP , who has already visited the region three times this year .
I recall that the President-in-Office of the Council has been twice .
The European Union special representative for the Middle East peace process , Mr Moratinos , is continuing his efforts in the field .
The Council has been working closely with other interested parties , such as the United States , Russia and the United Nations ; proof of this is the summit taking place today in Madrid between the four players I have mentioned - the United States , Russia , the United Nations and the Presidency of the European Union .
It has also been in contact with countries in the region . In addition , it has expressed its support for the recent initiative by Crown Prince Abdullah of Saudi Arabia .
The Council is delighted that this initiative has been backed by the Arab League Summit in Beirut , which the President-in-Office of the Council of the European Union also attended ; this was indeed an unprecedented action because never before has a President-in-Office of the Council been invited to take part in a meeting of Arab League Ministers .
I believe , therefore , that all the preconditions for peace have been placed on the table by the European Union , as was made quite clear here in the debate we had yesterday . Contacts are continuing , and we hope that decisions may come out of today 's meeting that will allow us to achieve an immediate ceasefire and start peace talks straight away to re-establish order between Palestine and Israel .
I should like to thank the President-in-Office for his response .
I know it is difficult to come back to this question again and again .
However , you will see that my question was submitted at the end of February .
Like my colleague , Mr De Rossa , I did not have time to speak in the House yesterday .
There comes a time within a negotiation when the kid gloves must come off , when action must be taken .
The European Union delegation was given a kick in the face by the Israelis by not being allowed to meet with the necessary parties to try to start a dialogue and bring it around .
We have to be more vocal in our support for the right of the Palestinian people to have their own state , whilst at the same time guaranteeing the right of Israel to its security .
None of us could agree with or condone the suicide bombings which have taken place over the last number of weeks .
But likewise it would be wrong of us not to strongly condemn the reactions taken by the Israeli forces .
Until such time as both sides can be brought together to work out a solution then peace will never arrive .
Peace can only be built on parity of esteem , where there is respect for the territorial integrity and the rights of each group .
I urge the President-in-Office of the Council to utilise what are obviously the good offices of the Spanish presidency to bring about that solution .
Mr President , I should like to thank Mr Crowley for his considerations , with which I agree .
As we debated this subject in depth yesterday and this morning Parliament supported a strong resolution on the subject of the Middle East , I think we should refer to the conclusions we drew jointly from yesterday 's debate , which were well reflected in the resolution approved by the House this morning .
Mr President , my question relates to whether or not the Presidency-in-Office has on its agenda the issue of suspension of the Association Agreement with Israel .
There are very clear human rights provisions in that Association Agreement .
There are very strong indications that torture is being used against Palestinians - Israeli human rights organisations are reporting that .
If this is true , it is in breach of the Association Agreement .
Could I ask the President-in-Office whether he intends to place this on the agenda and make it clear to the Israeli Government that the Association Agreement can be suspended and that even tougher action , such as a trade embargo , could be put in place if this kind of activity does not stop .
Mr President , I should like to remind the honourable Member that it was only yesterday , right here , during the conclusion of the debate , that I pointed out on behalf of the Presidency that it intended to convene the European Union-Israel Association Council .
With regard to the measures that may derive from our considerations on whether or not it is appropriate to apply or suspend any part of the Agreement , I should like to remind you also that these decisions are made unanimously by the Council and that therefore it will be the Council , in its wisdom , that decides whether the measures you refer to will be adopted .
At the moment I can only tell you what I said yesterday : the Presidency is actively working on convening this Association Council and , if circumstances permit , it might even be able to meet during the next General Affairs Council , to be held in Luxembourg on the 15 and 16 April .
If for procedural reasons it does not happen , we will convene it as soon as possible .
I repeat , however : it is one thing to convene the Association Council and another to adopt measures that have to be approved unanimously .
Mr de Miguel , I am glad to hear you speak again .
I heard you yesterday , when you did indeed announce that the Presidency intends to convene the Council , and today you remind us that the review of the agreement with Israel has to be adopted unanimously .
I should like to ask the President-in-Office of the Council this : what is the Spanish Presidency 's position ?
I will say that , with regard to the Council , the Presidency cannot have a position , although I believe Mrs Díez González is well aware of the Spanish Government 's position on this matter .
I hope , therefore , she will excuse me from having to express it in public , because that would not befit the neutrality that the Presidency must have .
Question No 4 by Marie Anne Isler Béguin ( H-0174 / 02 ) :
Subject : Community programme for environmental education
The aim of the Spring Summits is to evaluate the degree of integration of sustainable development in Community policies .
In your priorities for the European Council Presidency you said that education would play a major role .
How do you aim to incorporate the idea of environmental education , not included in the priorities for the ' Spanish Presidency programme : More Europe ' , in your proposals ?
Mr President , I should like to reply to Mrs Isler Béguin that at the moment no proposal has been put to the Council on the idea of environmental education alluded to in her question .
But I should also like to remind her that the subject of education is not something that lies within the competence of the Community , but is the exclusive competence of the Member States . I am very pleased to hear - although I do not know the details , I do know enough to say this - that environmental subjects are already included in primary and secondary teaching and , of course , at university level in most Member States .
As I say , however , this is something that falls to the Member States and is not within the competence of the Community .
The only institution that has the right of initiative to submit proposals is the Commission and , since it has no legal base to make proposals on this , it has not made any .
Mr President , I was half expecting your response as we are well aware that education is the responsibility of the Member States .
The reason I asked this question , however , is precisely because it is really urgent .
You all know that people everywhere are talking of nothing but sustainable development , without knowing exactly what this term means .
We must therefore take action , and I think it would be useful if , at Council and European Union level , an initiative was taken precisely so that we could envisage every pupil , every high school student perhaps , being able to have a lesson on ' sustainable development and the environment ' within the European Union .
Although it is not the responsibility of the Member States , I believe there have been other requests on the history of the European Union .
I think this is urgent , as we have been talking about the environment and environmental education for thirty years , and ultimately , this subject is always the responsibility of the Member States or the voluntary sector .
I think it is time , and the matter is urgent now , to implement provisions and practical initiatives .
I do not need to be convinced of the need to introduce an element of universality in education matters at a European level , in both history and the environment , but I repeat what I said a moment ago : in the Union attributions are made only by the Treaties and secondary legislation .
Primary law does not , therefore , recognise this Community competence .
You know that the possibility was raised in Intergovernmental Conferences of amending the articles of the Treaty , and this was rejected by several countries that I am not going to name , but you know which they are .
Therefore , all I can tell you is that the only instrument at a European level that can prick the consciences of the Member States is this Parliament , and so I encourage you to put forward a motion or a parliamentary resolution to get this subject on the table , so it can be a wake-up call for the Member States ' governments .
Since there cannot be a common policy and the Commission cannot , therefore , make proposals , let these come from the Union 's political body , the European Parliament .
Question No 5 by Francisca Sauquillo Pérez del Arco ( H-0179 / 02 ) :
Subject : Ratification of the Cotonou Agreement
By 6 March 2002 , according to information published by the Council itself , only four of the European Union 's Member States ( Denmark , Finland , UK and Sweden ) had ratified the Cotonou Agreement signed on 23 June 2000 .
To date , only Belgium and Italy have begun the relevant ratification procedures ; the ratification of the Agreement by the European Community took place on 16 January 2001 , after the European Parliament had given its assent .
What are the Council 's forecasts for the ratification of the Cotonou Agreement as we approach the second anniversary of its signing ?
What action has the Presidency taken or will it take to encourage those Member States which have not yet done so to initiate their respective ratification procedures ?
Does the Council not believe that there is a need for a European-level campaign to inform individual citizens and associations of the existence of this agreement , which constitutes the framework for the EU 's associative relationship with 77 countries in the developing world ?
I should like to confirm that , unfortunately , even though it was signed some time ago , only four Member States have so far ratified the Cotonou Agreement .
In chronological order they are Denmark , United Kingdom , Sweden and Finland .
The Council wishes , however , to correct the statement that only two Member States have begun ratification procedures .
That is not the case : these procedures have been started in all the Member States without exception , and they are even nearing completion in Spain , for instance .
I could almost say it is a matter of days rather than weeks .
The ratification procedures are following their normal course , although it is a long process , and we can expect that , if nothing untoward happens , all the Member States will have ratified the Cotonou Agreement before the end of this year , 2002 .
The Presidency of the Council - which has been aware of this situation - has contacted all the Member States of the Union to urge them to push forward and speed up their ratification procedures , and nothing would give us greater satisfaction than to be able to say that by the end of our Presidency the Cotonou Agreement had been ratified . We must bear in mind that this agreement will come into force on the first day of the second month following the date on which the ratification instruments are deposited by the European Union Member States and two thirds - i.e. 51 - of the ACP states , as well as the instrument by which the Community approves the agreement .
As of today , 42 ACP states have deposited their ratification instruments .
I want to take this opportunity to emphasise once again that the Presidency is reminding all the contracting parties to the Cotonou Agreement that full implementation of this agreement is urgent , since it is an essential component of the European Union 's foreign cooperation and development policy . I did so myself on behalf of the Presidency of the Council of the European Union at the meeting of the Joint Parliamentary Assembly which took place in Cape Town from 18 to 21 March this year .
This will of course be a priority issue at the meeting of ACP-EU Ministers to be held at Punta Cana -Dominican Republic - on 28 June , during the Spanish Presidency .
Mr President , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , from what you have said today and you also said in Cape Town , I imagine that Spain is about to ratify it .
In any case , given the importance of this Association Agreement between the ACP countries and the European Union , and as two years have now passed since the signing of the Cotonou Agreement , I should like to know whether - apart from what the Member States that have ratified it - only four of them , as the President-in-Office of the Council has pointed out - may be doing - the Council is thinking of organising a campaign to inform our public opinion in Europe , which hardly knows what this Cotonou Association Agreement is about .
The same cannot be said of the ACP countries , 44 of which have ratified it , as he has indicated .
Does the Council intend to make the most of this Presidency and the current situation in the ACP countries to carry out this awareness campaign ?
I think you are quite right about this being an opportunity to launch a campaign to make European citizens aware of the importance of this relationship , the longest-standing one that the Union has had with third countries . It is a commitment that the European Union has to the developing world , a world towards which the countries of Europe hold a special responsibility since most of these ACP countries were once colonised by the former colonial powers , now members of the European Union .
I also think the time is just right .
The Monterey Conference on development funding has taken place , and in Johannesburg there is going to be a world conference on sustainable development in early September , at which development funding and all the actions developed under the Cotonou Agreement will be high on the agenda .
I am , of course , prepared to bring this up with the Commission - with the Commissioner responsible - and to back a campaign to effectively raise European citizens ' awareness of the importance of this instrument , which places Europe at the head of development cooperation in the world we live in .
This is particularly important , especially when you take into account the fact that at Monterey we were reminded of the special duty that the more developed countries have to help the less developed ones .
Question No 6 by Richard Corbett ( H-0183 / 02 ) :
Subject : Kashmir
Does the Council agree that recent developments have made it all the more urgent to find a solution to the dispute over Kashmir ?
What steps does the EU intend to take to help bring the parties concerned together to negotiate a solution ?
The Council is concerned about the recent tensions between India and Pakistan , especially in view of the extent of their military build-up and the nuclear capability of both countries .
It hopes that , as a result of the firm measures taken by Pakistan against the terrorist groups that are based in its territory and operate in India , both countries will be able to resume bilateral talks in the spirit of the Shimla Agreement and the Lahore Declaration .
The Council also hopes that these talks will cover all subjects of interest to both parties , including the question of Jammu and Kashmir .
The Council is prepared to assist in the talks , but only if the parties consider it would be useful .
Does the presidency agree that Kashmir is a good example of a conflict allowed to fester for too long ?
While our attention is understandably focused elsewhere - such as on the Middle East - we tend to forget that there are very dangerous conflicts going on in other parts of the world and therefore tend to do too little about trying to resolve them ?
Is the presidency aware that there are many EU citizens of Kashmiri origin - not least in my own constituency - who are very worried , and increasingly worried , about the wellbeing of their relations ?
Does the President-in-Office agree that it is now time to press even harder for the parties concerned to find a negotiated solution ?
We should not forget that conflict while our attention is focused elsewhere .
We need to pay more attention to it as a European Union and , if necessary , we offer the European Union 's services as a mediator if that would be helpful to those involved .
Mr President , the Presidency is well aware that the Kashmir conflict is one of those conflicts that last or have lasted longer than would be desirable .
Unfortunately , adjustments in the modern society that has emerged on the international scene in the twentieth century have caused flashpoints to develop in various parts of the various continents ; it has not been possible to defuse these flashpoints , because they are highly charged both politically and emotionally .
Kashmir evidently does not claim our full attention , but not because it is not a serious problem but precisely because of the praiseworthy efforts made by both India and Pakistan to contain this hotbed , which has been on the brink of sparking off a war that could have had incalculable consequences . This was possible thanks to the spirit of dialogue which still exists between India and Pakistan , despite their many problems .
I think the Council has been extraordinarily appreciative of this spirit of conciliation shown by the Indian Government and the Pakistani Government , particularly over the recent months when very serious events have occurred , with terrorist attacks that could have destabilised the region , which was already unsettled enough with the conflict in Afghanistan .
The Presidency has , of course , been offering both sides its services since the very first day .
I believe Pakistan and India are countries with a high culture and long traditions .
They believe they can solve the conflict by themselves .
If they should need us , you can rest assured that we will be there for them , but for the time being the spirit of dialogue that reigns between the two powers , Pakistan and India , suggests that slowly but surely they have the will to solve this conflict , which is similar to what happened at the time of separation from India , when Pakistan became independent , which sparked off great frustrations .
Question No 6 by Cecilia Malmström ( H-0187 / 02 ) :
Subject : Visitor 's visa for leading Taiwanese citizens
Taiwan 's democratically elected Liberal President , Chen Shui-bian has been invited to Sweden by a Swedish sister party to take part on a private basis in its hundredth anniversary celebrations .
He is being refused an entry visa on grounds that EU visa rules do not allow the Taiwanese President to enter any EU Member State .
President Chen Shui-bian was also refused a visa to visit Brussels last autumn .
The One China policy is clearly restricting the EU 's room for manoeuvre in its relations with Taiwan .
EU Member States have for a long time been testing the limits as regards our diplomatic relations with China and have occasionally managed to stretch those limits .
As recently as autumn 2001 , for example , the European Union received the Tibetan leader , Dalai Lama .
Is the Council prepared to review its visa policy towards Taiwan so that the country 's democratically elected president can enter the European Union at least for private visits ?
Does it consider the policy of allowing the Tibetan leader to visit , but not the democratically elected president of Taiwan , to be consistent ?
Council Regulation 539 / 2001 lays down the list of third countries , identities and territorial authorities not recognised as states , at least by one Member State , whose citizens are required to hold a visa to cross the external borders of the Member States , and Taiwan appears on this list .
It is up to the Member States to adopt decisions regarding the granting or refusal of a visa in individual cases , based on the criteria laid down in the Common Consular Instructions on Visas , when said decision relates to the Schengen acquis .
There is no specific Council decision obliging Member States to refuse a visa to the person you refer to .
The Member States therefore have the power to do so if they so desire .
Thank you , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , for that clarification .
We discussed China this morning , and there was a great deal of agreement in the House about how important it is to have dialogue and cooperation where human rights too are concerned .
If I interpret your answer correctly , you are saying that there is no justification for the references to the EU 's visa regulations made by the French , Danish and , now most recently , the Swedish Governments when President Chen Shui-bian was refused a visa after he had received an invitation on a private basis .
As I now understand it , there is , then , no decision by EU ministers which must be adhered to in this case . Instead , each country can make its own judgment on the matter .
Do you not think it strange that these judgments are made ?
It sends very odd signals to China at a time when we are so anxious to emphasise the dialogue on human rights and to strike the right note in discussing this issue with Taiwan .
I see nothing strange in that , Mrs Malmström .
What I have to say is that Taiwan poses a political problem that you are aware of - and which , naturally , I am not going to go into - and so the Common Consular Instructions on Visas do not state that visas should be automatically issued to people from Taiwan , especially to someone as significant as the President of the Government .
Nevertheless , any European Union country that itself wants to issue such a visa exclusively for entry into that country may do so , and nobody will stop it .
That , of course , depends on the political considerations of each Member State , and I imagine it does not escape you that there are powerful political grounds and great pressure from China for such visas not to be issued .
As the author is not present , Question No 8 by Mr Van den Bos lapses .
As they deal with similar subjects , Questions Nos 9 and 10 will be taken together .
Mrs Rodríguez Ramos , author of Question No 9 , has appointed Mrs Díez González as her deputy .
Question No 9 by María Rodríguez Ramos ( H-0192 / 02 ) :
Subject : Action to unblock international adoptions in Romania
Following pressure from various international institutions , the Romanian government decided in June 2001 to suspend international adoptions . It is now preparing a new adoption law which will reportedly soon be put before the national parliament .
Nonetheless , on 7 December 2001 the Romanian government adopted an ' emergency ordinance ' opening the door to the completion of the procedures currently sub judice , thus authorising certain exceptions to the blockage of procedures pending adoption of the new law .
A considerable number of families from the Member States , including 1200 from Spain , had started the procedure for adopting a Romanian child .
In some cases , the Romanian Adoption Committee had gone so far as to assign a child to prospective parents , and the couple concerned had visited Romania to get to know the child - only to be faced with the suspension measure .
These circumstances apply to 17 requests made by Spanish families to whom a child has been assigned by the Romanian government and who have been waiting for confirmation from the Romanian Adoption Committee before they can act within the Romanian legal system .
What action has the Council taken , or what action does it intend to take , vis-à-vis the Romanian authorities to ensure that these 17 procedures are completed ? What initiatives does the Council intend to promote to ensure that the families whose adoption procedure has been bureaucratically blocked since 2000 are offered a rapid solution to an agonising situation which now has been going on for far too long ?
Question No 10 by Pat the Cope Gallagher ( H-0219 / 02 ) :
Subject : International adoptions and Romania
In June 2001 the Romanian Adoption Committee stopped referring children to international adoption foundations and suspended the registration of new foreign families requesting international adoption for at least one year .
Will the Council state what steps it is taking to seek the lifting of the moratorium on international adoptions in Romania , and is it satisfied that enough is being done to integrate childcare policy with other sectoral policies ?
Mr President , by chance you were chairing this sitting in March this year .
At this very time and in this sitting I answered a question by Mr Gil-Robles Gil-Delgado and I spoke plainly and at length on this subject .
The question now asked is identical .
I could refer you to my reply to Mr Gil-Robles Gil-Delgado , but I am not going to do so ; instead I am going to read out exactly what I replied to him , so that everyone will know that the Council has not in fact changed its mind between March and April :
' The European Union has systematically given priority to the issue of human rights and the protection of minorities within its relations with the candidate countries .
' This issue is a key element of the pre-accession strategy for each of these countries , in accordance with the political requirements for accession established by the Copenhagen European Council in 1993 .
' In the case of Romania , one of the specific areas included in the pre-accession strategy is childcare .
In the Commission 's periodic report for 2000 on Romania 's progress towards accession , the Commission expressed its concern in relation to the legislation and practice on adoption between different countries , which allow considerations other than the best interests of the child to influence decisions on adoption .
As a result of this , and other expressions of concern , the Romanian Government decided to suspend international adoptions .
In the revised Association for the accession of Romania , adopted by the Council on 28 January 2002 , amongst the intermediate priorities and objectives , it is stipulated that Romania must maintain the moratorium on international adoption until new legislation is adopted which is compatible with the interests of the children and with Romania 's international obligations , and the necessary administrative capacity to apply the new legislation is guaranteed .
As well as maintaining the general moratorium , the Romanian Government adopted measures in December 2001 to allow for the completion of adoption procedures in those cases which were already before the courts at the time of the suspension of international adoptions .
The Presidency of the Council believes that the adoptions of those children whose adoption procedures have already begun in the Member States , with all legal guarantees , should be completed within a reasonable period . ?
Actually , the President-in-Office of the Council of the European Union - the President of the Spanish Government , Mr Aznar - obtained this commitment when he visited Mr Iliescu and Mr Nastase last November during a tour of capital cities prior to the beginning of the Presidency .
There we were given guarantees that the adoptions were to go ahead and , moreover , that they were going to introduce all the legislation needed .
Thus the Presidency did this before it started its term of office , and now it intends - as was said in the reply - to ' closely monitor the situation in Romania in this regard , especially within the bodies created within the framework of the European Agreement , such as the Association Council and the Association Committee . '
I should point out that this subject was raised at the last meeting of the Association Council , and we have also raised it bilaterally with both the Prime Minister , Mr Nastase , and the Foreign Minister , Mr Geoana .

Mr President , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , you have , in effect , told us that there is a new piece of legislation , an emergency decree that will allow some formalities to be completed more quickly .
Mr de Miguel , I do not want the Council to change its mind , and I also believe that we need to protect children , but , do you not think that our governments could at least be as effective as their American counterparts ?
You are well aware that in February , after a visit from the Romanian President to the United States , and pursuant to this new decree and this new legislation , nineteen children were given up to American families for adoption .
Do you not think that , once this decree is in force and we have removed barriers to adoption , keeping a close eye , of course , on the children involved , but also asking the Romanian Government to ensure equal treatment for European families , the solution lies in properly exerted political pressure ?
Do you not think that if Mr Aznar were to include this issue in his agenda once again , if he were to pick up the telephone , if he were to establish political contact at a high level , this issue - which affects at least 17 Spanish families that have already been allocated children - the barriers would be removed , as has been the case for the Americans ?
I think it would , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , and I would ask him to do this .
I can only reiterate that the President-in-Office of the Council indeed took action , which managed to kick-start this issue , before Spain took on the Presidency of the EU .
This issue has been raised again , most recently at the Barcelona European Council . I am not aware of the measures Romania has taken with regard to children given up for adoption to American families , nor do I know the specific details of the adoptions under way in EU Member States .
I would remind you that the Presidency makes no exceptions for nationality - all children in the EU are equal , whether they be Spanish or from any other Member State .
I do not know the numbers of adoptions under way that have been unblocked , but I have the impression that the process is well underway .
In any case , I would like to tell you , Mrs Díez , that we will naturally spare no effort , and if we need to take further action , we will not hesitate to do so .
I have taken note of what has been said and I will not hesitate to pass these views on to the appropriate person - I will even take the necessary action in this regard myself .
I thank the President-in-Office for his honesty in saying he has given the same reply as he gave last month .
My supplementary question relates in particular to vast evidence that is available to us in Parliament thanks to a report that Baroness Nicholson of Winterbourne drew up on behalf of Parliament .
It is in the interests of a lot of children to be given up for adoption because they can have a better chance in life .
In particular there are a number of severely disabled children in orphanages in Romania for whom there are willing host families in European Union countries .
These families are now being prevented from taking what in a lot of cases would be unwanted children in Romania and other countries - in America in particular .
There are host families in the European Union who are willing to take in severely traumatised and disabled children - disabled both physically and mentally - into their own families .
Unfortunately they have been blocked from doing so .
Could not a priority system be put in place with regard to those kind of adoptions ?
Mr Crowley , my work takes me frequently to Romania and I have had the opportunity on several occasions to see the wretched and miserable lives led by children who are orphans or who have been separated from their parents in orphanages and children 's homes .
I can only agree with you when you say that these children would be much better off living with a family than in a charitable institution , which usually have neither the resources nor the money available to be able to offer these children a decent life .
This issue of adoption , however , is very emotional for Romania and states in a similar situation to it , and , because it is emotional , it is also highly political . The Romanian Government is not finding it easy to put its house in order where this matter is concerned , because this issue has also been tainted by the unbelievable corruption that has tarnished Romanian public life .

I think that we should give a vote of confidence to the new government put together by Mr Nastase , an honest Prime Minister , which is trying to establish a system free from corruption and based to the greatest possible extent on respect for rights and human rights as it is required to do by the Copenhagen accession criteria for EU candidate countries , and I feel that we need to give Romanian Government the space it needs to be able to reconstruct the adoption system .
This issue , however , which affects many families , is a humanitarian issue .
There is also the problem of families who are still waiting for the children they have already been allocated ; we need to take care of this situation and then give the Romanian Government the room for manoeuvre it needs to establish a completely transparent adoption system that allows Romanian children , that have neither family nor fortune , to find a better future with European or American families .
It gives me very great pleasure to thank and support the Council for everything that it has said today on this complicated issue .
I rise because , although the Council position has not altered , the Romanian Government has put in a great deal of work , and I want to commend to the Council the report that came out just a few days ago from the independent group for international adoption analysis , which the Prime Minister commissioned .
The report has now been adopted and will be published and promoted once one or two details have been sorted out .
This new report is very important , in particular for unblocking pipeline cases , which I know will give my good and eminent colleague , Mr Gil-Robles Gil-Delgado , very great pleasure .
But we need to remember that it is not just families in Spain and North America who are affected by the corruption and child-trafficking to which the Council has referred .
There are many thousands of children in Romania who have families of their own and have become detached from them .
So the whole system has to be refreshed , renewed and looked at , as the Council has said .
It is a very important matter , particularly in regard to severely disabled children , and I feel confident the new report helps on priority as well .
My question to the Council , however , is that I am very concerned at reports , that appear to be very well-founded that the US , stirred perhaps by the emotion that this issue creates , is linking the potential membership of Romania to NATO , which this Parliament 100 % supports , with the lifting of the moratorium on inter-country adoption .
Could the Council please state - if it is true - that this is a most improper way to behave ?
My reply is going to be very succinct , because I do not wish to continue discussing this issue .
Baroness Nicholson has made a very significant contribution to relations between the European Union and Romania in her report , of which we are all aware and , with which the Romanians are , of course , even more familiar than we are .
I think she knows that many of these issues are in the process of being resolved and I do not think it is an appropriate time to continue speculating on matters of adoption in Romania .
Mr President , my question will be very brief .
I would like to ask the President-in-Office of the Council whether , according to his information , there used to be around 3 500 international adoptions every year in Romania , and the same number of children living in orphanages ?
If there are now at least 50 000 children in orphanages , we will not be able to resolve this problem using this system . Is the Romanian Government truly exempt , because of its duty to eradicate corruption , from a basic principle of the European Union , which is the non-retroactivity of current laws , under which adoptions have hitherto been processed ?
To tell the truth , I am not able to give any precise details on the number of children in Romanian orphanages .
It goes without saying , however , that there are tens of thousands .
I also agree that one way - a humane way - of providing some kind of future for these unfortunate children would be to speed up the adoption procedure .
However , I also said that I believe this is a serious political problem for the new Romanian Government , which is dogged by what has happened in the past .
This government is taking great steps to produce legislation on and to put some kind of order into this issue of adoption which , I might add , is extraordinarily sensitive inasmuch as it affects the whole of Romanian society .
Therefore , I think that we must be prepared to give this government the benefit of the doubt and have faith that Mr Nastase and his government will implement this new legislation and be able to re-establish the pace of adoptions that existed before .
The principle of retroactivity is one option for the Romanian Government , which can , if it wants , apply the old legislation , or wait to apply the new legislation .
In any event , we have already reached the compromise that children allocated under the old legislation will be delivered to the corresponding families , and this is what is actually happening at the moment .
Question No 11 by Jonas Sjöstedt ( H-0193 / 02 ) :
Subject : Extension of scope of SIS 2
The Council is considering a proposal to extend the recording of details in the SIS 2 register to include ' troublemakers ' , for instance football hooligans or violent demonstrators .
Does the Council intend to make it possible to record in the SIS register details of demonstrators who have not committed any offence , too ?
Mr President , the question refers to the Belgian proposal to include details of persons known to have committed certain public order offences , who could become troublemakers in certain circumstances , such as at sporting , social or cultural events , or any kind of demonstration , in the SIS ( Schengen Information System ) register .
The intention was to match this information with descriptions provided under Article 99 of the Schengen Agreement , but with a different aim : that is to say , to actually prevent these people participating in certain events , instead of implementing specific or one-off surveillance operations , as has been the case recently .
Ministers debated this proposal at the meeting of the Joint Committee on 7 December 2001 .
There were differences of opinion and some delegations firmly opposed to the proposal .
Consequently , no detailed examination of the proposal by experts was carried out nor were the possible conditions for the introduction of this information on particular individuals made clear in case it was agreed that these measures would be introduced .
Therefore , at this time , a definitive answer to the question cannot be given but , taking account of current opinions , it does not seem likely that this proposal will prosper in the near future and even less likely that it could affect persons who have not committed any crime .
For your information , the Council would like to point out that there is a draft Council Decision concerning security at international football matches .
In the aforementioned draft decision , the exchange of police information between national football information points is anticipated but not the use of the SIS for this purpose .
I would thank the President-in-Office of the Council for his answer .
My question now is about whether this proposal will be debated again by one working party or another or in the Council of Ministers .
Has it been included on the agenda for forthcoming meetings ?
I should also like to emphasise that this is an important legal rights issue .
It is about possibly restricting fundamental human rights : the right to travel and the right to express one 's opinion by taking part in a demonstration .
There need to be very strong reasons for imposing any such restrictions .
An absolute condition must be the existence of a judgment so that it is not done merely on the grounds of , for example , a political suspicion .
I am pleased with the Council 's answer , to the effect that it does not see it as possible in practice to include people not convicted of crimes in such a register and that it considers it unlikely that such a decision would be made .
I think I have been explicit enough , Mr Sjöstedt .
The Council has not been receptive to this idea of adding to the SIS lists of persons known solely for their slightly unusual activities at particular events , because this would give rise to an absolutely intolerable surveillance of persons who have committed no crime .
The SIS is only used to compile lists of criminals .
In cases where public order issues are expected to arise , such as at sporting or political events , or demonstrations , as has been the case in the past , the discreet surveillance of individuals entering a country and of borders is far more effective than compiling such lists which are not only odious , but run counter to our civic tradition as a whole .
I would like to remind you that the last occasion when discreet surveillance was used was the Barcelona Council , to prevent the streets of Barcelona from being turned into some sort of battleground , as happened in Genoa . The temporary suspension of the Schengen Agreement allowed the Spanish police to stop several troublemakers at the border , who were carrying clubs and baseball bats with which to break shop windows , for example .
More than 2 000 implements were confiscated .
Everyone was allowed to cross the border , except those carrying objects with the aim of causing destruction .
Such controls are surely more effective than the publication of a list of persons that have theoretically committed no crime and who , therefore , have absolutely no reason to be classified .
Mr President , this is not really a question , but I shall willingly respond to your suggestion that , in effect , neither controls , whether discrete or not , nor the SIS lists can prevent unfortunate acts from taking place at public demonstrations . I believe that the Spanish Presidency can pride itself on the fact that absolutely no violent acts were committed in Barcelona , against goods , property , persons or against demonstrators , because the police as expected - carried out their task of control and surveillance with sufficient respect for the people demonstrating , always attempting to separate troublemakers from peaceful demonstrators .
It should be remembered that the Barcelona demonstration was an extraordinary display of civic unity and that for a demonstration of such size to be free from violence is quite unprecedented .
Therefore , I am absolutely convinced that the best way of preventing these occurrences from taking place is to carry out effective surveillance and to have a police force that knows how to operate effectively , as was the case at the Barcelona European Council .
As the time allocated to Question Time has elapsed , Questions Nos 12 to 40 will be answered in writing .
Mr President , I have attended Question Time in this Parliament on many occasions and my personal view is that , when compared with others , Mr de Miguel is guilty of parliamentary filibustering , because he speaks very slowly , but more than anything , he also reads very slowly , which is even more astounding .
I understand the Spanish language very well , and I see this approach as a kind of parliamentary nit-picking , designed to all but bring the debate to a halt .
I believe that if we were to carry out a comparative phonetic , phonological and time study , we would see that there have been Presidents-in-Office of the Council whose participation in these debates has been magnificent , and who have devoted a great deal of time to their explanations , but unfortunately , this is not the case here .
I believe there to be a certain amount of political filibustering at play here , in deliberately slowing things down , so there is not enough time to answer all the questions .
For this reason I would ask the Presidency to study this issue to see if it would be appropriate to give Mr de Miguel some advice on this matter .
Mrs Izquierdo , I can tell you that my perception of this matter does not coincide with your own , very personal , opinion .
This is not a point of order .
You have every right to express your views in writing , but I can tell you that the Presidency has absolutely no intention of carrying out any phonological or time study and believes that Mr de Miguel answers questions as he is supposed to .
Sometimes Members of this House like this arrangement and on other occasions they do not , Mrs Izquierdo .
I do not think this is too hard to understand .
If Mr de Miguel would like to answer , since this matter concerns him , he has the floor .
I think that this remark stretches courtesy to its very limits , and even more so today , since Parliament kept me waiting for half an hour before starting Question Time because of another debate .
I did not reproach Parliament for this delay in the debate because this seems to be a completely normal occurrence .
I find it absolutely incredible that someone in this House should accuse me of wasting time when answering questions when it is Parliament itself that has kept me waiting for half an hour .
Mrs Izquierdo should be aware of this .
Furthermore , this is not the first time I have spoken in a parliament - this not even the first time I have spoken in this one - and nobody has ever accused me of filibustering .
In fact , the opposite is the case . I believe I read with sufficient speed and talk quickly enough for no one to accuse me of such things .
Therefore , Mr President , I would like to formally protest at these comments , which I think are bordering on out and out rudeness , to put it very mildly .
Mr de Miguel , I would like to apologise for the late start to Question Time .
I am sure you are aware that this delay is not the fault of the President of a particular sitting , because the debate running beforehand has to come to an end .
I have already made it perfectly clear that the Presidency does not agree with any of the comments made by Mrs Izquierdo .
We have no intention of stirring up trouble between Parliament and the Council , because this would be pointless .
I personally , as President of this sitting , am very satisfied with your answers , with the pace at which you give your answers , and with your cooperation with Parliament .
Having established that , we , or rather the Members of this House , are free to criticise the type of answers given as they see fit and as takes place in parliaments worldwide .
I am sure that Mrs Izquierdo will at some point come to share this view , even if she does not right now .
However , the Presidency is absolutely convinced of the President-in-Office of the Council 's dedication in coming here this evening , and he has done exactly what you have asked of him , if not more . With the utmost courtesy , then , I would like to thank you , Mr President-in-Office , for coming to Parliament to speak to us today .
The next item is the debate on the report ( A5-0020 / 2002 ) by Mr Skinner , on behalf of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs , on the Commission communication to the Council and the Parliament on implementation of the risk capital action plan ( RCAP ) [ COM ( 2001 ) 605 - C5-0015 / 2002 - 2001 / 2213 ( CNS ) ] .
Mr President , it is because the Lisbon Summit first of all set its sights on making Europe the most dynamic and knowledge-based economy in the world by 2010 that we actually have the risk capital action plan we have today .
It was optimistic of governments to set this target , but not unrealistic , given that it is within their grasp to achieve it .
A stimulating framework is required for us to promote high-growth industries such as information and biotechnologies and from that the jobs that must come .
SMEs are a part of that process and that is what this is about : attracting finance to try to generate those businesses .
Why do we need the risk capital action plan ?
If we make a comparison of Europe and the US in the areas of business generation and equity financing , particularly amongst small businesses , then venture capital activity demonstrates a huge gap in Europe 's readiness to compete .
A framework has had to be established in order for us to plot Europe 's future .
To begin with , and the Commission has done this fairly well - after prompting by Parliament - key barriers had to be removed and benchmarks set for their removal .
The framework for these benchmarks has now been identified .
The first is market fragmentation .
How do companies actually raise debt and equity finance across the European Union ?
There are varied and contrasting pictures across the 15 Member States .
There are can best be described on one side as nascent markets , and on the other , rather more sophisticated and developed approaches .
Commercial bank loans are how many small- to medium-sized businesses attract finance .
This is wholly appropriate in some circumstances ; but new and exciting projects or spin-offs are not necessarily so appropriate for bank loans .
In areas where risk is likely to be a considerable feature of the exchange , dotcoms for example , commercial banking may be deemed inappropriate and unworkable .
Alternative processes are then required - business angels or groups of investors , private investors - bringing together people with ideas on one side and money on the other .
At the institutional level , there is the possibility of quotation on the AIMS market in the UK , for example , and perhaps even the idea of using pension funds to allow for higher growth returns rather than with bonds and blue chip equities .
Given the pursuit of those higher returns for potential new and growing firms , it is not perhaps surprising to learn that an entire industry has sprung up in this field .
Similarly , the careful approach of these investors , with their application of the principle of due diligence , means that spontaneity is not a part of the risk equation , as one might have first imagined .
If the EU wants a place in the " premier division " of industrial growth and competition , then funding the industries of tomorrow is of vital importance .
This is the stark reality of a market which is held back , not just by the slow evolution of debt-raising , but also by the nature of the institutional and regulatory barriers which fence in any further development across the European Union .
Let us have a look at some of those barriers .
On the administrative side , it is nice to see that the administrative formalities for forming a company have now acquired the cornerstone of the company statute .
This permits the kind of progress we hope to see .
I note also that in January 2002 the Directorate-General for Enterprises started to work on benchmarking the administration of business start-ups .
The cost of starting up a business varies across the European Union and there is some progress .
But look at some of the licensing issues .
Look at some of the other issues which hold companies back .
It is important to make distinctions , and here we see companies in the areas of hi-tech , drugs , and biotechnology being made to jump through hoops which may have to be reconsidered .
We have to look at just how these businesses fare .
We do not just need to look at start-ups - businesses grow , they develop or they are bought out .
So , for any practical observation , we need to consider just what kind of businesses we are looking at for risk capital .
Even now buy-outs - and management buy-outs in particular - are the single largest category of acting in venture capital .
Clearing the path of regulatory barriers means introducing new directives . There they bind together the approaches necessary for a single market to emerge .
Recently the prospectuses directive was adopted and now - I believe , because of the activities of this Parliament - protects small- to medium-sized businesses from the bureaucratic requirements of continual registration or the dangers that threatened their ability to have access to funding .
The issues of the prospectuses directive which Parliament had to address could have been avoided if there had been sufficient cross-referencing with the risk capital action plan in the first place .
Let me also just mention pensions and the need for us to have a good quality directive on pensions - one that avoids the prudential plus approach .
That approach , would actually reduce the prospects of any kind of funding from the pensions industry - an industry which , in the US is a major source of small business investment .
If that prudential plus approach is used , then we may as well not have a pensions directive in Europe .
The financial services action plan itself gathers together many of the directives necessary for completion of the risk capital action plan , including most of what I have already mentioned .
But now that the Lamfalussy issue is practically resolved , progress will be assured , leaving the regulatory framework requirement for the risk capital action plan well within our sights .
The impact of small- to medium-sized businesses has long been an issue raised by many parliamentarians who want to see nothing but the most positive advantages passed on to companies .
The Commission 's benchmarking of its achievements in these areas has given the European Parliament and the Council the tool to measure Europe 's progress .
So far that progress has been good , if a little slow .
There are other areas which have been mentioned , such as taxation , double taxation of venture capital or capital gains tax , tax arrangements for new firms and comparative tax rates with less risky forms of capital .
These have been taken up by a number of Member States but some backbone still needs to be put into these issues .
Also , in terms of human resources , we have to have the kind of training or advice that is necessary to help these businesses flourish in the first place : life-long learning and initiatives in vocational qualifications can seen as the start of the spread of best practice , as is the introduction of business mentors in certain countries and developments in school curricula .

The high-tech small businesses which , in the end , are the target of the risk capital action plan , are in short supply themselves .
The Lisbon Summit of 1997 threw down the gauntlet of the risk capital action plan for Europe to pick up .
The expectation is to reach completion by 2005 in terms of a regulatory framework and 2010 for the knowledge-based economy .
The risk capital action plan is not in itself a master plan for increased growth or job creation , but it is the essential framework .
Progress has been made but it is quite slow .
Mr President , I should like to begin by making two declarations of interest .
The first is that I represent Wales in the European Parliament .
Members may know that the risk capital action plan was first adopted at the Cardiff Summit , the capital city of Wales and also the city in which I live .
However , a rather more direct financial interest is that I am a director of the National Farmers ' Union Mutual Insurance Company in the UK , one of the UK 's top ten insurance companies .
I should mention that because some of my remarks will touch upon issues that are relevant in the insurance sector .
I congratulate Mr Skinner for the work he has done on this report .
It is traditional to say that but , in this instance , I really do value the hard work and commitment that he has given .
He is a somewhat solitary figure on that particular side of the House in terms of the need to ensure that we develop the interests of business .
Nonetheless , his is a voice that we welcome . His report is one that we welcome .
My colleagues and I in the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs have made some variations to the report which make it even more acceptable .
This report is set within the context - I believe - of some of the failures of the venture capital industry .
There have been such failures .
The venture capital industry has been too focused on areas where there is already significant financial activity .
That is why it is necessary for there to be some guidance in relation to the state aid rules .
But I should like to caution Parliament in the light of some of my own experience of the history of the failure of government-sponsored forays into the whole venture capital area .
First of all , people imagine that if there is some government-sponsored capital scheme it is bound to mean a guarantee of financial support .
Secondly , what are the judgments as to which investments should be backed and which should not ?
Who is making those judgments ?
Thirdly , the effect that there can sometimes be in distorting markets and actually driving good competitors out of business .
These are some of the cautions there may be .
The report we are considering here gets this balance right but we still need to get away from the idea that government , in some sense , can resolve all of these issues .
It is important that we deal with the promotion of entrepreneurship .
We give too much lip service to this without effectively putting it into operation .
In my own country we have Objective I status but getting the people who are involved in putting that plan into operation to recognise the importance of entrepreneurship is very difficult .
Very often we have local and regional administrations run by the public sector who just regard this as yet another income stream .
So there must be guidance in those areas as well .
Finally , I want to make a point about the sources for raising funds .
They are pension funds , banks and insurance companies .
That is something that is recognised by the Commission and Mr Skinner as well .
In this House we have to get away from demonising these organisations .
These organisations are the ones that we look to for the funding to create the dynamic economy that we want to develop in Europe .
There will be two benefits : we will create new businesses and employment opportunities and we will , at the same time , be funding , very often , income for retirement for European citizens .
As a result of that we will be creating a virtuous circle of investment .
That is a message that is not heard often enough in this Chamber .
Mr President , without any sense of parliamentary obligation , I shall begin by welcoming Peter Skinner and praise him for the quality and depth of his report which , in fact , obviates the need for me to make specific points on the subject , since he deals with them very well in his report .
Ladies and gentlemen , Europe 's economic recovery , which is absolutely crucial to the Union 's achieving all its political objectives , must depend more on the quality of the policies themselves than on the result of favourable boosts that it receives through recovery in other economic areas .
In Lisbon , in 2000 , the Union defined the clear and crucial objective of making the European Union the most dynamic and competitive knowledge-based economy in the world by 2010 .
Achieving this objective involves , on the one hand , taking full advantage of all the potential arising from the expansion of the information and knowledge-based society and from the liberalisation of some markets , specifically in the area of energy , and , on the other hand , the definition and implementation of public competition and competitiveness policies that create an environment that favours sustainable economic development .
A Community-based Europe consists of an economy founded on a commercial framework in which private initiative is dominant and a culture of innovation and risk is an indisputable reality .
This , therefore , requires the national authorities for political regulation and the appropriate Community institutions to promote and not to hinder all these efforts at innovation .
The risk capital action plan drawn up at the Lisbon European Council , which called for its full implementation by 2003 , is one of these instruments and certainly one of the most effective instruments available to us .
It is , therefore , important that it is assessed and that its implementation is monitored , not only to record the progress that is made , but mainly to motivate all the relevant bodies in the Member States and to alert them to the need for the gradual and ongoing pursuit of a healthy entrepreneurial spirit underpinned by a culture in which risk is a factor that is permanently under control .
The use of risk capital as an instrument to promote investment in new businesses and above all in sectors that face considerable uncertainty at the start of the production process must be stimulated and protected , because the enormous potential that risk capital creates and multiplies is not yet exhausted .
Nevertheless , as the rapporteur quite rightly points out , this requires a set of measures for legislative harmonisation and the acceptance of policies for fiscal stimulation drawn up by every Member State , but also some suggested by the Union , which will enable us to break down existing barriers in the field of capital provision and , specifically , with regard to the access of small and medium-sized enterprises to this financing instrument .
By accepting greater responsibility for the financing of risk capital through the European Investment Bank , Europe is demonstrating its desire to unequivocally shoulder its share of responsibility .
Nevertheless , without precluding access to this form of financing by the high-technology sectors , we must strengthen and develop the appropriate political , economic and institutional framework for the full use of the instrument of risk capital for small and medium-sized enterprises .
The role of the Commission and of Parliament becomes , in this context , absolutely essential and will certainly be decisive .
Many major technological breakthroughs were made by small-time entrepreneurs with an ingenious streak .
For example , Philips invented the light bulb at home and Bill Gates started developing software from his garage .
Needless to say , not every innovation is immediately accessible to the public at large .
This requires courage , moral fibre , boldness and risk capital .
In order to allow society to benefit from these innovations , it is important that investments be made .
These promote the further development of new technology .
However , many small entrepreneurs do not have these investments at their disposal or have no access to the capital market in order to obtain these resources on favourable conditions .
It is therefore very important to promote access to risk capital and to remove obstructing rules .
Based on the fact that , in the past few years , both supply and demand in respect of risk capital for medium-sized and small businesses have been stagnating , it can be concluded that only an approach which removes obstructions both on the supply and on the demand side will be effective .
In this context , I can hardly see a case for making public funds available , if at all .
It is mainly up to the Member States to provide sound legislation with regard to the way in which pension funds make the resources entrusted to them profitable .
Scope to invest in risk capital must be possible under strict conditions , taking into account the risk profile of the funds .
Pensions should not be put at risk as a result .
In addition , Member States must ensure that incentives do not ultimately become government support .
This is undesirable and does not provide incentives to the innovative and creative entrepreneur .
Nor is it a solution to the substantial problem of an inadequate capital market .
The incentives should therefore certainly be temporary in nature .
Mr President , Commissioner , and those ladies and gentlemen who are not yet present , it is clear to all of us , how significant equity capital and risk capital are in terms of Europe 's achievement of the Lisbon objectives .
We are glad that clear indications were given in Lisbon of the important role played by efficient risk capital markets in respect of innovative , fast-growing small and medium-sized enterprises and thus also in the creation of new and lasting employment .
We are very glad that Lisbon saw the renewed demand made for full implementation of the risk capital action plan by 2003 , and that it was made clear that small and medium-sized enterprises are the foundation of technological development and innovation on our continent .
We are therefore also most heartened by the result showing that venture capital investments in Europe increased in gross volume from EUR 10 billion in 1999 to EUR 19.6 billion in 2000 .
Despite this report of success , we are saddened by the fact that we are still a long way behind the United States .
Taken as a share of GDP , venture capital investments in 2000 accounted for only 0.23 % of Europe 's , as against 0.7 % in the United States .
We must catch up on America , or overtake them , if we want to achieve the Lisbon objectives in this area .
It is also important , in this connection to point out - as my predecessor on the floor has done - that the largest sources of finance are the pension funds , followed by insurance and banks .
It is , then , all the more regrettable that the Commission proposal for Europe-wide enhancement of occupational retirement provision in the Internal Market as part of the Financial Services Action Plan has to this moment still elicited no official response from the Council , so that we are at the moment unable to negotiate .
I also regret the fact that we get the feeling that the so-called compromise proposals in the Council cannot and will not be adopted by either Parliament or the Commission , so that Commissioner Bolkestein , who is responsible for these matters , has now felt constrained to say that , if we make no headway here , the need to get things moving would force him to withdraw his Commission proposal .
The Council 's behaviour also goes against the Barcelona decisions .
We also know that small and medium-sized enterprises have difficulties when it comes to getting access to capital .
That is why the Basle Process is so important , as is the fact that the Basle result makes allowances for the private business sector in Europe and does not make access to capital more difficult for small and medium-sized enterprises .
We would , then , also request the Commission , not only to monitor the Basle Process in line with the Barcelona decisions , but also , in the interests of European economic structure and in view of the significance of small and medium-sized enterprises for growth and employment , to actively influence it .
Mr President , the Skinner report provides a sensible response to the October 2000 Commission communication to implement the risk capital action plan which dates back to the 1998 Cardiff Summit and dovetails neatly with the financial services action plan which Barcelona has made a priority .
SMEs in Europe face much greater difficulties than their US counterparts in raising loan or equity finance , which may help in part to explain the extraordinary success in US economic growth over the last ten years .
Although there is now rapid growth in venture capital funds in the European Union , there is enormous variation in performance .
The City of London , which I proudly represent , leads the way at 0.4 % of UK GDP devoted to this cause .
But even here , most funding comes from US sources .
Pension funds are the prime source of capital , and I have advocated UK-style self-select pension plans for the self-employed being permitted to make such investments on a pan-European basis , although this was rejected in committee , unfortunately .
I agree with the call for US-style EU-wide insolvency laws along the lines of the American Chapter XI bankruptcy procedures which afford a number of advantages , particularly in so far as they do not disrupt the continuity of trading in failing companies .
I also lament the lateness in bringing forward the much-needed Community patent , due to excessive sensitivity on the language issue which will only add to the cost for SMEs and make the procedures unworkable .
Not radically tackling the language issue now will only get worse after enlargement when there are 40 million Polish speakers who also want their language to be given the same priority as , say , Italian or Spanish .
Member States should also seriously consider promotion of funds through generous capital gains tax incentives to mitigate the risk to investors .
I generally , though , reject State funding directly for SMEs as the State is generally poor at picking winners amongst competing demands for capital .
Nevertheless Mr Skinner 's suggestion of a one-stop shop risk capital website to facilitate the interface of SMEs and the finance-providers is a very good one .
This excellent report enjoyed considerable cross-party support in the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and , in spite of originating from the other side of the House , deserves our full support .
Mr President , I wish first of all to praise the rapporteur , Mr Skinner , who has done very well in describing a large number of measures which must be taken if the supply of risk capital in Europe is to be increased .
If we are to be able to attain the very optimistic objective set in Lisbon two years ago , according to which Europe is to be the world 's top economy by the year 2010 , measures must be taken quickly to increase companies ' access to risk capital .
Time is running out , and the United States is increasing its lead .
As the rapporteur also points out , it is especially important to review the conditions governing small and medium-sized enterprises , for it is among these that regeneration and technical development take place .
It is also small and medium-sized enterprises that can give rise to new job opportunities .
We know that risk capital investments have fallen in Europe .
In such a situation , it is easy to revert to the solution applied in the past : public funding .
However , that would lead not to strong and healthy companies but to companies which , though certainly new , would be dependent upon subsidies .
It is therefore important to emphasise that state support can only be justified in exceptional circumstances .
The overall business climate is crucial to the success or otherwise of the European economy and the economies of the Member States .
One clear example of a country that is deficient in this area is Sweden , which has experimented a great deal with state aid and so excluded healthy competition .
Since 1960 , not a single large company has been started up in Sweden .
The report discusses much that is important to small and medium-sized enterprises , and what clearly emerges from this discussion is that there are still administrative , legal and cultural obstacles to be overcome and that too little has been done to remove these .
It is essential that the work required continue at a brisker pace because access to risk capital is a prerequisite of companies ' growth and development .
It must be possible for companies which go bankrupt to be given another chance .
To try and then fail must not lead to companies ' being stigmatised due to bankruptcy legislation . Otherwise , no one in the end will want to go out on a limb .
People who are prepared to do just that , together with the availability of risk capital , are the indispensable features of a growing economy .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , Mr Jonathan Evans represents the citizens of Wales , and I represent the citizens of Wels .
In both our cities we have strong small and medium-sized enterprises , and that is also Europe 's strength .
It is because firms with under 250 employees account for two-thirds of jobs that we in the political world must always bear in mind the need to ' think small first ' .
First we must think of the ' small players ' and look to see how we can apply some leverage for them .
It is precisely for the students or workers who want to become self-employed that we have no help to offer by means of functioning instruments .
The so-called ' one man start up ' is a very important area of concern .
It must also be possible to make risk capital available in instalments ranging from EUR 5 000 to EUR 10 000 rather than only from EUR 5 million upwards .
In particular , we will have need of that when it comes to the new Member States .
We must be aware that they suffer a glaring lack of equity capital , and that even the banks there find this very difficult . If we want to build prosperity there , with a market economy that works , we have to consider how these businesses get their hands on the capital they need once they are working in the European Union .
The second major area is the transfer of businesses .
There is at present an enormous tax burden when businesses are handed on from one generation to the next .
It is , though , precisely at this stage that the enterprise is at greatest risk , as , on the one hand , the experienced generation is stepping down , and the new generation takes risks in its desire to build something new .
I would ask the Commissioner to offer alternatives on this point .
I would like to add , in conclusion , that it is important that we think about fiscal optimisation .
Are the rules on depreciation right ?
Do new businesses and enterprises using risk capital not need new rules on depreciation , new allowances and reserves ?
How long are time limits to be , and to what should they apply ?
I believe that tax also plays an enormous role in the accumulation of equity capital .
I request the Commission to produce a Green Paper on this issue , because it is in taxation also that Basle II will bring enormous changes , as we can create the conditions for Basle II only if there is massively reduced taxation of business proceeds , especially of undistributed profits from businesses , and then the Finance Ministers really will have to prick their ears up .
Mr President , I should like to begin by saying that the Commission welcomes this report and would like to thank the rapporteur , Mr Skinner , for preparing the report on implementing the risk capital action plan .
The report is clearly supportive of the Community strategy to develop the EU risk capital market .
As has been said a number of times this evening in this Parliament , risk capital provides a vital source of financing for new and innovative enterprises , and in that way it contributes significantly to economic growth and to the creation of jobs .
The development of a large and efficient EU risk capital market is a key element in the so-called Lisbon Strategy to create a more dynamic and prosperous European Union .
The period since the launch of the risk capital action plan has seen a rapid growth in the EU risk capital market .
Investment almost tripled between 1998 and 2000 .
Growth then slowed in 2001 as the " dot.com bubble " burst and the global economy weakened , but nonetheless the market remains fundamentally sound .
Indeed the slowdown in growth may be seen as a necessary consolidation after the rather exuberant behaviour of previous years .
But despite the real progress that has been made , there are still important barriers to development of the EU risk capital market .
As the report points out , these barriers affect both the supply side and the demand side of the market .
The risk capital action plan is designed to address those barriers , and in order to meet the deadline of 2003 for implementation of the RCAP a number of key actions are required .
Perhaps I may mention four of them .
Firstly , the relevant measures in the financial services action plan must be adopted urgently .
Those measures include the proposed directive on prospectuses , the proposed directive on occupational pension funds , about which a number of Members have spoken tonight , and the proposed regulation on international accounting standards .
The commitment by the Barcelona European Council to have those proposals adopted as early as possible in 2002 is very welcome .
May I say in reply to Mr Karas , on the matter of occupational pension funds , that the Commission is not in the business of making life more difficult for those pension funds that are in operation and that operate efficiently and satisfactorily .
Why should the Commission place an increased burden of regulation on those pension funds ?
That is why I recently said that if the Council were to insist on further restrictions on those pension funds which operate satisfactorily - and basically they are found in the United Kingdom and Ireland , in the Netherlands and Denmark : together those countries account for maybe two thirds or 75 % of total capital assembled and saved for the purpose of defraying pension fund obligations - why should the Commission place further restrictions on those pension funds ?
That is why I have said that if the Council wants to do that then the Commission will have no alternative but to withdraw the proposal .
That is the first way in which the Commission aims at increasing the risk capital action plan market .
The second way is that Member States must maintain , and improve where necessary , the pace of structural reform .
The objective of reform must be to create an environment in which the risk capital market can flourish .
Progress has been made but much remains to be done .
The Commission 's broad economic policy guidelines for the year 2002 / 2003 will again call for intensified efforts in this area .
Thirdly , entrepreneurship must be encouraged .
Measures to promote a culture of enterprise in the EU have been taken at Community and national levels , but Members of Parliament will appreciate that to change a culture is not easy .
Cultural barriers can indeed be particularly difficult to overcome but our efforts in this field must continue and , if possible , be intensified .
Fourthly and lastly the efficiency of public funding for risk capital activities must be improved and it is important that public funding should not crowd out private sector investment .
We do not want to see that happen .
Based on that consideration the Commission has clarified its policy on state aid to risk capital activities .
I regard the report from the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs as another important building block in our efforts to develop the EU risk capital market .
It is encouraging that the recommendations from the committee correspond fully to the measures proposed in the risk capital action plan , and the Commission would very much like to once again thank the rapporteur for his work .
Before I end my contribution to this debate I should like to say , in reply to a question put by Mr Karas , that the Commission is actively following the negotiations at Basle .
As Mr Karas knows , the Commission is an observer in those negotiations .
We are now entering a third consultation round .
More time has been allotted for those negotiations and one of the prime objectives of the Commission is to see to such a development as will ensure that small- and medium-sized enterprises will have the same possibilities of attracting capital as larger companies .
Again , why would the Commission approve something which would harm the possibilities for small and medium-sized enterprises to get capital ?
After all , all we want to do is to facilitate capital going to SMEs since we all know that SMEs play a very important part in creating jobs ; of course they also they play a very important part in the creation of high-tech industries , or rather , activities which may lead to high-tech industries .
In conclusion , I would like to say something about the five amendments which have been proposed by Mr Goebbels .
Unfortunately he is not here , but I would like to say that on the first amendment the Commission has difficulties because we fear that his amendment would send the wrong signal to the market .
We are particularly concerned that state aid discipline should not be weakened , and therefore the Commission does not really like the first amendment and hopes that it will not be accepted by Parliament .
The second amendment states that a shortage of appropriate finance is the major obstacle to starting a business .
The Commission begs to differ .
The Commission does not agree that the shortage of funds is the major obstacle .
There are a number of obstacles and it would be difficult to say which one is the major obstacle .
Therefore the Commission regrets it cannot accept this amendment .
The other three amendments - Amendments Nos 3 , 4 and 5 - are acceptable to the Commission and no doubt Mr Goebbels will be informed about the opinions of the Commission .
We therefore once again accept the fact that those three amendments will be approved by Parliament .
Thank you , Commissioner Bolkestein .


The Presidency will , of course , pass on your opinions to Mr Goebbels , who was , however , represented by Mr Santos in this debate .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon .
The next item is the debate on the report ( A5-0073 / 2002 ) by Mrs Ayuso González , on behalf of the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development , on the on the proposal for a Council regulation on the common organisation of the market in ethyl alcohol of agricultural origin [ COM ( 2001 ) 101 - C5-0095 / 2001 - 2001 / 0055 ( CNS ) ] .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , The EU produces 20 million hectolitres of alcohol annually , of which 13 million hectolitres are of agricultural origin and the rest of the Union 's production is what is known as synthetic alcohol .
The main manufacturing industries that use ethyl alcohol are the spirit drinks industry , which represents around 30 % of the European alcohol market and can only use alcohol of agricultural origin , and the chemical , pharmaceutical and cosmetics industries , which represent the other 70 % and which can use both agricultural and synthetic alcohol .
Both types of alcohol , therefore , are competing in the same market .
In the past , there have been five successive attempts by the Commission to set up a COM in alcohol , but all of these attempts have come to grief in the Council . The reasons for this failure lie in the wide variety of national systems traditionally used for alcohol in the various Member States .
The main reason is that , in principle , establishing a COM would entail dismantling national aid , as set out in Article 10 of the proposal .
This type of aid , linked to rural aid , however , can and should be maintained , not least because it does not distort the market in the current Europe of fifteen .
The arguments in favour of a Community legal framework are to improve the functioning of the single market , to ensure fair conditions of competition between operators and to help improve transparency and knowledge of marketing flows with a view to globalisation .
The global liberalisation process is the main threat to European alcohol producers .
Alcohol imports from third countries are finding it increasingly easy to gain access to the EU market due to new openings arising from preferential systems , GATT tariff-cutting agreements or bilateral negotiations with specific third countries that produce a large amount of alcohol .
Other factors which might affect development prospects for the European alcohol market at this time include the substantial levels of alcohol production in the applicant countries , future tariff reductions in the forthcoming WTO negotiations and a possible increase in bioethanol production for fuel in the European Union , that could significantly alter the horizon for traditional uses of European ethyl alcohol .
Faced with such developments , the Council of Agricultural Ministers of 17 July 2000 asked the Commission to examine the possibility of introducing a regulatory framework for agricultural alcohol , in order to improve statistical information and market transparency , as well as introducing a regime for import and export licences , and to create an appropriate management committee for the sector .
The Commission is proposing a limited scope or ' lightweight ' COM , which does not involve measures under the EAGGF , but does however go further than the Council request in that , in addition to the definitions , statistics , import and export licences system , and the establishment of an appropriate management committee , the proposal also contains elements such as the possibility of establishing tariff quotas and a safeguard clause , the possibility of prohibiting or restricting inward processing arrangements and a specific provision on state aid .
The problem arises from the fact that a COM can apply only to products included in Annex I of the Treaty , which means it can apply to alcohol of agricultural origin but not to synthetic alcohol .
Given that the two types of alcohol compete with each other and are to a large extent interchangeable for most uses , the fact that the Commission is only intending to regulate alcohol of agricultural origin prompts questions about the purpose and value of rules supposedly designed to regulate the European alcohol market as a whole .
For this reason , a problem surfaced at the time of drawing up the corresponding report on behalf of the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development , which was , what should be done with synthetic alcohol ?
To add synthetic alcohol would mean having to consult the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market , given that this addition would involve amendment to the legal basis of the Commission proposal .
The Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market established that the dual legal basis ( Articles 37 and 95 ) is impossible , given that the procedures that correspond to the two articles are incompatible .
As a result , faced with the impossibility of amending the proposal to include synthetic alcohol , the rapporteur proposes that the Commission should put forward a new proposal to include synthetic alcohol within its scope .
In this way it will be possible to regulate the whole ethyl alcohol market at Community level .
You will understand why the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development voted for this proposal unanimously .
A COM is probably not the appropriate instrument , but we have to bear in mind that it is the Commission that has the power of legislative initiative .
I would like to finish by asking the Commission three questions . Can you tell what stage negotiations in the Council have reached ?
Is the Commission intending to withdraw the proposal ?
If this is the case , does it intend to present another ?
Mr President , we have reached that time of the evening at which I am sure Commissioner Bolkestein , Mrs Ayuso González , you and I can all think of better things to do with ethyl alcohol than talk about it .
However , we are fated to spend at least a few more minutes in conversation .
I would like to express profound sympathy with Mrs Ayuso González for the amount of work and time she has put into this report , only to discover that it was not possible to construct an adequate legal base to bring in both the sources of ethyl alcohol .
As I understand it , ethyl alcohol produced for industrial use comes more or less equally from agricultural sources and from non-agricultural sources , chiefly from the oil industry .
In that context , it would be necessary to find a dual legal base to deal with both together .
Personally I think she is right that it would be absurd for the Community to try to deal with this single identical substance differently according to the two alternative sources .
On the other hand , the economics of production and the industrial circumstances of production are quite different , as I am sure Commissioner Bolkestein knows even better than I from his own manifold past experience .
So it is quite an important question to try and find a way of dealing with the whole market in a way that is sensitive to both sources of production .
It would have been objectionable - I know from contacts of my own with the oil industry in Scotland - to spatchcock the oil industry-produced ethanol into an agricultural organisation which had been set up without regard to circumstances in the other sector , so we need a two-handed approach to this .
Thus it is absolutely right to suggest that the Commission should put its thinking cap on again and come back with a new look at whatever is needed in the way of keeping an eye on the whole alcohol market at this difficult time , dealing even-handedly with both sources of production .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to start by thanking Mrs Ayuso most warmly for the work she has done .
The Common Market Organisation for agricultural alcohol was voted down in the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development .
We are convinced that the Commission should withdraw this proposal and revise it .
Whilst the Spanish Presidency would very much like to wrap this issue up during its term of office , I do not think this will be possible , quite simply because Parliament will not have produced a position for the Agriculture Council in due time .
There are three key issues ; firstly , for example , the title of the act .
Is a Common Market Organisation appropriate , or a simple regulation ?
Secondly , to what extent do we include synthetic alcohol ?
Thirdly , is there the need for a regulation on state aid ?
As discussions currently stand between Parliament and the Commission , these issues have not been resolved .
If the Commission were to abandon its dogmatic position on the Common Market Organisation , it could surely agree to the regulation providing for the purely statistical supervision of synthetic alcohol .
This way ahead would be possible even without extending the legal basis .
I reckon that a qualified majority in the Council of Ministers could adopt the lightweight Regulation that was originally called for .
I continue to be highly sceptical about the aid provisions , on which many questions remain unanswered .
On the issue of universal land use management across the whole of Europe , which includes the sparse areas , and also on the twofold task of agriculture , which is both the cultivation and raising of agricultural products and the care and maintenance of the cultivated landscape , we must support producers of agricultural alcohol through the production of corn , potatoes and fruit .
My appeal to the Commission is this : please , let us not needlessly wreck a system that works .
Mr President , Commissioner , on behalf of my group I also wish to thank the rapporteur for the work that we on the Committee on Agricultural and Rural Development jointly prepared .
The proposal before us now can be traced back to when my country held the presidency in 1999 .
Then once again it was realised that the alcohol markets need common rules .
The objective is to correct the surplus situation and it is being proposed to dismantle national aid as part of the measures to be implemented .
The committee , however , was unanimous in its conclusion that the whole proposal should be rejected .
Synthetic alcohol should be considered comparable with alcohol of agricultural origin .
The legal basis now in force makes this impossible .
The ELDR Group endorses the course of action proposed by the rapporteur as we wish to make two comments : firstly , we want to complain about the unsatisfactory way in which the Commission has prepared this matter , and , secondly , it would be good to keep the legal basis consistent from the point of view of the single market .
We could in this way also proceed in the right way in COM reform .
Although the Commission 's proposal is by no means totally acceptable , my personal opinion is that it would make the situation better than it is now .
We on the committee drafted a good number of amendments to it which might have helped this matter to gain ground .
It is a pity that now we will not effect any legislation .
This is probably the sixth time this matter has been discussed by the EU institutions .
The end result is always the same : nothing is done .
The legal basis cannot be changed just like that .
We have to continue with things as they are .
As I understand it , this is all very much based on the question of the codecision procedure relating to agricultural matters , which causes problems all the time .
It is continually being discussed in the Committee on Agricultural and Rural Development and often we reach a situation that is somewhat artificial .
The EU is in the process of enlarging .
Soon we will have ten new Member States , and a simple matter like this , such as similar substances coming from the same source , as Mr MacCormick said here , cannot be dealt with or decided upon .
The EU institutions have debated this issue five or six times and have always drawn a blank .
Ethyl alcohol and synthetic alcohol are , in my view , an excellent example of why we must swiftly address questions about the Treaty , as after 2006 , with the reform of agricultural policy , Parliament will have to take some very fundamental decisions .
If the Treaty prevents this kind of issue from being corrected and taken forward we really will be on the wrong track .
How will it reflect on the agricultural profession as a whole and how will it be for the European agricultural model and its justification if we cannot have a decision on a matter of this sort ?
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the Commission proposal to create a common organisation of the market in ethyl alcohol of agricultural origin is underpinned by a good intention .
This is to establish conditions ensuring that the market is better regulated and that there is greater transparency and fairer competition in trade both within the European Union and with third countries . This product should , furthermore , make a major contribution to the functioning of the single market in this field .
Its use in sectors such as the spirits industry and in the chemical , cosmetics and pharmaceutical industries , gives it a strategic importance in the European context .
Ethyl alcohol of agricultural origin , however , only represents around one half of alcohol consumed and produced in the European Union , with the rest being produced synthetically .
This type of alcohol which is a good competitive alternative for all uses except alcoholic drinks , has seen increased growth in the European Union .
The Commission proposal , however , only covers ethyl alcohol of agricultural origin , and ignores synthetic alcohol , as stated by Mrs Ayuso González .
Consequently , the proposal will not enable us to achieve even a minimally effective regulation of the market unless we include , without rules or with different rules , this type of alcohol .
It is also worth adding that the Commission proposal also fails to solve the problem of the small and very small distillers which , until now , has been resolved by means of national schemes and national aid .
For these reasons , we feel it is reasonable to do as the rapporteur proposes and reject this Commission proposal .
The European Parliament would be thereby clearly expressing its dissatisfaction with the scope of the Commission 's intentions and would call on the Commission to submit a new proposal regulating the entire market in alcohol , of both agricultural and non-agricultural origin , and to resolve the outstanding problems with the various national systems in force .
The issues of bioethanol and enlargement will also have to be considered in the next proposal .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , my thanks must go first to Mrs Ayuso González , who has invested the greatest effort in this report , even if we are left to vote on just one amendment .
Members who sit on the Committee for Agriculture and Rural Development , with Mrs Ayuso , have disregarded party boundaries in trying to point the Commission proposal in a more balanced direction .
By balanced we mean that , as well as agricultural alcohol , which makes up only a part of the alcohol market as a whole , synthetic alcohol must also eventually be the subject of a Common Market Organisation , both types of alcohol being in direct competition with each other .
Our demand that this be done was rejected .
Secondly , there must be exceptions to the existing regulations in Member States which give state support to the production of agricultural alcohol in order to take account of the need to protect the landscape and environment , safeguard the diversity of species and maintain the structures of smallholdings .
I am speaking here with specific reference to the German agricultural alcohol monopoly , which has to date effectively performed the functions I have just mentioned .
Minimal state aid , which in the European context is in no way relevant to the Internal Market , is used , particularly in southern Germany , to maintain cultural landscapes with fruit meadows that are of ecological value , and which are cultivated and looked after almost exclusively by smallholders .
The result of this policy , which has to date been right and proper , can be seen by you yourselves , ladies and gentlemen , on the steepest slopes of the Black Forest , which are now in bloom .
This small remuneration for caring for the landscape is almost an idea from the second pillar , which is widely believed to be in need of reinforcement .
This concern , though , has not been taken into account either .
Parliament is therefore , in my view , doing the right thing in rejecting the Commission proposal before us , which , moreover , utterly disregarded the Council 's original mandate for a simple framework regulation .
We have kicked the ball back .
I am putting my hopes in the unofficial meeting of agriculture ministers at the end of April , and quite specifically in Mrs Künast .
The desirable outcome would be for the Council to take up what Parliament has come up with , which I presume will be decided on tomorrow .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I unequivocally welcome the favourable opinion the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development has on Mrs Ayuso González ' report .
Rejection of the Commission proposal for a Common Market Organisation for agricultural alcohol is the only sensible response that the committee could have delivered .
I would like to use this opportunity to briefly recapitulate on why this is the case .
The Commission had not been tasked with the setting up of a new market organisation and with using it to intervene in a healthy and intact market .
Despite that , and with great zeal , it drew up a proposal whose substantial loopholes are evident even on first sight .
Thus , synthetic alcohol is left completely out of the equation , even though it now has a 50 % share of use in the EU and is , above all , indispensable in fields as important as the cosmetics , pharmaceutical and chemical industries .
This gives rise to the danger that distortions in competition may result to the detriment of the market for agricultural alcohol .
A new market organisation is also to be rejected in view of the EU 's enlargement , and of the fact that very large quantities of agricultural alcohol are produced in many candidate countries .
We cannot , shortly before the accession of these countries , make a regulation that takes no account of their circumstances and thus would not sufficiently prepare their existing markets .
A further significant point of criticism lies in the Commission proposal 's manifest complete disregard for the cultural and economic importance of agricultural alcohol .
Alcohol , when produced on an agricultural basis , originates as a natural product in small and medium-sized enterprises mainly situated in rural areas , and makes a substantial contribution to preserving traditional cultural landscapes .
Mrs Jeggle has pointed this out .
Its production is also of great significance from an ecological point of view , and the by-products are , indeed , still used as agricultural feedingstuffs .
Rural areas characterised by fruit meadows would find themselves in a serious crisis situation if the Commission 's plans were implemented .
It is easy to see that not only the regions shaped by private business and farming would suffer as a result of this , but that there would also be massive loss of jobs .
The Commission cannot and must not overlook this , and so I find it utterly incomprehensible that they are disregarding the adverse consequences for agriculture and above all for small and medium-sized enterprises in this way .
The Commission paper before us is thus , in my opinion , a futile approach to shaping the market in alcohol .
Any new regulation must cover all types of alcohol .
There cannot and must not be partial solutions that bring more imbalances in their train .
Quite apart from that , it makes sense not to provide a transition period for the current national aid arrangements , but rather to integrate these into the overall framework in a rational way .
Mr President , it is actually a pity about the great amount of work done by the Commission and by the rapporteur , who has indeed taken a great deal of trouble , because , at the end of the day , tomorrow 's vote will not result in a satisfactory outcome .
So this sixth attempt is a real loss .
I would like to make use of the opportunity afforded by this short speech to refer to two things .
I get the impression that , with the avowed intention of thoroughly justifiably protecting small businesses - some of which are very small indeed - we will end up back with a situation we very often encounter on agricultural issues , where the small players are used as a pretext while the big players can continue to safeguard their position .
Please do not misunderstand me .
I am very much in favour of maintaining the small distilleries and the arrangements for benefits in kind , especially in the form in which they exist in Germany , but within bounds , and for the benefit of the small rather than of the great .
I would like to end with the topic of biofuels , one that is of the utmost importance .
I believe that biofuels represent a great opportunity for agriculture .
There is still far more that we can do in this area than has been done to date , and that is through research into them , into the conditions to be imposed on them and how best to promote them , so that we can involve these alcohol products , too , in an ecological approach to our surroundings and thereby find new trade outlets for our agricultural sector .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , Commissioner , I too would like to thank Mrs Ayuso for this report and for the work she has done .
She has spared neither effort nor trouble in trying to bring about a positive outcome in the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development , but that has unfortunately not been possible .
Around 20 million hectolitres of alcohol are produced in Europe every year , around 13 million hectolitres of which are of agricultural origin .
The attempt has often been made to create a common market organisation for alcohol in the EU .
Up to now , proposals for this have always failed at Council level , as the national regulatory systems were so heterogeneous , and the frameworks and aid structures so diverse , that no common denominator could be found .
This time , the hurdle at which it fell was that of the legal basis .
The new Commission proposal envisages what is termed a ' lightweight ' COM , with no provision for intervention mechanisms to the detriment of the EAGGF or of export refunds , and , hence , comprises only the definition of products , a system of monitoring foreign trade through import and export licences , the possibility of laying down tariff quotas and a protection clause , the collection of statistical data or specific provisions on state aid .
My response to this is that I basically welcome the Commission proposal , even though the current position of the alcohol sector in Austria is not a very important problem .
I am well aware , though , that for other Member States the inclusion of synthetic alcohol in the proposed COM is a central issue .
It is precisely for this reason that I do not see it as possible , because there is no basis that is legally incontestable .
It is for that reason , too , that I fully endorse our rapporteur 's view that we should call on the Commission to submit a new proposal .
At this point I would like to make a more critical observation on the relationship between agricultural and synthetic alcohols .
The concerns of farmers and of the rural areas as a whole matter to me .
It is from this perspective that I would like to point out that the agricultural manufacture of alcohol as the product of specific raw materials such as , for example , wine , fruit , corn , and potatoes represents an important trade outlet .
I want to firmly emphasise that this portfolio should cover the production and sale of agricultural alcohol and not of synthetic alcohol .
Synthetic alcohol is in my view to be used only for industry , pharmacy , energy and so on , and not mixed with any other products .
As a representative of rural areas in Parliament , I will always put forward the interests of farmers and of rural areas , as multifunctional , farm-based , universal and environmentally-responsible agriculture is the model for land management throughout the whole of Europe .
It is my view that any new proposal by the Commission should , in any case , provide for a specific Management Committee , as the present Management Committee for Wine is already overstretched by its plethora of competences .
In conclusion , I wish to declare my wholehearted commitment to a common agricultural policy , from which I have learned of the problems of farmers in the different Member States .
I would like to thank all Members of Parliament who have spoken for the work they have put into considering the proposal for a Common Market Organisation for Alcohol .
In particular , my thanks go to the rapporteur , Mrs Ayuso , for her analysis of the proposal and efforts to understand its objectives .
As you know , this is another proposal to establish a set of common rules for the alcohol sector , after several attempts in the past that all failed for different reasons , as has been mentioned tonight by several Members .
The Commission is of the opinion that the actual market situation in this sector made it necessary to propose at least a minimal set of rules and that , under those circumstances , the chances of succeeding this time were fairly good .
That was also the opinion of a large majority of Member States that invited the Commission to come forward with such a proposal .
The Commission is therefore somewhat surprised that , despite the hard work of the rapporteur , who initially came forward with a series of amendments which might well have been considered , Parliament now proposes rejecting the whole proposal .
In the draft resolution Parliament has asked the Commission to withdraw its proposal as it does not fulfil its objectives of regulating the whole market of alcohol in the European Union .
I presume this amendment refers to the non-inclusion of synthetic alcohol in the proposal for agricultural alcohol .
The Commission cannot , at this stage , agree with Parliament 's position , as is understandable .
Parliament 's position would imply considering the proposal to be the result of a lack of reflection and lack of analysis of the real situation of the sector .
If , from an economic point of view , there are good reasons to extend the proposal to synthetic alcohol , there are legal and practical reasons why the Commission did not do this , when it established the proposal .
Synthetic alcohol is a non-Annex I product and therefore not covered by CAP .
Inserting it into the proposal would mean that we would have to find another legal basis other than the CAP Articles 36 and 37 of the Treaty .
More importantly , the smoothest way to make a proposal was to limit it to agricultural alcohol because the production and trade in synthetic alcohol in the European Union is more limited .
Most of the problems the sector faces are linked to agricultural alcohol and not so much to synthetic alcohol .
If , once this regulation is applied , serious problems arise in relation to synthetic alcohol , insertion of synthetic alcohol into this instrument could always be envisaged .
The Commission is well aware of the fact that the major part of the alcohol market is accessible to both types of alcohol , which therefore compete for the same outlets .
In order to realise its objective of better market information and transparency , the insertion of synthetic alcohol in the article on data collection to establish a yearly market balance of the sector and therefore to increase market knowledge might be considered .
The Commission is working on that .
This would also be defensible without a change of legal base provided that it could be shown that it was genuinely necessary , in order to manage the CMO for agricultural alcohol , that we should have the data for synthetic alcohol .
The case-law of the Court of Justice permits the use of Article 37 for provisions that have an ancillary effect on non-Annex I products , where this is necessary for the proper functioning of the CMO .
For the rest , the Commission is of the opinion that all other provisions proposed are necessary to establish a set of common rules for the alcohol sector , including the provisions on the application of the rules on state aid .
Without a fair application of those rules there would not be a common market for agricultural alcohol , as already exists for synthetic alcohol .
I should like to say something about the German market in answer to Members who have made reference to that particular aspect .
The Commission is well aware of the functioning of the German alcohol monopoly .
The purpose of this proposal for a common market organisation for alcohol is not to put an end to the existence of the German monopoly .
If the production of alcohol by German farmers , under the rules of the monopoly , including federal payments , is necessary for the maintenance of precious eco-systems or to cover the additional costs of environmentally-friendly production methods , there would be no problems , as current state aid rules offer substantial possibilities for Member States to grant aid for those purposes .
If , on the contrary , the aid in Germany is not given for such reasons but is simple operating assistance , paid for other reasons , then the application of the state aid rules would cause a problem .
On the other hand , those small distillers who produce not only alcohol but also a spirit , could benefit from the de minimis rules on state aid for non-agricultural products .
I hope that these comments which I have also made on behalf of my colleague , Mr Fischler , have clarified the Commission 's position on the proposal .
Moreover , I would like to thank Members of Parliament for their constructive suggestions , which the Commission will consider .
In answer to the question put to me by the rapporteur , if this amendment is accepted - which the Commission would regret - then Mr Fischler and my other colleagues will reassess the situation and reflect on a further course of action .
Again I thank all Members that have spoken and others who have dealt with this subject .
I thank them for the time they have given to this proposal .
In particular I thank the rapporteur , Mrs Ayuso González , for her efforts .
Thank you , Commissioner Bolkestein .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon .
Mr President , it is not just a procedural matter ; it is a personal , political matter ...
( The President cut the speaker off )
I voted in favour of the draft recommendation for second reading tabled by Mr Sterckx .
I would like to thank the rapporteur , who presented those of Parliament 's amendments that had not been taken up by the Council in its common position .
For first reading , I proposed a tighter timetable for the installation of black boxes and transponders onboard vessels .
This timetable was adopted in plenary by the European Parliament , but was not taken up by the Council in its common position for second reading .
However , the United States has made a submission in IMO concerning the anticipated application of AIS carriage at the latest in 2004 .
I would point out that the Council common position gives 2007 as the date for application by Member States .
Once again , we will be lagging behind the United States in the area of maritime safety .
I therefore welcome the fact that the House has reintroduced this request in today 's vote .
However , I have some reservations as to the concept of places of refuge , which does not provide the same guarantees as a port , for equipment and naval installations .
( Explanation of vote cut short pursuant to Rule 137 ( 1 ) of the Rules of Procedure )
The next item is the report ( A5-0037 / 2002 ) by Mr Beazley , on behalf of the Committee on Culture , Youth , Education , the Media and Sport , on the evaluation report from the Commission to the Council and the European Parliament on the application of the Council Recommendation of 24 September 1998 concerning the protection of minors and human dignity [ COM ( 2001 ) 106 - C5-0191 / 2001 - 2001 / 2087 ( COS ) ] .
Mr President , may I first pay credit to my colleague , Mr Heaton-Harris , for the initial work he did in drafting this report before he moved to another committee .
The rapid development of the audio-visual media has brought many real benefits in terms of education , spreading greater awareness of public affairs around the world , and not least in the field of entertainment .
However , along with the undoubted advantages , there have also been concerns that , given the generally greater adeptness of children at using audio-visual resources , in some areas there are dangers of their obtaining access to unsuitable or harmful material .
This is most obvious in the fields of overt sexual material and gratuitous violence .
The principles which have guided this report are to encourage greater public awareness of these issues and to support parental responsibility and to develop co-operation between the content providers , consumer organisations and the respective authorities , both national and European .
Self-regulation is considered to be the main instrument , underpinned by legal requirements where necessary .
The report , which analyses the Commission 's evaluation report , is primarily concerned with the Internet and with video games , as it was felt important not to anticipate a possible future review of the Television without Frontiers directive .
The report calls for user-friendly content filter systems to enable parents to predetermine the sort of content which they feel is unsuitable viewing for their children and , in this regard I very much welcome the fact that , since the report was first drafted , the Internet Content Rating Association ( ICRA ) , has launched a filter system available free of charge , an initiative supported by the Commission .

We also called for greater public awareness , for education campaigns and hotlines to be set up , as already exists in TV broadcasting , so that complaints about illegal or harmful content may be recorded by consumers , particularly by parents .
We consider that so-called ' Internet Chat Rooms ' should be subject to greater monitoring , both of the rules for their installation and in relation to their use .
As far as video games are concerned , we call upon the Member States to continue to promote the rating of video games , again through self-regulation , but if that is considered to be inadequate in some cases , it should be backed up by the introduction of agreed minimum standards of content and promotion .
It is also hoped that the Member States will continue to exchange best practice in this field and co-ordinate measures which are taken in co-operation with the industry and with content providers .
The report does not seek to sensationalise or exaggerate perceived dangers , but it does provide a useful framework to encourage public awareness of the risks involved and to provide practical remedies .
Finally , Parliament calls on the Commission to draw up a further report , preferably before the end of this year , on the implementation of the recommendation with specific reference to implementation in each Member State .
I commend the report to the House .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the protection of minors and human dignity is an issue that is close to the hearts of us all .
It is therefore to be welcomed that the Commission has presented this evaluation report on the progress we are making in this area in relation to audio-visual media and the Internet .
Mr Beazley , as Mr Heaton-Harris before him , has drafted a sterling report on the subject .
Nevertheless , I should like to take this opportunity of drawing your attention once again to the fact that technical resources and legislation from above are not sufficient to guarantee this protection .
There are always ways and means , devious or otherwise , to get round this , and certainly children are very resourceful in this area .
Self-regulation , as is now being applied on a large scale , appears to be a very handy instrument .
However , I want to point out again at this juncture that instilling awareness in minors themselves , as well as their parents and educators , is still the best way forward .
This is possible by , on the one hand , paying ample attention to media education at school , so that minors can be taught to identify harmful content for themselves , and , on the other hand , by providing educators with a tool , such as the Dutch ' viewer guide ' classification system .
This is a system on which we had a very interesting hearing yesterday and in which I am also personally involved in the Netherlands .
It is a well thought-out system which actually works , and by means of which children can handle audio-visual media products with awareness .
The system is also accompanied by an age category .
MG6 means : six years , parental guidance desirable , and , in this way , adults are reminded once again of their responsibilities , for uninterested parents produce vulnerable children .
I would therefore call on the Member States and the Commission , when studying best practices , to keep this classification system in mind and , when planning school curricula , to make room for media education too .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , Commissioner , I would like first to congratulate Mr Beazley on his report and thank him for his good cooperation .
This topic is , as my predecessor on the floor has confirmed , close to all our hearts .
There are many points on which we agree , such as trust being a better fundamental premise for this common endeavour than overall control or even censorship , neither of which would serve as a good basis for cooperation .
We also agree that we must advertise the hotlines more extensively in order for them to be used , as we desire , right across the whole of Europe , and in order for us to be able to establish where protection is needed .
We agree , too , that we have to provide parents with the right tools to enable them , together with their children , to assess which TV programmes , computer games , and films are the right ones for their children , and in order to support them in their judgment of the programmes .
On this I agree with Mrs Sanders-ten Holte , who spoke before me .
This is where moving closer on a European level to a uniform system of classification for the whole audio-visual sector seems to be of the greatest and most urgent importance , as that would be a tool facilitating control by parents and young people themselves , one that could also function on the basis of trust and not tend towards either excessive control or censorship .
I now come to what I believe is at the moment the most important point in connection with this ' box ' , namely that the Internet strikes many as a sort of ' wonderbox ' ; they stand in front of it and are simply overwhelmed by all the stuff that comes out of it , forgetting in the process what influences can come into play , especially on children and young people , if we do not consciously discern what is heading in our direction .
Let me emphasise it three times , four times , ten times over : media literacy .
Media literacy - we cannot start too soon on heightening awareness of it and on playing our part in developing it .
To do this , we also need not only the political willingness ; we also need more programmes .
For them , we need money .
Perhaps we will achieve some sort of collaboration with all the players at the European level , something which is , at the end of the day , in the interests of all .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , our experience following the quantum leap in the mass media , especially television , is increasing daily .
I am sure you have all witnessed in your countries , as I have witnessed in mine , the boom in cheap ' big brother ' type television programmes in which people agree to be imprisoned , for want of a better word , while viewers are invited to peep through the keyhole , waiting for something titillating to happen , usually - to be frank - a sex scene , or for something unexpected or interesting to happen .
But , at the same time , this sort of programme encourages viewers - especially young viewers - to look on the people playing this sort of lottery , betting body and soul in the hope of winning money at the expense of the others , as role models .
These programmes are objectionable and absurd but we cannot attack them through legislation or administrative intervention .
As other speakers have said , technical rules do no good , nor does informing and educating children , because forbidden fruit does , of course , taste sweeter .
None of this is enough especially , Commissioner , as everyone will be able to access this sort of programme on the Internet sooner or later .
I think we need some sort of European legislation and regulations with more teeth than we have at present .
I do not have a great deal of faith in self-regulation because competition lives by its own - very powerful - rules .
However , it would be no bad thing if we could come up with some sort of more binding code of conduct than we have at present .
If we were to give parents and consumers the right to lay siege to the producers of these cheap programmes , it would , perhaps , provide some small counterweight to competition .
And , of course , we could look at the more technical question of watersheds to draw a dividing line between when children watch television and their bedtime and when these programmes go out .
However , even with all this , unless we come up with something more original and imaginative , I shall persist in my pessimism as to the future and the success of this sort of programme .
Mr President , the Internet and television have changed the world .
Knowledge and information at your fingertips , 24 hours a day and in large quantities .
As I have indicated in previous speeches , however , the Internet and television are a reflection of society .
The Commission evaluation report and the report by the rapporteur , Mr Beazley , confirm this .
Both media are also used for criminal and degrading purposes .
I am pleased with the Commission evaluation report and the rapporteur 's report .
It is encouraging that the Commission is able to conclude that , in many Member States , a great deal is being done to prevent the distribution of child pornography .
This also applies to other degrading and illegal activities .
Attention is rightly drawn to the need for the Commission to continue to urge the Member States to implement the provisions in the recommendation .
The rapporteur is also right to draw attention to parental responsibility in the first place , but also to the responsibility of the government and of suppliers of Internet products .
They must jointly ensure that human beings are valued as unique creatures and not as instruments to fulfil personal needs .
Children , in particular , deserve protection in this area , so that they can develop a healthy image of human beings .
This is not just about child pornography .
This is also about racism , hatred and other forms of degrading excrescences which can so easily be spread via the Internet and television .
The global reach of the Internet and television requires an international approach .
The wish expressed by Member States to subject national legislative frameworks to minimum standards at European , and probably global , level receives my approval .
In my view , the combination of national frameworks and international minimum standards makes sense .
This does justice to the global problem and cultural diversity .
Moreover , the maintenance of a national legislative framework does not give the Member States the opportunity of hiding behind international legislation .
The proposal to consult all parties involved when drafting codes of conduct and other ways of preventing the distribution of pornography and racist material is useful .
I should , however , like to add that , in matters of censorship and handling illegal material , the police and justice departments are the legally competent authorities .
Finally , I should like to urge the European Commission to encourage the Member States to continue to pay attention to evils which are distributed via television , video games and films .
From the report , it is clear that less progress has been made in these areas than in the area of the Internet .
Less clear-cut evils are still evils .
And where the protection of minors and human dignity are concerned , we cannot be alert enough .
. ( FR ) Mr President , the representatives of the MPF in this House welcome the European Parliament resolution on the evaluation report by the Commission concerning the protection of minors and human dignity , which they will be voting for .
On this subject , which concerns the very essence of humanity , there are two main players involved : the family , first of all , which bears full responsibility for the upbringing of its children , and secondly , society , which must ensure that children are protected .
It is , therefore , important - as emphasised in the resolution that we are discussing today - to do all we can to ensure that protective frameworks are established , in particular for the forms of media which are used freely by young consumers , be they audiovisual , written resources or on the Internet .
It is also important for the victims of abuses of power to be able to turn to a moral authority that can help them .
We must increase the means available to these organisations .
Changing the behaviour of adults is something else that will enable us to protect our most vulnerable fellow citizens effectively .
We must not be afraid ; we must be prepared to go against the flow and to lay down new rules for a moral code that respects all aspects of the individual .
We must condemn these counter-models of pleasure , who are all too often idolised by the young , whose points of reference some are seeking to destroy .
We should also be inculcating a genuine appreciation of the beautiful , the good and the true in minors , so that they hold the keys to their protection in their own hands .
To answer Mr Papayannakis , I would say that adopting this attitude demonstrates our optimism and I personally am not pessimistic about what society and what individuals can do to effectively protect minors .
Mr President , I would firstly like to congratulate Mr Beazley on his report .
The dangers children and young people are exposed to today are very different to those we were exposed to at that age .
TV and the Internet have undoubtedly contributed to this , to a large extent , because they fill youngsters ' heads with ideas that have very little to do with reality .
A short time ago , a study was published in a Spanish newspaper , which stated that young people seeing , for example , a person throw themselves off the fourth floor of a building and yet run away unharmed or a person stop a speeding bullet with their bare hands without suffering any ill effects , contributes to many young people being unaware of the real danger of such situations .
It is thought , furthermore , that such images put too many ideas in their heads and that this is , unfortunately , the cause of the increase in violence amongst young people and even children .
Having said this , I would like to express my total support for the rapporteur when he calls on Member States to classify video games using self-regulatory mechanisms set up by the industry , and for them to establish ' abuse departments ' .
I would also like , of course , to congratulate the Commission on its intention to carry out a study on the classification of films distributed to cinemas , shown on TV , and available on DVD or video .
Ladies and gentlemen , we need to be aware that we cannot expect to have a world without violence when the adults of the future spend their time watching cartoons , films and news stories that are of an increasingly violent nature .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I want to focus on the actual task we are to perform as a European institution , but without neglecting the demands also made of the Member States .
I believe that the digital age will see the acceleration of current developments in the services offered by the media , which are far from being limited to traditional television , or even to the Internet , but include many other services , and so it is right and necessary that we give thought to the legal form that control and the protection of young people might take , and also set up the means for dealing with them .
There is no doubt that the legal framework must be adapted to these new developments , at both European and national level .
I speak also for my group when I say that I consider self-regulation instruments to be an important addition to a legal framework .
We cannot do without standards laid down in law , and these are a compelling necessity .
Self-regulation instruments , too , need to be on a legal footing , which means that the promoters , those who provide the programmes , cannot be absolved of their responsibility . To put it another way , we cannot allow service providers to shirk responsibility for their programmes .
That is the basic premise .
As for how this can be put into practice , there may be - and indeed there are - many ways of going about that .
Regulatory arrangements in the Member States are very diverse , which is ultimately due to the fact that they correspond to conventional media systems as these have evolved , and we are not about nullifying all that .
I emphasise that self-regulation instruments as additions to the law are something we cannot do without .
Technical systems , too , can be indispensable , but they cannot be a substitute for responsibility .
We also know that many children and young people , in an age when adults have not mastered the whole range of technical options , are ahead of their parents in that respect .
That will change in the long term , but that is the way things are today , and we all know that children can get up to all sorts of tricks , for example when it comes to cracking something .
That is why we cannot rely exclusively on technical systems , and why there is a need for contents to be monitored , in which respect there must be restrictions on content , which cannot relate only to real-time transmissions .
The different time zones in a region over which a satellite broadcasts make that obsolete in any case , and so even that method has serious limitations .
I am very glad that this report takes up my group 's call for the continuation and extension of the action plan on the safe use of the Internet , which is due to come to an end at the end of the year .
I see this as compellingly necessary .
I will conclude by saying that we must take steps to impart media literacy to children , young people and their parents , as a sound capacity for judgment can only come into being if our measures help to develop it .
Mr President , I want to concentrate on the need to tackle the growing phenomenon of child abuse on the Internet .
We welcome initiatives by the Member States in the EU on safer Internet use for children but we need to step up our actions for a more coordinated campaign to fight against Internet paedophilia .
When it comes to cybercrime , Member States rightly prioritise the campaign against global terrorism and , additionally , focus on Internet credit card fraud , but more can and should be done on Internet-paedophilia .
Last week I met with the Abusive Images Unit of Greater Manchester Police , a small , committed team led by Terry Jones , leading the field in expertise in the UK on tracing and convicting child abusers on the net .
The unit was launched in 1995 , when 12 images were seized .
In 1999 , 41,000 images were seized and one recent conviction revealed a man with over 50,000 images of child abuse .
This is not child pornography but gross and indecent sexual abuse .
I have seen the pictures .
Behind each image is a real child traumatised by their experiences .
The police I met with are doing an excellent job and being assisted by new software technology designed again by a local company in my constituency , Surf Control .
With this they monitored chat channels for 16 hours .
They picked up 48 offenders right across the EU - offenders in positions of trust ( teachers and scoutmasters , a foster parent in Germany and a Swedish army sergeant ) ; babies as young as three months had been anally raped .
Abuse is under-reported .
So what should we do in the EU ?
We need to do more .
We need hotlines and to make this a priority at EU and Member State level .
This week we voted for a EU network of national monitoring centres on football hooliganism .
That is a violent and visible form of abuse , but we can do more for those children who are suffering behind the scenes from fear and violent abuse .
Yes , we need self-regulation and partnership , but Internet service providers have to prioritise this .
AOL and NTL have excellent reputations , but others are not doing the job .
They are not answering the request of police to track down these abusers and they are even beginning to ask to charge the police service for it .
I want to see closer cooperation between Europol and EU law enforcement .
I want better research and funding for Internet-tracing software .
We can do more if we make this a priority and we can protect our children from this violent and heinous form of abuse .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I would also like to start by offering my very special thanks to Mr Beazley for this report , because I think he has summed up Parliament 's opinions in a particularly constructive way .
You can tell that by the fact that we adopted this report unanimously in committee and that , today in Parliament , there are no amendments to this report left , and that on a topic that involves a very large number of problems and unanswered questions .
So many thanks for it .
The work we are going to do will be on a very good foundation .
Our ongoing efforts will be particularly important because the future convergence of the media - television , computers , the Internet - will mean that we will have to find new ways to really guarantee that young people and human dignity will be protected .
The proposals submitted by the Commission are therefore very much the right thing , and the Member States ' support for them is urgently needed .
I would like to again go over the three points that I see as being the most important .
We need , firstly , new and more highly-developed models of self-regulation , enabling the industry and the responsible Governments to work together on a common basis .
It is for this purpose that the model of jointly-coordinated self-regulation has been devised , and we need to develop it further .
Secondly , it is not standards harmonised on a Europe-wide basis that we need , but Europe-wide minimum standards , particularly for video games and the Internet , in order to offer young people real protection .
And , thirdly , media education is needed not only for children but also for their parents .
All these tasks require involvement on the part of the Council , and it is to them , and for that , that I appeal .
Mr President , I would also like to add my thanks to the rapporteur for his work on this very important report .
The explosion in broadcasting technologies has caused many parents to lose control over what their children watch , and the growth of digital , cable and satellite TV , as well as home computer technology , means that parents are increasingly powerless to monitor their children 's viewing habits .
According to some reports , parents were not aware of the facilities , such as the blocks on pay TV and Internet filters , which help them control what their children watch .
Parents need to be given more information on how these work and how trustworthy they are .
Children 's welfare is primarily the responsibility of their legal guardians , but this does not absolve suppliers and distributors of audiovisual content of their responsibilities .
Both sides must take full responsibility in this regard .
The degree of self-regulation in broadcasting differs from one Member State to another , but we all agree that we must work towards some commonality in this area and that self-regulation must be underpinned by some legal basis .
Finally , child pornography on the Internet is unforgivable , and there are vast numbers of websites with illegal content located outside the European Union .
I commend the report to the House and thank the rapporteur again for his excellent initiative in this regard .
Mr President , I too would like to congratulate the rapporteur on this report .
The constantly growing range of multimedia services surely makes safety arrangements necessary - and of a comparable nature right across Europe - in order to protect our children and young people from harmful content and its consequences .
We have heard about the introduction of technical measures such as filters and acoustic warning signals , and also about the possibility of direct intervention in services that offend against the dignity of young people or are a danger to them . These certainly deserve our full support and should be implemented to the same degree in every Member State .
I would , though , like to remind you that - as the report also points out - many safety arrangements are not there to supplant the responsibilities of the parents , who must , at the end of the day , be the ultimate and most important regulators .
We will otherwise not be able to prevent the situation arising where young people may well be unable to buy swastika banners over the Internet , but can do so in the nearest flea market .
Preventing that is a task for the educator and not for the censor .
Mr President , of course , we wish to thank the rapporteur and the Commission for this work and for the evaluation report .
I am not going to repeat what other speakers have said but I should like to mention , Commissioner , three specific cases that have been brought to my attention this week .
The first concerns the mother of a handicapped teenager who goes out to work .
For some time , every evening , she has had to go and fetch him , because he is supposed to return home from work at around 5 p.m. but there , he has free access to pornographic sites .
This is happening in a major city in France .
As things stand , she cannot turn to the local police to close down these sites .
Secondly , a letter that I received this week informed me of a site funded jointly by the Ministry of Health and the Ministry of Education .
This site states that the role of adults is to allow children to sample everything , to try every experience .
And there are a number of very specific examples - I shall provide the relevant documents later - funded from the public purse , of the type of thing our children are looking at these days .
Thirdly , organisations that fight against paedophilia last week sent me a CD-ROM which brings together a large amount of information that is currently available .
This CD-ROM was sent to authorities such as Europol over a year ago and no progress at all has yet been made on the matter .
Soon , Commissioner , on 8 May , a world summit on children will take place .
This afternoon , we will be voting on a resolution on the matter .
We would like you , between now and this summit , to hold a meeting with all of the competent bodies to tell us what practical measures you intend to adopt in this field in order to combat this phenomenon .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I should like first of all to thank Parliament and its rapporteur , Mr Beazley , for having succeeded in reaching agreement on all the points under discussion .
I must tell you that the Commission supports Parliament , just as Parliament supports the Commission .
We have a shared aim , which is to protect our children .
There are different ways of achieving this , as the honourable Members have rightly stated , and in order to accomplish this objective we must , therefore , join forces .
I have listened with great interest to the specific and shocking examples provided by the speakers .
There are thousands of such examples , which merely confirm our feeling that we must translate our words into action and that we will not be able to resolve the problems in the European institutions alone , but that concerted action by all key players is necessary , including the NGOs working to protect minors and human dignity , at both European as well as national or regional level .
As the report states , progress has already been made in a very short time .
For example , associations of Internet Service Providers have been established in most Member States and the ISPs in most Member States are members of the European Internet Service Providers ' Association ( EuroISPA ) , which has promoted the adoption of codes of conduct for the responsibility of providers .
Hotlines have been set up in the vast majority of Member States to deal with complaints about illegal or offensive content .
The European Commission is supporting the creation of these hotlines with its action plan for safer Internet use .
According to the information provided by the Member States , it seems that the majority of Internet sites advocating political extremism or which depict sexual violence , and very many paedophile or pornographic sites are located outside the European Union , hence the importance of a strategy in this field that is not only European , but global .
At the same time , the industry is also working on establishing classification and filtering systems , on the creation of protected areas or ' walled gardens ' ; portals in which ISPs guarantee the quality of the sites to which they provide access .
The Community action plan for safer Internet use is also encouraging these initiatives .
There have certainly been some very positive experiences , but there have also been sites which are , unfortunately , appalling , and which cannot be effectively closed down .
With regard to the application of the recommendation by radio stations and television companies , all the Member States now have devices available which ensure that programmes likely to harm minors are preceded by a warning sound or have a symbol on the screen throughout the programme .
We know full well that the times that are supposedly ' closed ' to children no longer have any meaning today , because our children are perfectly capable of recording programmes that are broadcast whilst they are fast asleep .
Furthermore , filter systems can only be used with digital television .
It will , therefore , be easier to filter programmes when digital television is up and running , but for the moment , this is happening very slowly .
In 1999 , the Commission had a study produced on parental control of television programmes , which recommended giving the greatest emphasis to self-regulation whilst making filter devices available to families at an affordable price .
I agree , on this point , with all Members of the House who approve of self-regulation , on condition that this is backed by legislation .
This is the direction we must concentrate on in future .
Mr President , I should like to close by answering some specific questions raised by honourable Members .
First of all , I shall address my comments to the rapporteur , Mr Beazely : it would be premature to present a new report by the end of 2002 , but under the review , we shall take all of Parliament 's observations into account .
We shall continue our work , but the report will probably not be ready by the end of 2002 .
Secondly , with regard to the system of classification , a new study on classification was started by my staff in January and should be completed by the second half of 2002 .
It will be forwarded to Parliament and we will discuss it and draw the relevant conclusions from it .
Thirdly , media education : as I have said on many occasions , this is one of my competences , one of my objectives .
Our children learn , to a greater or lesser degree , to read , write and to do arithmetic , but they never to learn to read and to gauge this society of images that surrounds them .
This is why we have launched the first pilot projects for image education .
This is also why the forthcoming ' Net-Days ' in November 2002 , which will link up hundreds of thousands of school classes in most of the Member States and , furthermore , in other parts of the world , will this year be dedicated to image education and image analysis .
Our approach , therefore , is extremely practical .
To conclude , I wish to draw your attention to the fact that a single Commissioner , the European Parliament or the Commission alone cannot deal with all of these issues .
This is why the proposals will be studied in conjunction with all the Commissioners responsible for the areas affected by this issue , and with institutions other than the Commission that have responsibility in this area , such as Europol , for example .
What is needed is concerted action , which we shall continue to implement .
Thank you very much , Commissioner .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place at 12 noon .
The next item is the report ( A5-0035 / 2002 ) by Mrs De Sarnez , on behalf of the Committee on Culture , Youth , Education , Media and Sport , on the Communication from the Commission to the European Parliament and the Council on strengthening cooperation with third countries in the field of higher education [ COM ( 2001 ) 385 - C5-0538 / 2001 - 2001 / 2217 ( COS ) ] .
Mr President , before presenting my report , I should like , first of all , to thank all my colleagues for their amendments , which have improved this text , and also the draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on Foreign Affairs , Human Rights , Common Security and Defence Policy , who has delivered an extremely good opinion .
The aim of the report I am presenting is to consider , on the basis of the communication by the Commission , ways of making the Member States more competitive and attractive in the international training market .
We all know that the issue of training is of great importance for the coming years .
Students the whole world over are increasingly looking beyond their own borders for the training that offers them the best prospects .
Consequently , we are seeing the burgeoning of a real international market in training .
It so happens that in Europe we have fewer students from third countries than the United States , Australia or Canada , to give a few examples .
We therefore have a great deal of ground to make up and this is why my report makes a number of proposals .
Firstly , we must have a detailed survey on the international mobility of students , since none exists at the moment .
It would , therefore , be useful if the European Commission , through the good offices of Eurostat , could work in close cooperation with Unesco and the OECD in order to give us a clear and detailed overview of the mobility of foreign students . And it is finally time , I believe , to propose a harmonised definition of what constitutes a foreign student .
My second proposal is that we must move towards harmonising the quality of higher education and the recognition of diplomas and studies .
The European Union must be able to provide high-quality training , whatever the university or the host country .
It is crucial for students to be able to start a degree in one Member State and complete it in another with the guarantee of seeing the knowledge they have acquired validated by a diploma that is recognised in all Member States .
I therefore propose that the Commission continue to improve and to promote the university studies validation system known as the European Credit Transfer System ( ECTS ) and that this should inspire it to develop new programmes for mobility .
We must also promote the creation of joint courses between Member State universities in order to achieve , wherever possible , the award of joint diplomas .
Thirdly , I propose that a European university label be established , which would be awarded to training modules provided in higher education establishments recognised for the quality of their teaching and of the reception they give to students of third countries .
This university label would focus less on the quality of the university as an institution than on the modules it teaches .
I feel sure that this will enable us to help promote European higher education and will send a clear signal to foreign students .
Fourthly , we must also encourage the promotion of language learning .
Language learning is an undisputed factor of mobility and this is why it would be desirable for the Member States to systematically establish the teaching of foreign languages in the form of modules in all institutions of higher education and also for teaching of the language of the host country to be made available to foreign students .
My fifth point is that we must also guarantee high-quality reception facilities .
Universities must now focus their efforts on ensuring that they provide these high-quality reception facilities for foreign students .
They must be helped to deal with the administrative arrangements that they will necessarily have to face .
They must be helped to find accommodation and to obtain grants .
These high-quality reception facilities will be one of the criteria on which the award of the European university label will depend .
My sixth and final point is that we must make use of existing programmes of cooperation that have already proved their value , such as the ALFA programme .
Consequently , the new programmes should take account of the enormous importance of the drawing up of joint study programmes and the development of systems for the reciprocal recognition of courses of study and diplomas and partnership with undertakings , with local authorities or with multilateral organisations .
The aim of this report is , therefore , to urge the European Union and the Member States to take action to make European higher education dynamic , competitive and attractive .
The competitiveness and attractiveness of European higher education must , of course , start taking shape in the Member States first of all .
The Member States ' Ministers of Education are aware of this and raise the point at every Education Council meeting .
I am sure that the European Commission and Parliament are today willing to do everything they can in order to achieve the creation of a European area of knowledge that is attractive and competitive , and ultimately able to make its presence felt in international competition .
Mr President , it has now become clear that an international training market does exist ; the fact that the European Union 's involvement in the evolution of the international market in education is very slight and not in keeping with its cultural traditions is something of which the Union itself is aware , and the Commission was right to raise the matter in its communication .
Mrs De Sarnez 's work is excellent and the Committee on Foreign Affairs , Human Rights , Security and Defence Policy has made a positive contribution .
In addition to the communication 's huge technical content and the many considerations and proposals we are presenting to the Commission with a view to strengthening cooperation in the field of higher education , there is another , extremely important issue : the quality of the training provided .
The draft resolution contains over ten paragraphs on guaranteeing high-quality higher education , but it can clearly go no further , given the technical nature of the suggestions and proposals .
The issue of the quality of training warrants further analysis , for the quality depends on the extent to which the training fosters the human development of the young generations .
Cultural and vocational development is based partly on the development of the human dimension , on respect for one 's own life and the lives of others .
When young people are committing suicide for what appears to be no reason at all - as happens in the West - or when they use their bodies as instruments of death to kill defenceless people - as happens in the Middle East - we must look closely at the causes of this distortion of values and at what we can do in terms of training , understood , not least , to mean fostering human development and an awareness of the dignity of the individual , in order to prevent such unusual behaviour .
This is no longer just a technical issue : it is a question of philosophy and education too .
In this regard , I wonder whether we should not start to extend the Union 's responsibilities beyond the limits of harmonising rules and do more than just develop cooperation tools .
We fully support the creation of centres of excellence , towards a European university label , just as we are in favour of the Union taking on a role in promoting high-quality university teaching .
It is worth trying to set every possible wheel in motion to harness the high-quality human resources available in order to improve the quality of training , so that culture and education become sources of life-giving energy which remains with people throughout their lives .
Quality in the sense of providing tools for intelligent living , then : that is the primary goal of training .
Mr President , Commissioner , I would like , on behalf of our group , to thank Mrs De Sarnez , who has drafted an excellent report .
I would like to point out that this ' Europe of knowledge ' , which we have come to use as a common expression , has to give an account of itself at an international level .
This is an important challenge , and the declarations at Lisbon and Barcelona , or what was adopted in Bologna or Prague , are also important . If , though , they only result in everything being done , at the end of the day , in a so-called open coordination that bypasses Parliament , then that is something we simply cannot agree to .
We agree with the contents , but also want to be involved .
The challenges we face are great .
As I have said , we have to give an account of ourselves , and I agree with Mrs De Sarnez that we must increasingly see to it that our education becomes more appealing and more competitive .
In the European Union , we need something like a community with a first-rate knowledge-based society , of which we can then make real use .
For that , we need more mobility .
As Mrs De Sarnez has already said , mobility and the quality of our education are the most important things , and so there are of course a number of things we have to do .
We must also make it our concern that more languages are taught and learned in higher education institutions .
We must make it our concern to have more common leaving certificates .
The Franco-German college in Germany , at which common leaving certificates can be taken , could serve as an example for many other European higher education institutions .
In competition , we should stand or fall by whether we get this on the move .
The university label proposed by Mrs De Sarnez strikes me as excellent , and so we must work at making it a reality .
We must also act more quickly than we have in the past to ensure that leaving certificates and diplomas are at last recognised .
We have been saying this for ever and a day and yet progress is being made at a snail 's pace .
This is damaging our young people , and I do think this is a challenge for all of us and one that we should take up .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , now that we have this report - for which I should like to thank Mrs de Sarnez - the time is right for the European Union to reflect on what it means by the right to education , and more specifically higher education , and how it intends to implement this right .
The twentieth century has seen human rights universally accepted as the main guiding force behind what we do .
Our responsibility has to be to see them fully respected and put into practice , because education is not only an individual right ; it is also an essential means of promoting peace - a crucial issue today - and ensuring respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms in general .
If its potential for building a world of peace is to be realised , education needs to be widely available and made equally accessible to all .
It is a huge task , but let us not forget that even today we live in a world where there are more than 800 million illiterate adults and almost 100 million children of secondary school age who do not have access to a school .
Moreover , millions of those in school today are not able to benefit from high-quality teaching that meets their basic educational needs .
It is therefore increasingly urgent for us to meet these needs in a world where the upheaval caused by globalisation and by the revolution in information and communication technology is marginalising entire peoples , who have been plunged into the most extreme poverty and who are easy prey for extremists of all kinds .
Making the right to education a reality is now less a question of access to education than of access to adequate training programmes for everyone so as to meet basic needs .
From this point of view , the right to higher education is - on our own evidence - not yet a reality , in particular for women .
Higher education shall , according to the Universal Declaration of Human Rights , be equally accessible to all on the basis of merit , but in Africa and Asia fewer than one person in ten in the age group concerned is in higher education , and the gulf is continuing to widen between these regions on the one hand and Europe and North America on the other .
There is no doubt that considerable progress has been made in the last 50 years towards making the right to higher education a reality throughout the world , but we should not forget that this vision , which is laid down in Article 26 , is not only quantitative but also qualitative because it encompasses the aims and objectives of education and thus its content .
Mindful of the task which remains to be accomplished - and with repeated thanks to Mrs De Sarnez for her report - I therefore think that it is essential , as far as those who are still excluded from any form of education are concerned , for us to be aware that it is not a question of choice , but that a great many people do not even know that they have a choice .
If we are talking about dignity , demands , and equal and inalienable rights , I hope from the bottom of my heart that this report will enable the European Parliament to continue to fight for these things and that it will not stop fighting when the battle is only half won .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , in Europe , we have been familiar with the phenomenon of the mobility of students and lecturers in higher education for a long time .
Such mobility greatly contributes to mutual understanding within Europe .
It is truly the shop floor on which understanding is shared .
The Commission is now calling for this process to be extended and intensified so as to include third countries .
In her thorough report , Mrs De Sarnez makes the correct assumption that high-quality higher education is required .
That the European Credit Transfer System must be improved and promoted in this respect goes without saying .
As does the fact that closer cooperation with third countries also requires the development of new cooperation programmes in higher education .
The EU has already set up cooperation programmes with America and with Canada , but I should like to fight for cooperation in the field of higher education with the developing countries .
According to the Commission , one of the objectives of cooperation with third countries is to train highly qualified people .
This is certainly very important for developing countries .
The mobility of people and ideas has an extremely stimulating effect on all participating institutions within and outside Europe .
Education in general is the best way of eradicating poverty in the world , and this certainly applies to developing countries .
Strict exchange arrangements will be needed to stave off a brain drain .
I would therefore call on the Commission , in its incentives policy , to pay extra attention to cooperation in the field of higher education
A second point I should like to bring up is the use of e-learning .
For many universities , especially in Developing Countries , it is not always financially possible to fund extensive exchange programmes .
Precisely for them , the use of e-learning is extremely important , with a view both to gathering knowledge and to spreading their own knowledge .
The Commission should therefore pay extra attention to this aspect in its policy in the field of development cooperation .
Mr President , I too would like to congratulate the rapporteur on this interesting report .
Collaboration at the academic and cultural level in Europe does of course need to be improved , but educational differences in certain areas , which produce different results , form part of Member States ' national traditions .
This only becomes dangerous if education fails to reach a certain standard .
In the past , for example , this often led to the situation in which graduates in medicine from one Member States were not , because of educational standards , permitted to work in others .
Crossing borders when changing from one university to another also becomes impossible if the same minimum standard is not guaranteed .
The announcement of academic and cultural cooperation with candidate states is , however , particularly to be welcomed .
We who live on the border with Eastern Europe know these countries very well .
Many here will be astonished to learn that , in the twin areas of culture and education , we might even have a few things to learn from the Eastern European candidate states .
Mr President , first of all , I should like to congratulate Mrs De Sarnez on her report , which gives a sound and clear overview of the present situation in higher education , the existing programmes and the possible forms of cooperation with third countries in the field of higher education .
The summary she gave us a moment ago is excellent .
In the Seventeenth century , some 40 % of all students at the universities in the Netherlands were of foreign origin .
With the advent of the national state , education became increasingly national .
We now see another trend towards internationalisation , and this is also necessary .
With the enlargement and extension of Europe , we need more people whose hearts are in Europe and who have a feel for Europe , together with a knowledge of , and a feel for , the various countries , languages and cultures .
But the world extends beyond Europe , and it is becoming , as it were , increasingly smaller due to growing mobility and further internationalisation .
Not for nothing is the term ' global village ' used .
The digital knowledge-based society turns the world into a single coherent whole .
This creates a demand not only for citizens who have technical and scientific knowledge , but also for citizens with a feel for world citizenship .
And this is precisely why cooperation with third countries in the field of higher education is important .
A society must be supported by its citizens .
The Ancient Greeks already recognised the significance of education towards citizenship .
They observed that politics , training and education towards responsibility belong together .
Education plays an important role in integration .
It is a well-known fact that it can contribute to greater understanding and , as a result , to better relations .
It is important for the EU to seek , and intensify , cooperation .
Even if education is a national competence , more harmonisation is possible and necessary .
This report is about cooperation with third countries .
As has been said before , Europe does not appear to be the first choice of students who wish to study aboard for a while .
The US is still far more appealing .
This is partly due to the language problem , but this is not the only reason .
The quality of the curriculum , the reputation of the institution , as well as the recognition of qualifications play an important role .
I agree with the report that we in Europe must work towards a consistent and high level of education , which inevitably goes hand in hand with a command of languages , international recognition of qualifications , a Credit Transfer System , at least at European level , and more flexible opportunities for students from third countries who study in one Member State to also study temporarily in another EU country .
Finally , I should like to focus on the importance this has for development cooperation .
It is crucial for the advancement of a country .
It is a sound proposal to critically analyse the EU programmes in this respect and to look for other options .
Mr President , the Commission communication , although somewhat late in arriving , seeks to address and resolve the issue of the sensitive relationship between the European Union and the international training market , the principle leaders of which are currently the United States and some European countries , which are , moreover , in competition .
The initiation of this debate and the excellent report by Mrs De Sarnez would appear to be extremely important within the European Union , particularly in the field of higher education , for they highlight how little Europe has been involved thus far .
Evidence of this is the mere existence of national bilateral exchange programmes developed by the Member States .
However , I feel that the two goals identified for cooperation between the EU and third countries are particularly positive : firstly , the development of high-quality human resources , which can only be achieved through high-quality training or education ; and secondly , the promotion of a world centre of excellence for study , training and research situated in Europe .
I would also have liked to see some sort of reference to Cedefop and the Turin agency , which contribute a great deal in this field , particularly as regards research .
However , the issue is not just the quality of courses and programmes but the mutual recognition of qualifications too , an area in which we are guilty of being severely behind schedule .
We therefore need to establish transnational training modules of certified , recognised quality , provide incentives for student exchange programmes and language learning and improve the study grant system , providing vocational integration grants for students from third countries , who , although certainly free to choose where to settle down and work , might be more useful if a vocational integration grant were available to enable them to go home to their own States and contribute to their development .
This is certainly a major challenge - a challenge for the Europe of culture and values - which we cannot afford not to take up and in which we must succeed .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I would firstly like to congratulate our colleague Mrs De Sarnez on her excellent work on an issue of such great importance to all Europeans .
I am saying nothing new when I tell you that education does not fall within the competence of the Community .
Furthermore , in the Committee on Culture , Youth , Education , the Media and Sport , of which I am a member , each time we talk about education issues , one of our colleagues takes note of how many times the word ' subsidiarity ' comes up in the debate .
However , one of the fundamental rights of EU citizens is the free movement of persons , a right denied to European citizens insofar as there is no recognition of qualifications that enables citizens to go and work in another EU country .
At this very moment , the large number of students on the Erasmus programme who spend a whole year studying in another Member State come back to find that this year abroad has been a waste of time , because it is not recognised in their country of origin .
This is a totally unacceptable situation , all the more so because , when faced with this situation , many of these students , instead of going to another EU Member State , prefer to go to the United States or to Canada and spend a year there to master the language .
I believe that we should avoid this situation by improving conditions within the European Union .
It is very important for students to have the opportunity to spend a year outside their own countries , for the opportunity to live alongside other EU citizens , for the training that this experience provides and for the opportunity this offers them to learn and perfect another European language , which is so important for us as EU citizens .
For these reasons , I would like to express my support for Mrs De Sarnez in her call for the creation of a European university label , for improved international student mobility , the promotion of further language learning and , above all , for the harmonisation of higher education that will , without a doubt , have to lead to the recognition of qualifications .
First of all - and this is sincerely meant - I should like to thank the Members and their rapporteurs for their in-depth work and for studying the Commission proposals in a spirit of solidarity .
It is very important for Parliament and the Commission to work side by side .
As others have stressed , it is not easy sometimes , given the lack of legislation , to establish a system for collaborating directly with Parliament in the field of education .
I regret this and hope that it will change .
I have already said several times to Parliament , when I have appeared before the relevant parliamentary committee , that I will keep it abreast of any new developments and that I would welcome initiatives from Members to enable the Commission to take account of Parliament 's proposals , which are very important in this particular field .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the communication which was adopted last July by the Commission sought to launch the debate on cooperation with third countries , taking into account many of the points which have been made by honourable Members : globalisation , increasing international mobility , Europe 's lack of competitiveness in the international education market , and the need to foster an understanding of other cultures amongst our own young people and those in third countries .
The Commission reiterated that cooperation with third countries is based on Article 149 of the Treaty .
I would also add that above and beyond the Treaty this cooperation is one of the ways of fostering dialogue between civilisations .
On this basis , the Commission drew two conclusions : firstly , that if we build bridges between universities within the European Union - which is what we are in the process of doing - we also need to build bridges between these European universities and those in other continents .
This is precisely the subject of the report before us .
Secondly , we must ensure that our work in this area is more visible , so as to promote Europe as a centre of excellence and so as to attract students seeking an international education .
We have identified two objectives : firstly , to train high-quality human resources in the partner countries and in the Community through our system of reciprocal development of human resources .
We do not want a brain drain , but we do want the students who have been trained over here - not in one single country but in several because this is where the European added value that we have to offer lies - to return to their countries and , in a context of globalisation , we want them to know what is at stake when , as adults , they are called upon to make decisions in the private or public sector .
Secondly , obviously we want to promote the Community as an international centre of excellence for studying .
We have centres of excellence - they exist - but we need to link them up and make them more competitive because they will already be well known .
We are making progress , ladies and gentlemen , by taking specific action .
The first specific action is the Tempus programme , which has been extended to our MEDA partners .
This initiative is , of course , part of the Barcelona Process , but it also fits in with the idea of strengthening cooperation in the field of higher education , which is the subject of the communication .
The rapporteur mentioned the ALFA programme .
I can tell her that we are in the process of developing ALFA Plus for the countries of Central and South America .
Within the institutional framework of inter-university relations , ALFA Plus proposes to award more than 3 000 study grants to postgraduate students , who will be admitted to our universities .
You can see that we are working at a very practical level to develop pilot actions in other continents .
Moreover , we intend to continue working on similar initiatives .
We fully agree with the basic analysis of the European Parliament and the Member States .
Here , for once , we have a wonderful unanimity on the issue which concerns us .
Furthermore , the Commission has taken note of the requests to draft a framework proposal in response to the analyses that have been made .
We are already working on this and I might even be able to launch the proposal this year .
You will understand , Mrs de Sarnez , ladies and gentlemen , that I am not at liberty to divulge the details now , but we will most certainly take account of the many ideas contained in Mrs de Sarnez 's report .
I will of course keep the parliamentary committee concerned informed .
Mr President , with your permission , I should now like to respond very briefly to some of the proposals made by Mrs de Sarnez .
I think that I have already answered her questions on the pilot actions , ALFA , Tempus , and so on .
The rapporteur asks us to analyse quality in universities and to establish joint courses of study with joint diplomas , using the ECTS validation scheme .
Well , that is what we are in the process of doing .
We are setting up pilot projects whereby three or four universities from three or four countries will collaborate on the basis of a joint curriculum leading to a European Masters degree .
There are plans for the university chancellors to meet for a major conference in Berlin in 2003 where they will make presentations on the pilot actions , which will have been launched by then ; some of them will get underway during the current academic year , but in the majority of cases it will be during the 2002 / 2003 academic year .
We will , therefore , analyse the initial results in Berlin , and I very much hope that the initiative will snowball and that , when they see how positive it is , many universities will want to be involved in this new system .
As far as the detailed survey on international mobility is concerned , I think , Mrs de Sarnez , that this analysis is something that will have to be done mainly by the OECD and Unesco .
We are in discussions with these two institutions , but , to conclude their analyses successfully , they need to overcome problems with the comparability of statistics and statistics which are outdated and which have therefore been overtaken by events .
But we think that these are the institutions that should do this .
We will be collaborating closely with them .
Turning now to the quality of the reception provided , administrative procedures , accommodation and grants , I should like to reiterate that the French Presidency organised a major meeting of education ministers at the Sorbonne who spent a whole day discussing obstacles to mobility .
All of the results were put on paper and signed by our Heads of State and Government at the Nice Summit .
The high-level political decision exists .
The problem that we have is that progress is not being made as rapidly on the ground because these are issues which need to be addressed by national governments .
And I am not even talking about education ministers because often it is Social Security ministers or Home Office ministers who need to get involved here .
We therefore need to exert friendly pressure on our governments to remove these barriers to mobility , which often are relatively trivial .
We are however making progress here too .
Let me give you an example : in some countries the grants awarded by the State to their students were not exportable , which seriously hampered mobility .
However , most of the ministers concerned have taken measures making it possible for their students to continue to benefit from a grant whilst they are studying abroad .
My final point is languages .
As you know , 2001 was the European Year of Languages .
This has set things moving .
I say this full of admiration for the speedy response of many Education ministers , who have undertaken reforms of their school systems to enable children to learn one or more foreign languages from an early age .
I can tell you that at the Barcelona Summit the Heads of State and Government adopted our slogan of ' mother tongue plus two ' .
Things are moving then and progress is being made , not quickly enough , but we are going in the right direction .
With Parliament 's help , I am sure that we will be able to move forward more quickly towards our shared vision .
The next item is the debate on the Commission Statement on the Second United Nations World Assembly on Ageing ( Madrid , 8 to 12 April 2002 ) .
Mr President , on 18 March , the Commission adopted a communication as its contribution to the Second World Assembly on Ageing , which is being organised by the United Nations and hosted by the Spanish Government in Madrid from 8 to 12 April 2002 .
The Commission 's communication is entitled , ' Europe 's response to World Ageing - promoting economic and social progress in an ageing world ' .
This communication addresses the phenomenon of ageing in Europe against the background of worldwide ageing .
First of all , Europe 's population is one of the oldest in the world , and European countries will continue to be prominent in the league of ageing nations for several more decades yet .
Ageing is , however , no longer essentially a problem peculiar to developing countries .
Today it is also - and increasingly - becoming a concern of developing countries .
In a number of these countries , ageing will be a much more rapid process and will take place against a background of a level of development which is markedly lower than in Western Europe .
Ageing is therefore a problem which , in the Twenty-First century , will require not a European response but a global response .
The approach adopted by the Commission is based on three points :
Firstly , the population is ageing rapidly .
Enlargement will not affect this situation at all , and neither will immigration , although it may have a slight influence on this process .
Nevertheless , demography is not a destiny .
The political responses to ageing will determine the impact that it has on European societies .
Secondly , ageing is the result of a combination of several social processes and should be considered as a trend which interacts with other phenomena .
The response must therefore constitute an integral part of the global strategy , which is made up of mutually supportive policies .
Thirdly , although the living conditions and possibilities open to the elderly are an important concern at any time , if we are to adapt successfully to ageing , people of all ages will be affected .
A life-long approach can therefore make it easier to put in place adequate political measures .
The main part of the communication describes the way in which we need to act at European level .
The Commission has identified ageing as one of the six common challenges of sustainable development , and the Member States have taken decisive measures to step up cooperation on ageing problems .
The Member States have committed themselves to coordinating their work and we are starting to see a similar tendency for health care .
We have identified the main challenges together . They are : anticipating an increase in expenditure while guaranteeing sound public finances ; adjusting to an ageing and shrinking workforce ; guaranteeing adequate , sustainable and adaptable pensions and guaranteeing ageing Europeans access to high-quality health care for long periods of time .
Over and above the experience which the European Union has acquired in considering its response to ageing , the communication also takes account of the problems faced by candidate countries and developing countries at a global level .
Taken as a whole , the communication is a contribution by the Commission to the debate on the new International Plan of Action on Ageing , which is to be adopted .
It is therefore intended to support Member States ' efforts to establish a uniform Union position on this problem .
On Monday , my colleague , Anna Diamantopoulou , gave a presentation to the World Assembly in Madrid on recent developments in the European Union 's position on the problem of ageing .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to thank Commissioner Reding for coming here today to inform us of the Commission 's new strategies on ageing .
This subject , which I strongly urged should be included in today 's debate , must lead us all and , in general , the European Union , which I feel needs to show more determination and sensitivity in its approach , to greater reflection .
In the future , our institutions are going to be called upon increasingly to respond quickly and effectively to the new challenges posed by the increase in the average life expectancy , and to provide the elderly throughout the world with an increasingly high standard of living .
Indeed , the phenomenon of the ageing of society affects all countries , both the more advanced and the developing countries , although in markedly different ways , and due consideration of these differences in impact reveals the need for different approaches and initiatives .
I therefore feel that the European Parliament , the institution which is the voice of the citizens of Europe , must adopt an official position at the Second United Nations World Assembly , due to close tomorrow in Madrid , and we shall do this by voting on the joint motion for a resolution today .
Indeed , the protection of and respect for the dignity of this section of the population needs to be fully guaranteed , and a debate must be opened on the future of the third and fourth ages .
This distinction is not based on biological age but rather on the degree of self-sufficiency of an elderly person .
Indeed , it is necessary to distinguish between the elderly of the third age , who are still fully active and have the right not to be excluded from social , cultural , political and economic life , citizens who are a resource for our society rather than just a problem , and those who belong to the fourth age and , although no longer self-sufficient , still have the right to live a dignified life and enjoy full respect for their dignity .
That is why , Mr President , I call upon the House to give its full support to the resolution we are to vote on today .
Mr President , Commissioner , thank you for your contributions .
In actual fact , this is not perhaps the best time for this discussion .
It would have been better either to have adopted a resolution before the assembly on ageing that is taking place right now under the auspices of the UN and so have been able to influence it , or else perhaps to have adopted a resolution subsequently once we had been able to assess the assembly 's conclusions .
However , it is encouraging that the European Parliament is so unified in its view of ageing .
All too often , we see ageing as a problem .
I , for my part , cannot see it as a problem that people live longer and are more and more healthy at ever more advanced ages .
Rather , it is very encouraging and an asset to our societies .
However , we in the Member States of the EU are very bad at making use of the skills possessed by the older portion of the population , particularly in the world of work .
In the majority of the Member States , the formal pensionable age is approximately 65 while the actual pensionable age is very much lower .
People are thrown out of work for a variety of reasons .
It is the result of discrimination against older people , something which does in actual fact occur and must be got to grips with , as to some extent it has been .
It is also the result of poor working environments that cause people to become exhausted before their time .
Last but not least , it has to do with the fact that , in our knowledge-based society where it is increasingly important to develop one 's skills and engage in lifelong learning , older people are not given the opportunity to do just that .
If they were to be given that opportunity , there would also be a very much greater opportunity to make use of their skills .
It is important that we retain the European social model , that is to say a social security system with high-quality , developed health care and medical services .
This is crucial , especially for the most elderly people of all who have a great need for health care and medical treatment .
In the future , the need will become greater because women , who have previously assumed responsibility for providing a large part of that care , have now entered the labour market and will continue to do so to an ever-greater degree .
This demands even more of society in terms of developing resources so that the elderly receive dignified care when they become really old and have greatest need of it .
We must also adopt a global perspective , as the Commission has done .
It is important that we monitor developments beyond our borders and try to form a global strategy covering the status of the elderly throughout the world .
Mr President , one of the key issues regarding ageing , as people have said , is to tackle age discrimination itself , particularly in the labour market , in healthcare and so on .
In our view that is going to need more than codes of conduct , which do not seem to be working particularly fast .
As others have said , it is important , too , that we recognise the contribution of older people who are already keeping society and our economy going , by acting as carers offering childcare , for example , so that their children can go out to work , or by acting as volunteers .
Indeed , in a number of countries the local government system , let alone the parliamentary system , would probably collapse without their input .
The key thing as others have said , is for us to stop perpetuating the image of people , like many of us in this Chamber , as a burden on society and its services , and to see us as much more of an asset .
Indeed , in future we will need to be even more fully involved in our societies .
We look to our societies and to our governments to act internationally to create a sustainable future so that we can change the situation of poverty in which many people live .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the strategy of the international action of the United Nations World Assembly advocates the commitment to create a society for all ages , with political and financial means dedicated to achieving this .
It is , therefore , crucial that the European Union and its Member States give this commitment , incorporating issues of ageing into Community policies and including the elderly in their social , economic and development programmes , paying particular attention to elderly people at risk of isolation and by developing the principle of active ageing , promoting opportunities for the elderly to participate in social and cultural life .
There are various ways in which this can be done , as Mrs Lambert has already mentioned .
Although the issue of ageing is generally associated with long-term concerns , it already presents a major challenge for society and for governments because of its profound implications for policies of social security , employment , education , health , immigration and the family . This means that the necessary measures must be adopted to ensure that the income and resources available to elderly and retired people remain in line with average living standards in society .
It is unacceptable that concerns about public spending and pressures for compliance with the Stability Pact should have a negative effect on the living standards of the elderly , as suggested in the recent decision of the Barcelona European Council to increase the age of retirement by five years by 2010 , which we find unacceptable , and in the statements by the current President-in-Office of the Council , Prime Minister Aznar , at the opening of the Second UN Assembly on ageing , when he called for changes to the pensions system , to working hours and to the age of retirement , all of which involve the same issues .
It is crucial that we move ahead with integrated social policies , that we promote intergenerational solidarity , that we pay particular attention to issues of universal access to healthcare and of the quality of services provided and that we attach greater importance to the use of the free time of the elderly .
We hope that the Commission will propose an action programme that is specific to the elderly and which takes account of all these aspects in an integrated vision , having listened to organisations representing pensioners and the elderly .
The European Union must also demonstrate greater commitment to providing international aid to developing countries in order to enable them to develop policies in the field of ageing , specifically for women and in order to combat Aids .
Mr President , I too would like to thank the rapporteur and I support the work that has been carried out on a subject of such major importance as the ageing population of our countries , of our continent .
I feel that we should all genuinely see elderly people as our human heritage : their wisdom , their knowledge and the history of which they are the living exponents are not fully valued or exploited .
There have been many sincere efforts in recent years in our countries , in Europe too , to provide systems of guarantees and dignity for all elderly people - and rightly so .
Of course , more has been done in some areas than in others , and I therefore feel that Europe needs to develop policies ensuring a minimum level of guarantees and focus on the world of the elderly , a level which is the same in all the countries of the Union and must be proposed as a goal for the candidate countries too .
Without a doubt , European society took as its starting point the awareness that being in economic difficulties - being poor - is always difficult , being poor and ill is both difficult and complicated , but being poor , ill and old too is absolutely awful .
I feel that less has been done , on the other hand , to attempt to give the elderly a political and institutional position too , to attempt to keep all elderly people in the active world for as long as possible , to make their departure from the world of work more gradual .
There you are . I feel that this is the major challenge facing us all , and that the solution lies precisely in a more flexible vision of the world of work itself , in more intelligent use of the professional skills of the people concerned .
Mr President , we have to address this question of the ageing of our population from the point of view of having a society for all ages , as our motion indicates .
There are real risks if we simply address this question from an economic point of view , regarding and valuing citizens simply for the contribution they can make to the economy or the workforce .
Society , as this House knows , is a much wider concept than the economy , and that must be our starting-point .
The question of income for older people depends on the extent to which we retain the European social model of a contribution from people who are in work to those who , at various points in their lives , either through illness or old age , will no longer be able to take part in the workforce .
It is , therefore , essential to secure an efficient and effective taxation system and efficient and effective social insurance system .
Most of all , we need to have a pensions reserve fund , so that there can be inter-generational solidarity between this generation and not just the next generation but also the generation after that .
It is important that all Member States take this on board .
I also want to draw attention to what I consider to be a mistaken view by Mrs Diamantopoulou , who seems to think that the solution to the ageing of our population is for us all to become more fertile : to have more babies .
That is a cop-out .
This simply will not happen - certainly not in the wealthier parts of Europe .
We have to therefore grapple seriously with the whole issue of immigration .
It is not enough to talk about the need to ensure that developing countries have sufficient resources to feed and to provide for their own people .
Of course , we need to do that , but no matter how often or how well we do that , there will still be a need for people to move into the wealthier parts of Europe .
I contend that we must stop this idea that we can build a fortress Europe and keep out these millions upon millions of people who want to come to Europe .
They want to make a contribution to Europe , and we would all be the better for it , both economically and culturally .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the World Assembly on Ageing organised by the Spanish Presidency , which is taking place 20 years on from the first conference on the subject , is certainly a unique opportunity for the entire world , not just the developed countries , to be able to focus on the extremely important and no less topical subject of the ageing population , which is the result of the new demographic trend , and the increase in average life expectancy , which is due , not least , to the progress made in medical science .
I hope that , when the economic , social and health consequences of the increase in average life expectancy and the ageing population are discussed and analysed , the emphasis will not just be on the role that elderly people must be able to play in modern society today but also on the right , for example , of each elderly person who loses their independence to continue to enjoy a guaranteed quality of life .
We need all the States of the European Union to focus once again , more intently , on promoting the active involvement of elderly people in social and cultural life .
Indeed , it would be very valuable for our society to aim at adopting that approach , for it must treat the elderly person not just as a potential user of services but as a person who is still useful to society as a whole too .
I warmly welcome the new Community programme that the Commission is preparing to launch in the second half of the year - not least because the Commission has not done a great deal on this matter thus far - in an attempt to remedy a situation which the Commission itself has described as disturbing in terms of the preservation of the quality of life of elderly people .
In other words , there needs to be an effective , coordinated action at European level if we are to address the issue of ageing , which is both a challenge and , at the same time , an emergency , a burden on the future of all the European States , particularly my country , Italy , where Genoa holds the record for the city with the greatest proportion of elderly people in the entire Union .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , last Saturday , in Madrid , I participated in one of the many round tables organised within the NGO forum that accompanied the Second United Nations World Assembly on Ageing .
At this meeting , it was revealed that ageing is a phenomenon affecting both the North and the South , despite the growing divide and inequality between societies in the developed world and those of countries that are fighting to overcome underdevelopment .
Perhaps the most interesting aspect was understanding that , regardless of location , there are three specific priorities for the elderly .

The first concerns healthcare at an age when people 's health requires care that is more and more costly ; the second is the guarantee of economic security in order that the elderly can continue to live independently when , because of their age , they have to stop working ; and the third is the social consideration , respect and appreciation that society adopts towards the elderly , not only in recognition of the services they have provided - which should also be the case - but also with regard to the role and function these elderly people should fulfil within our social framework .
A satisfactory response to these three priorities will increasingly enable the elderly to live in dignity longer , which is to be welcomed .
In general terms , the EU Member States have managed to respond in a way that basically satisfies the two first priorities : health care and economic security , although benefits are often frankly inadequate and need to be increased , and we must remain alert to any potential threats to such benefits .
On the other hand , little or no progress has been made on the third priority , that of consideration and respect for the role of the elderly in our societies .
The picture in the developing world is even worse .
In these countries , none of the three stated priorities have been satisfactorily met and , if there is any sign at all , this is to be found in the third area , that of respect for the elderly and of assuming shared responsibility for them , in which some positive signs have been reported .
Within the demographic factors that alter migratory flows on a daily basis , these are other challenges we must confront .
This was achieved by the Second United Nations World Assembly on Ageing in Madrid , which set out a whole new strategy that the European Union must resolutely support , as we are doing in Parliament by approving today the excellent proposal put forward by Mr Podestà .
We should do this for our own future as well as for the future of a world which needs to demonstrate increasing solidarity , and consequently , treat the elderly with greater fairness .
Mr President , the World Assembly on Ageing is obviously very important in that it is expected to provide policy guidelines to guarantee the rights of the elderly and their quality of life and , most importantly , the fight against discrimination .
As Commissioner Anna Diamantopoulou said in Madrid on Monday , with people living longer and enjoying better health , we have room for a new life model , a new society which pro-actively reflects technological and scientific achievement .
However , that is not the case today .
On the contrary , every day Cassandras everywhere are peddling doom and gloom , with prophesies of a planet drowning under the weight of 6 billion people , of wealth-creating resources being exhausted , of the natural environment being destroyed , of poor nations increasing and multiplying while we in the developed world grow old and die out and our insurance systems crumble .
The solution offered by Malthusianists is to reduce the birth rate in third world countries and increase our own birth rates .
Such are the ethics of the developed world .
My own view is that there is a direct correlation between the uneven distribution of people on the planet and the demographic problem on the one hand and the development and distribution of the planet 's resources and the question of social justice , education , equality of the sexes , human rights and development standards , on the other .
The future of the planet is clearly not under threat from the starving children of the Third World or the ageing population ; it is under threat from consumer standards and the way of life of the third of the earth 's population who live in the developed world .
That is where we need to intervene and that is where we need a new demographic policy .
However , until such time as we have the integrated policy of sustainable development which the Commissioner referred to , we should follow the sound advice of those who propose that we abandon our restrictive immigration policy and give immigrants full social and political rights .
The population and workforce in Sweden and Germany would have been seriously depleted without their policy of integrating immigrants and fully recognising the right of women to work .
Strengthening these two policies could resolve the problems in the short term .
However , they will only be resolved in the long term under a fair - and very different - system of economic and social development .
To close this debate , I have received five motions for resolutions
Mr President , as regards the first request by the Council for the opinion of Parliament regarding the UN Security Council 's freezing of funds , I would like to inform Parliament that the Commission will give its full attention to the amendments proposed by Parliament and promote their adoption by the Council where the EU Treaty , the UN Charter and the urgency of the matter so allow .
Secondly , the Commission is also open to further discussion with Parliament on the tension that will inevitably arise between the continued efforts to eradicate the financing of terrorism and respect for civil liberties and human rights .
Mr President , I have asked for the floor simply to request that this legislative proposal be referred back to the Commission as unanimously voted by the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development .
This is not because we do not agree with it , but because it does not include synthetic alcohol and the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market has not found a legal basis to be able to include it .
Therefore , I would ask Members to vote against the legislative proposal , so that it can be referred back to the Commission .
Mr President , the Commission cannot agree at this stage with Parliament 's position rejecting the proposal and calling on the Commission to withdraw it .
If Parliament votes in favour of this position , which the Commission would regret , my colleague , Mr Fischler , would have to reflect on the situation and confer with his colleagues on the course of action to be taken .
However , Commissioner Fischler is , I believe , going to discuss this problem with the parliamentary committee .
Thank you , Commissioner .
In that case the matter is referred back to committee .
Report ( A5-0087 / 2002 ) by Pere Esteve , on behalf of the Committee on Foreign Affairs , Human Rights , Common Security and Defence Policy , on the Commission communication to the Council and the European Parliament to prepare the meeting of Euro-Mediterranean Foreign Ministers , Valencia , 22-23 April 2002 ( SEC ( 2002 ) 159 - C5-0128 / 2002- 2002 / 2057 ( COS ) )
( Parliament adopted the resolution )
Report ( A5-0076 / 2002 ) by Vasco Graça Moura , on behalf of the Committee on Foreign Affairs , Human Rights , Common Security and Defence Policy , on the Commission communication on an EU Strategy towards China : Implementation of the 1998 Communication and Future Steps for a more Effective EU Policy ( COM ( 2001 ) 265 - C5-0098 / 2001 - 2001 / 2045 ( COS ) )
( Parliament adopted the resolution )
Report ( A5-0071 / 2002 ) by Carlo Fatuzzo , on behalf of the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs , on the Commission communication ' Supporting national strategies for safe and sustainable pensions through an integrated approach ' ( COM ( 2001 ) 362 - C5-0012 / 2002 - 2002 / 2017 ( COS ) )
.
( IT ) I would like to table an oral amendment to Amendment No 16 , tabled by Mr Pronk and Mrs Lulling , which reads : ' considers that the Member States must shoulder their responsibility to guarantee pensions which will enable every pensioner to lead a dignified and independent life and to participate in social and cultural life ' .
As an oral amendment , I would like to add the words ' with the support of the European Union and with due regard for subsidiarity ' .
I would like to table an oral amendment , inserting the word ' compulsory ' before the words ' pensions system ' in the clause ' calls in particular on the Member States to maintain a well-functioning pensions system ' in the last line of Amendment No 12 tabled by Mr Pronk and Mrs Lulling .
The last two lines will therefore read as follows : ' calls in particular on the Member States to maintain a well-functioning compulsory pensions system ' .
Terrorism must always be fought on the basis of legal certainty .
We support every improvement along those lines .
There must be an improvement in the right of citizens to go to court in order to have their cases tried .
That right should also apply to human rights issues .
Our vote is an expression of our desire to combat terrorism and does not relate to improvements in legal certainty which , we believe , should go further and be reviewed in a national and European perspective .
. I am in favour of procedures to enable the sanctions list set up by the UN Sanctions Committee to be revised where justified as set out in Amendment No 2 .
The list is extensive and we are taking it on trust .
I would like to have had more certainty about the proposed role of the Court of Justice taking into account the role of the courts of the Member States .
I am not sure about the implications of Amendment No 9 , which covers the Commission 's proposals on the transmission of information received by the Commission to the competent authorities of the Member States .
The further transfer of this information to Parliament and its ' competent committee ? and ' in accordance with relevant procedures ? is vague .
I strongly support the proposed amendments to the Commission 's text on respecting human rights and humanitarian need .
I did not participate in the vote as I consider this to be a serious issue .
Anything to do with tackling terrorism is important .
Blocking off the supply of funds to terrorist organisations and their associates is one of the most important means at our disposal in dealing with the Al-Qaida networks .
I would like to have had more time to examine this aspect of the proposal and , if necessary , to have had time to strengthen these measures even further .
( Abbreviated pursuant to Rule 137 ( 1 ) of the Rules of Procedure )
We confirm our unreserved commitment to combating all forms of terrorism and voted for the amendments we tabled together with the other groups , because they could - by providing for appeal to the European Court of Justice - provide legal protection for the European citizens .
The names of some of the citizens have already been included in the list annexed to the regulation , even though no evidence has been produced of their connection to terrorist movements or involvement in terrorist activities .
However , we voted against the regulation , both because of the procedure employed - this is the fourth time we have voted on terrorism with an urgent procedure , without a report and without a debate - and because of the content of the regulation , for we are voting on a list of names given to the UN by the CIA with no evidence and no possibility of our having access to any evidence there may be .
The procedures for drawing up the list of natural and legal persons , groups and entities laid down in Article 2 of the regulation clearly violate the sacrosanct rules on the right of defence of EU citizens - also enshrined in the recently proclaimed Charter of Fundamental Rights - introducing a freeze on the financial assets and resources of those concerned without any possibility of democratic and / or judicial monitoring of the evidence on the basis of which they are included on the list .
I therefore call upon the Council to take into consideration the amendments adopted by Parliament , at least , and to make the necessary changes to the proposal for a regulation .
. Yet again , the European Parliament has been asked to apply urgent procedure , concerning the question of fighting international terrorism .
The procedure following a request from the Council is unacceptable , since the crucial questions about the deleting and adding of names to the list of persons and groups suspected of being terrorists has not been solved , leaving it up to the UN sanctions committee alone to decide the procedure .
Furthermore , the EU regulation continuously refers to the resolution decided by the UN Sanctions Committee under the UN Security Council , without clearly specifying the role and part played by the EU Member States and the EU Court of Justice .
Even though we welcome the amendments tabled by the political groups of the EP trying to lift the scope and the content of the regulation , we voted against the regulation in general due to the procedure chosen , the lack of any possibility of changing the content , or the procedures for drawing up the list .
On more than one occasion - this is the fourth - the Commission has asked the European Parliament to vote in favour of restrictive measures against certain individuals and organisations in the aim of combating international terrorism without any prior debate on the issue , either in plenary or in the relevant specialised committee .
This is a method that we reject and hence our vote against this proposal .
We reaffirm our complete and unequivocal condemnation of the terrorist acts that took place in the USA , as well as the need to produce a response based on joint efforts and international cooperation , within the framework of the UN and in full respect of its Charter . We also find it unacceptable that a list of organisations and individuals should be submitted to the European Parliament for its approval without any basis and without any evidence being provided , and this is the second reason for our vote against this proposal .
Furthermore , it is our view that the necessary fight against terrorism cannot be used as an excuse to broach fundamental aspects of the sovereignty of the Union 's Member States .
We have abstained in the final vote on the Commission 's proposal on freezing the assets of persons suspected of terrorism .
However , we have given our support to the amendments , all of which contribute to improving the regulation .
The fight against terrorism is crucial and has our support .
Freezing the assets of persons suspected of terrorism or collaboration with terrorism is an important element of this overall work .
However , a procedure in which the UN Security Council and sanctions committee decide upon sanctions against individual people , entirely without the latter 's being informed of the evidence or being given the opportunity to have their cases tried in court , is not acceptable .
In this way , there is a danger of legal certainty 's being eliminated .
Everyone on the UN 's list must be notified immediately of evidence against them and of formally notified suspicions concerning them .
They must be given the opportunity to have their cases tried in court .
Clear and distinct criteria governing the way in which people 's names are added to and deleted from the list must be established .
The EU countries on the UN Security Council - Great Britain , France and Ireland - bear a major responsibility for upholding legal certainty and demanding that human rights are not compromised away .
The Spanish Presidency and the Member States should take vigorous action in the UN and in relation to the United States in order to ensure that people 's rights are respected .
In today 's vote , we have supported a new Council regulation on international terrorism , together with important amendments adopted by Parliament which enhance legal certainty and promote respect for fundamental human rights .
We deeply regret the unlawful situation that has arisen for the three Swedes on the UN sanctions committee 's list of suspected terrorists .
There is clearly no legally tenable evidence against them . Instead , we are concerned here with a ' preventive ' measure .
The legal process in support of the Swedes must therefore be pursued further .
We welcome the express reference in the amendments to the regulation to the fact that ' The Court of Justice of the European Communities has jurisdiction in actions brought by the persons listed [ by suspected terrorists ] ? .
The proposal for a regulation also states that ' a procedure should be established within the Community to amend these lists ? .
Our country is bound under international law by the UN Security Council 's resolutions on which the Council regulation is based , and it must respect that principle , even when a decision goes against us .
The objective of the resolutions - that of fighting terrorism - is both legitimate and urgent , but so too is the objective of bringing about a change to the way in which they are applied .
The Council regulation is a step in the right direction , but legal certainty and respect for fundamental human rights require continued and intensified efforts to change current rules governing sanctions .
Fundamental freedoms and rights must never be called into question .
That is especially important in the fight against terrorism .
Terrorism cannot be fought by curtailing democracy and human rights .
According to the UN Charter , all Member States are bound by decisions taken by the UN Security Council .
These decisions are binding but can never be absolute .
There must be room for manoeuvre .
The sanctions committee 's practice of accepting without qualification the United States ' list of individuals and organisations suspected of terrorism is not acceptable .
The fact that the list , which is not made public , is approved by the sanctions committee if no one on the committee protests within 48 hours opens the way to unsubstantiated decisions .
It is a case of fundamental freedoms and rights being eliminated by a non-judicial authority when the individuals concerned are neither informed of what they are being accused of nor given the opportunity to appeal against the decision .
Parliament 's amendments are crucial in order to guarantee EU citizens legal certainty .
I am therefore able to support the Council regulation only in such an amended form .
. ( IT ) The radical Members voted against this document in order to express their opposition to terrorism and to emergency policies and procedures and their support for democracy and the rule of law and for the dignity of Parliament and the Members of the European Parliament .
We voted against the motion because this is the fourth time the European Parliament has been asked to adopt ' exceptionally ' a document containing several gaps which seeks to take steps to combat terrorism , and the second time it has been asked to endorse without a debate or report the decision to freeze the assets of persons and companies on the grounds that they are involved in - unspecified - terrorist activities .
We voted against the motion because it is now clear that , after 11 September , it has become standard practice to exploit the urgent procedure , using it as an emergency measure in situations that do not justify this .
We voted against the motion because , as Members of the European Parliament , we refuse to do the job of the ' naturally ' appointed bodies , namely the judiciary and the police , for them , or to take on their responsibility .
We voted against the motion because we are against a measure which should be the remit of the criminal police and which could have been debated and adopted using the ordinary procedure .
We voted against the motion in the hope that an initiative might be produced by Parliament as a whole opposing emergency procedures and policies which undermine the fundamental principles of democracy and the rule of law , doing the terrorists ' work for them .
I should first like to congratulate my colleague , Elisa Damião , on the work that she has done on this extremely important issue .
All of us remember the long debates which took place in the eighties , when everyone refused to budge from their opposing camps .
Some argued that the fact that asbestos was dangerous was not irrefutably proven , while those exposed to it rightly wanted the precautionary principle - as we now call it - to be applied .
In the end , they had to take account of the various studies stating that asbestos was a particularly dangerous substance and that exposure to it could cause serious diseases .
Since then , too many people have taken risks , risks for which the price is paid in the longer or shorter term .
This is because some diseases have a long incubation period from the time when fibre is lodged in the body until the point of biological degeneration .
The majority of Member States have now banned the marketing and use of products containing asbestos .
Nevertheless in some sectors the risk persists .
I am thinking in particular of work to remove asbestos and maintenance or repair work on buildings containing asbestos .
( Explanation of vote cut short pursuant to Rule 137 ( 1 ) of the Rules of Procedure )
First of all , I should like to thank both our rapporteur in the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs , Mrs Elisa Maria Damião , and the committee as a whole for the work which they have proposed to us .
Everyone is now aware of the significant risks of contracting serious diseases run by those exposed to asbestos , during its manufacture , of course , but also when it has to be handled for removal purposes .
It was therefore a matter of urgency to strengthen Directive 83 / 477 / EEC on the protection of workers from the risks related to exposure to asbestos at work .
It was in this spirit that the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs worked on the proposal tabled by the Commission : our report thus calls for a reduction in asbestos exposure limits for certain activities , in particular demolition , maintenance , repairs and specialised electrical and plumbing work .
The report also underlines the need for Member States to introduce dissuasive sanctions against breaches of legislation on removing asbestos .
Finally , the report provides for training for workers who are exposed to asbestos .
This is an essential initiative and an effective strand of our policy on health and safety in the workplace .
( Explanation of vote cut short pursuant to Rule 137 ( 1 ) of the Rules of Procedure )
With the proposal for a directive we are now debating , the Commission is seeking , albeit in a limited way , to refocus protection measures for the people who have hitherto been the most exposed : to review levels of exposure and re-examine the method of assessing the volume of asbestos fibres in the atmosphere ; to insist on measures to prevent or reduce exposure to the minimum and to consider the assessment of risks arising from work in which exposure to asbestos is intrinsic or incidental .
With the work in the specialised parliamentary committee and in plenary we have helped to improve the report with proposals that the rapporteur , Elisa Damião , and the plenary have accepted , specifically :
the need to pay particular attention to compliance with labour law , which takes on crucial importance in this sector , specifically the fight against greater job insecurity and compliance with health and safety regulations in the workplace ;
the need for the Member States to pay particular attention to workers ' rights , specifically where health is concerned , when mines or production plants are closed ;
the removal of exceptions unless it is proved that the cases under consideration demonstrate no risk to the workers .
We now hope that the Commission and the Council will accept Parliament 's proposals .
. I fully support moves to increase worker protection against the health risks of exposure to asbestos .
Since the numbers of people affected by asbestos are predicted to rise considerably by 2020 , legislation must be upgraded to further reduce acceptable levels of exposure .
In order for the EU to show itself to be serious about non-implementation of this legislation , the use of sanctions against irresponsible employers is vital .
I also welcome the move to provide EU funding for training and information about the health risks associated with asbestos .
Essentially , this report should lead to a more sensible preventative - rather than curative - approach to asbestos poisoning and it could potentially result in much lower figures of workers affected .
. ( DE ) I voted in favour of the report of the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development , and thus against this Commission proposal , because the latter far exceeds the targets set for the Commission in July 2000 by the Agricultural Council .
Rather than presenting a simple and straightforward regulatory framework for the supervision of the EU alcohol market and of trade patterns , the actual Commission proposal provides for the creation of a new Common Organisation of the Market .
This , among other things , includes the provision that , after its entry into force , tried and tested national regulatory arrangements on objectives of importance to agricultural and social policy , such as care for the cultural landscape and the maintenance of meadows of indigenous dehiscent fruit , but not supporting small agricultural distilleries , would have to be repealed on the grounds of incompatibility with the competition rules of the Treaty establishing the European Community , even though they have , to date , been declared by the ECJ to be compatible with the Treaty establishing the European Community and with current Internal Market rules .
The creation of a new COM is also to be rejected at a time when there is general discussion about reforming the common agricultural policy away from market regulation and in the direction of a multifunctional approach for the future , and Agenda 2000 is about to be reviewed .
I therefore call on the Commission to withdraw its proposal for the creation of a COM in agricultural alcohol and submit a new proposal closely adhering to the Council mandate of July 2000 .
. ( DE ) The EU Commission sometimes really cannot stop itself from bothering us with utterly superfluous , unwanted and counterproductive proposals .
The proposal for a regulation on the common organisation of the market in ethyl alcohol of agricultural origin is a truly magnificent example of a mania for inappropriate regulation .
Our Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development , therefore , did the only right thing in unanimously rejecting the proposal and calling on the Commission to withdraw it .
I would not go as far as to call on the Commission to submit a new proposal , as there is absolutely no need for action in this sector apart from the need for common provisions to deal with the many openings for the substitution of synthetic alcohol for alcohol of agricultural origin .
As , though , our learned jurists have confirmed that a synthetic product cannot be incorporated into a common organisation of the market in an agricultural product , this essentially sensible possibility on which our rapporteur 's eye had alighted , was dropped .
It makes no sense , though , to regulate only the market in agriculturally produced alcohol , as overall demand in the Community for alcohol is divided up 50 / 50 for the two types .
However , it must be said that market forces have , in the meantime , managed to achieve a balance , so that it really is not clear why what the market has arranged for the best should be regulated from the top downwards for better or for worse .
( Explanation of vote cut short pursuant to Rule 137 ( 1 ) of the Rules of Procedure )
We are critical of Mrs Ayuso Gonzalez 's report on a common organisation of the market in ethyl alcohol of agricultural origin .
In our view , the report represents an outdated agricultural policy inappropriate to the conditions and needs of a modern , global society .
In contrast , the Commission 's proposal for an organisation of the market without intervention measures would be a step in the right direction .
On that basis and in the light of the impending general review of the EU 's agricultural policy , we have chosen to vote in favour of the Commission 's proposal .
We welcome the Barcelona Process and are therefore in favour of the report .
We are , however , opposed to the creation of a Euro-Med Bank , which would only duplicate the work of the European Investment Bank and the African Development Bank .
However , we support the proposal to create a lending facility within the EIB , to be evaluated after it has been in operation for a year .
We advocate closer relations between the Member States of the European Union and the countries of the Mediterranean , and feel that this must be developed on the basis of enhancing economic and cultural relations between these countries , respecting the interests of each and every one in order to achieve development and to improve the living standards of all peoples .
This is why we are critical of the proposals put forward by the European Commission and supported by the Council to use the ' Barcelona Process ' to undertake , in the framework of this process of association agreements with these countries and of the creation of a ' free trade zone ' , the liberalisation of services and of agriculture and , generally , the neoliberal guidelines laid down at the WTO Conference in Doha .
Furthermore , we are concerned at the objective of defining the fight against terrorism as a central political priority , thereby disregarding the necessary consideration of its root causes such as , for example , the resolution of the conflict in the Middle East or in the Western Sahara , in the framework of the UN resolutions , or providing a response to the most basic needs and shortages that affect many populations , guaranteeing economic development and improving social conditions in the countries of the Mediterranean .
Because of its strategic importance and mainly in the context of eastward enlargement and of the new international political context that has arisen as a consequence of 11 September , the Mediterranean region warrants a sustained strengthening and deepening of euro-Mediterranean relations and consequently of the Barcelona Process .
The main aim of the Barcelona Process is to develop a euro-Mediterranean zone of peace and of shared prosperity .
There can , therefore , be no doubt as to the importance of and the need for the continuation , revitalisation and deepening of existing cooperation instruments .
I therefore give my support to the Action Plan which will be proposed by the Commission at the Interministerial Euro-Mediterranean Conference due to take place in Valencia , which I believe accurately reflects the concerns and the challenges currently facing the Euro-Mediterranean Partnership .
Nevertheless , and to conclude , I should like to stress the three points of the Action Plan to which I feel we should give priority : strengthening the feeling of belonging and of partnership of the Mediterranean countries by reorganising structures for dialogue and working methods ; support for the private sector and greater dialogue between cultures and civilisations .
. ( DE ) I have just voted in favour of Mr Graça Moura 's report on the EU 's strategy towards China and have consequently supported various amendments .
Thousands of nuns and monks are continuing to be persecuted , imprisoned and mistreated .
Tibet 's cultural and religious autonomy is being denied .
There is systematic settlement by Chinese people , so that Tibetans are increasingly becoming a minority in their own country .
The report is right to take up Parliament 's repeated call for the appointment of an EU special representative for Tibet .
It also recalls the resolution of two years ago , in which Parliament called on the EU Member States to recognise the Tibetan government-in-exile within three years in the event of the Tibetan situation stagnating or getting worse .
There is no alternative to a peaceful solution in the form of negotiations between the Chinese government and the Dalai Lama - without any preconditions .
As president of the Tibet Intergroup , I see complete autonomy for Tibet as a core objective .
Such a bilateral solution should also be advantageous to the Chinese , who are concerned about their international reputation .
Its starting point is the Dalai Lama 's five-point plan and the speech he gave to our plenary meeting on 24 October 2001 .
What I find most lamentable is the attitude of the EU , which did not put China 's human rights violations on the agenda at Geneva , preferring to deal with them in the context of the dialogue between the EU and China - and hence behind closed doors .
- ( NL ) As the world 's most populous country , China forms a military and economic power .
The governing Communist Party no longer has anything to do with rebellious movements of workers and farmers who fought against exploitation and lawlessness in years gone by .
The opposite is now true .
With the help of the army , the police , the imprisonment of critics and the application of death penalties , it makes efforts only to secure forced economic growth .
A strong state is targeting its own people and is creating as much scope as possible for a new group of entrepreneurs who , thanks to low wages and poor working conditions , will get rich quick .
There is no room for strikes and demonstrations , or for freedom of association , freedom of religion or free elections .
If China were a small country , there would be a broad consensus for putting it under pressure .
Because it is large and important , friendship and trade relations are sought right across the political divide .
I unreservedly denounce this preferential treatment of China which , unfortunately , is also being advocated by some colleagues in my political group .
Earlier in this debate , my Dutch fellow MEP , Mr Belder from the ChristenUnie / Staatkundig Gereformeerde Partij [ Dutch Christian Union / State Reformed Party ] , aptly remarked that a critical dialogue is inadequate as an instrument , easing our consciences as we take care of our own economic interests .
I can fully endorse his conclusion in this case .
. I fully support this resolution which calls for enhanced co-operation between the EU and China .
I believe that the EU has a vital role to play in helping to shape China 's economic , social and political agenda .
China 's accession to the WTO is to be welcomed , but the EU must not become complacent : human rights and the UN conventions that China has ratified are still far from fully respected .
I feel that the report shows the right balance between encouragement of China 's economic and social reforms , as well as denouncing its perennial abuses of human rights and the rule of law .
EU-China relations continue to be hampered by issues such as the oppression of Falun Gong practitioners and the imprisonment monks in Tibet .
Therefore it is equally important that the EU shows itself to be tough on these issues and willing to engage with China .
Mr President , I would like to start by thanking the Members from all the Groups who voted for or , in any case , have taken part in the debate on this report , which seeks to guarantee secure pensions for all the citizens of Europe .
We cannot , of course , work miracles , but the European Union can do something - and I believe it can do a lot - for citizens who have worked all their lives and have the right to have the value of their work recognised when they have grown older and need to receive something from society in return .
It is right for their money to be employed well and for them to enjoy long , very long lives as pensioners .
Mr President , in the end I voted in favour of Mr Fatuzzo 's report , despite the fact that some of the amendments that I had tabled with Mr Brok , on behalf of my group , had been rejected .
It is a pity , because they clarified the aspects of pension policy for which the Member States are responsible and the - very few - aspects for which the European Union is competent .
The oral amendment tabled by Mr Fatuzzo to our Amendment No 16 talks about the Commission 's support for guaranteeing the right to a pension .
The word ' support ' may cause confusion .
It must be clear that there can be no question of the Commission providing funding to enable the objectives laid down in this paragraph to be met , objectives with which all of us agree .
The Commission cannot provide financial assistance : all it can do is support a process , as it does with open coordination .
Moreover , we welcome the Commission 's initiative , in the same paragraph , seeking to guarantee safe and sustainable pensions .
This would have been more than enough .
I had not realised that our Socialist colleagues - who are after all quite vigilant when it comes to social security - thought that they had caused confusion here between Community competences and the sacrosanct principle of subsidiarity .
Yesterday the entire Left in this House violently opposed the Barcelona proposal that it would be worthwhile and necessary for many more people over the age of 50 to work .
In this case , we are in favour of subsidiarity , all the more so when we are talking about something for which the Member States have full - and not shared - responsibility , which is the case for the three pillars of our pension systems .
The Fatuzzo report on the sustainability of pension systems in the European Union offers a fascinating insight into how Brussels manages to take over an issue , as if it went without saying that it was competent to do so , when there is not a single word in the Treaty on pensions , which are legally - there is no doubt about it - the sole responsibility of the Member States .
It all starts , as usual , with cautious Commission communications , seeking to show that the sustainability of pensions has a more or less direct influence on certain European competences .
Similarly , in the conclusions of various European Councils ( Lisbon , Stockholm , Gothenburg , Laeken ) ' brief phrases ' are slipped in to legitimise what the Commission is doing .
Then one day the idea has taken sufficient hold for the Barcelona Council in March 2002 to call - to general amazement - for the average retirement age to be increased by five years .
This is bordering on Europe interfering , pure and simple , without any democratic debate having been held .
Admittedly , most of the ideas expressed are more or less along the right lines .
But this is an essential tactic in this method of competence creep : for the transfer of competence to be invisible or painless , the policy line expressed must , first , be indisputable .
Our pay-as-you-go pension systems are under threat .
For clearly identified demographic and economic reasons .
Everyone is aware of this .
In France , a white paper raised the alarm more than ten years ago .
But since then nothing , or nearly nothing , has been done apart from a few reports here and there whose conclusions basically reflected the ideological sympathies of those who had commissioned them .
The only thing that has really changed is the imminence of the predicted financial catastrophe .
The French presidential candidates , Chirac and Jospin , have not made any real proposals to save our pensions , which will no doubt save them breaking their promises .
And in Barcelona , without the electorate 's knowledge , they , along with the rest , opposed the idea of the French having the right to retire at 60 .
What this government lacks - like those which preceded it and most probably those which will succeed it - is determination and political courage .
But their salvation will not come from Brussels .
It cannot come from the European Union with its free-trade , ultra-liberal ideology , which dreams of allowing private insurance companies to make profits from billions of euro of social security , but which has still not been able to solve the problems of pension rights ?
( Explanation of vote cut short pursuant to Rule 137 ( 1 ) of the Rules of Procedure )
- ( NL ) As social security , public services and the level of prosperity improve , and the environment becomes cleaner , people 's life expectancy grows .
And with it the group that is dependent on a pension .
While pensions are crucial for older workers , there are young people for whom retirement is a long way off and rich people who do not need a pension scheme .
If you deem pensions unimportant , then you will consider them to be a liability which leads to higher taxes and premiums .
Some politicians will seize this as an opportunity to call for freedom of choice , commercialisation and state withdrawal .
Governments look into options for cutting costs or have saved insufficiently for sustainable pension provision .
On this basis , an agreement was reached in Barcelona to increase the pensionable age by an average of five years by 2010 .
At the same time , workers are fighting to have the pensionable age reduced to 60 or 55 .
As was the case here in Strasbourg on 7 February , when public transport ground to a halt for the entire day .
As long as pressure of work continues to rise because the working population is required to deliver maximum productivity , we should not be surprised if people burn out at an increasingly younger age .
This is why I opt for the variant of a guaranteed pension for everyone , so that people can retire at a reasonable age without being condemned to a life of poverty .
The Commission deserves credit for having appropriately addressed an issue which is crucial to social cohesion in a 15-Member State Europe , soon to be a 27-Member State Europe .
It must also be complimented on having done so adopting a line and principles which , preserving the subsidiarity criterion , facilitate the creation and development of common guidelines and goals through the open method of coordination and the national action plans on pensions .
However , we believe that , although the Commission communication covers a wide range of aspects , it fails to give adequate consideration to the scale of the issue or , therefore , to its future assessment .
Mr Fatuzzo , whose work I support , has stressed a large number of specific points , starting with the need to codify in future indicators what is actually pension provision and what , on the other hand , is welfare provision although , by mere political whim , a burden on pensions saving and therefore on the resources of the underwriters .
Two further points deserve a mention : the first concerns the removal of taxation on pension schemes , the second essentially social cohesion within the individual States .
With regard to the first point , it would , in fact , be absurd to consider , as happens in some States , the gross amount of pension expenditure when we know that that amount is subject to taxation in any case , irrespective of the different levels applied .
With regard to the other point , cohesion , there is no doubt that the disadvantaged territories of the Member States can and must benefit from incentives for the development of local economies and therefore of employment .
( Explanation of vote cut short pursuant to Rule 137 ( 1 ) of the Rules of Procedure )
. ( EL ) Pension rights are not being dealt with as a basic requirement of the working classes which the state has a responsibility to satisfy , they are being dealt with as an ' indicator ' , an ' expense ' which undermines the objectives of the stability pact and prevents big business from increasing its profits .
' Meeting social objectives ' and maintaining economic viability are being used to promote a policy which tramples all over workers ' social insurance rights in a bid to reduce the price of labour .
The sole purpose of insurance reforms in the context of capitalist restructuring is to abolish workers ' rights , extend flexible forms of employment and commercialise health and welfare , while the insurance funds gamble their reserves on the stock exchange .
The need to reduce state expenditure and the need for action to resolve the demographic problem , for which the system and anti-grass roots policies are to blame , are being used as a cover-up in order to abolish basic rights , increase the retirement age , extend working life to lifelong work and convert pensions to welfare benefits , while the problem of unemployment is getting worse and part-time employment is increasing .
Statements about the dignity and independence of the elderly are hypocritical and misleading , given that 70 % of pensioners live below the poverty line , as are statements about equality of the sexes , because the way is being paved to increase the retirement age of women and abolish the right to early retirement , maternity protection etc .
We support a social security system which satisfies the needs of the people , with national insurance and a free national health service for everyone , lower retirement ages of 60 for men and 55 for women and 50-55 in professions with serious health risks , shorter insurance periods and full , stable employment .
I have voted against Mr Fatuzzo 's report on safe and sustainable pensions .
My main criticism is that the report is designed to open the way for a transition from the open coordination method to a Community method in which all the institutions participate fully .
I believe it would be unfortunate if the open coordination method were to be abandoned through opening the way for a process leading to the Community method 's also being applied in the pensions area .
Nor is there any support for this in the Treaties .
I have not therefore been able to vote in favour of the report .
On the pretext of seeking to guarantee ' safe and sustainable pensions ' , the Fatuzzo report subscribes to the liberal ideology of attacking pensions .
In this report , we are treated to all of the current commonplaces on the subject , the main one being that the pensions problem is above all a demographic issue .
I do not think that there is a ' pensions problem ' ; the problem which haunts the whole of Europe is above all a problem of unemployment .
A society of full employment would not have any problems with pensions .
That is why I am in favour of a massive recruitment policy in the public services and a ban on mass redundancies in profit-making companies , and why I am against a cut in employers ' contributions .
If we defend pensions , we are defending the interests of the world of work , and an increase in the retirement age , as the Barcelona Summit recently recommended , is unacceptable .
It is out of the question to attack the pay-as-you-go pension system with pension funds , as has been proposed .
We are in favour of European workers all contributing for the same period of time , and no pensioner should have a pension that is lower than the minimum wage , which should moreover be increased .
( Explanation of vote cut short pursuant to Rule 137 ( 1 ) of the Rules of Procedure )
. ( PT ) This report is part , in general terms , of the Financial Services Action Plan and the integration of the risk capital markets , as decided at the Lisbon Summit and followed up in Stockholm , with a deadline of 2003 for the integration of the securities markets and of 2005 for the complete integration of the financial markets .
On the basis of the mystifying idea that venture capital is a means of resolving the financing needs of the SMEs and their start up capital , as if this integration could be a solution to their problems , once again an attempt is being made to move towards an economy increasingly based on finance , by means of the risk capital market and the participation of SMEs in volatile markets , centred largely on the huge pension funds .
Hence the rapporteur 's call for the liberalisation of pension fund investments in risk capital , favourable tax treatment for the capital gains of SMEs , the protection of the Community patent and tax benefits for fund investments in risk capital schemes .
For all of these reasons , we voted against the report .
The report seeks to obtain new benefits for capital , an aim which it does its best to dress up with modern justifications .
It cites the supposed difficulties which start-ups have in obtaining funds , and irresponsibly proposes allowing pension funds to invest in more high-risk projects , even though a considerable amount of money has been swallowed up by the fanciful dreams of the ' new economy ' .
The report calls for the removal of ' the fiscal , regulatory and administrative barriers ? encountered by new small companies , which - if you believe the report - are capable of closing ' the knowledge gap between Europe and the US ' practically single-handedly .
The fact that the report stresses the interdependency of risk-capital and the stock exchange shows clearly what this is all about : oiling the wheels of capitalism on the pretext of innovation , and creating a preferential status for small companies , which would allow the large groups to outsource even more of their activities , reduce their taxes and relax the few constraints that the Labour Code still places on them .
For these reasons , I voted against this report .
. I fully support this report to enhance present legislation to protect minors .
It is recognised that a child 's welfare is the responsibility of their legal guardians , but children are exposed to all manner of potential malevolent influences in the media , and especially from the Internet .
Whilst the EU has been active in protecting children from harmful media influences , such as the 1999 action plan and the Council recommendation , it is high time that a more concrete action plan was developed which involves not only policy-makers , but also NGOs , consumer groups and voluntary associations .
Controlling the media is a mammoth task and Europe needs to draw on as many expert sources as possible in order to harness what is increasingly a harmful influence on children .
We should never forget that the so-called new media , the Information Society , is a double-edged sword where children are concerned : it is a valuable information and learning resource but can also expose them to detrimental information .
Mr President , it is somewhat regrettable that the European Union does not have the competences in the area of culture and education that we might wish .
Mrs De Sarnez 's report is for that reason a slight and modest start at getting appropriate steps underway in the international education market .
I hope that this initiative will be followed by many others .
One of the items listed is the inventory of student mobility , the obvious problem with which is that many students are already not taking the road abroad because they will later have substantial difficulties with recognition .
My own region , which is bilingual and at home in both Italian and German language areas , is also affected by this , but gets into difficulties simply because of the lack of recognition .
We hope that our young people , and many others from elsewhere , will be able to avoid these difficulties in the future .
. ( EL ) The title " strengthening cooperation with third countries in the field of higher education " conceals a new endeavour to export the European Union 's education model to candidate countries , other countries on the European continent and third world countries , witness the report 's emphasis on developing " internationally competitive systems of higher education " .
This clearly illustrates that education is being dealt with as a commodity , open to the rules of the market , liberalisation and competition .
And what is even more terrifying is that the report proposes a European university label ( ! ) as if education was some sort of electrical appliance or washing powder on a supermarket shelf .
The parliamentary report outdoes even the Commission text at this point .
The report contains the usual mantras of student and teacher mobility , common curricula and even common diplomas , recognition of teaching modules , training courses and diplomas , all of which are used as a pretext for reducing university studies and education in general to the lowest common denominator .
And , needless to say , the report reminds us of the Bologna and Prague declarations spearheading the European Union 's intervention in the education systems of European countries , members and non-members alike .
The Communist Party of Greece is fighting for overall improvements to higher education and for subsidised , free higher education and it is fighting to stop education establishments from being commercialised and run on business lines .
That is why the MEPs of the Communist Party of Greece voted against the report .
. I fully support this draft resolution to enhance high-education co-operation with third countries .
Education is changing rapidly to fit the needs of the so-called knowledge society and new economy , and it is generally recognised that the US has the competitive advantage over the EU in this domain .
The departure of the best and brightest students overseas is a sad indication of this .
If we focus on assuring the mutual recognition of qualifications and invest in language training for those students who could potentially learn in another European country , we will go some way towards closing this gap .
Education must be seen as a core component of the Lisbon strategy and there must be detailed , continuous and rigorous attention paid to ensuring that our education is open to all and is of as high quality as the American system .
Indeed , Europe must capitalise on the fact that for those people who want to increase their skills base and learn languages , this is the ideal destination to do so .
Mr President , by some mistake my group was not able to speak during the debate and so I will restrict myself to delivering an explanation of vote , which I am very happy to do having been the rapporteur of a report on the subject of old age dealing with the communication ' Towards a Europe for all ages ' .
I feel that the European Parliament 's undertaking to present a report today , a report endorsed by all , moreover , is extremely positive , for it overturns that wholly negative preconception of elderly people as a burden , a dead weight carried by society , which , indeed , fails to accord them that attention we would wish them to receive .
The elderly are ultimately a resource and must therefore be considered in positive terms .
European Union and world policies must start to be more attentive to elderly people , to show more appreciation of the humanity and culture they have to pass on which is extremely important for the younger generations , culture which can be manifested at the level of work for elderly people who are still active , culture which is expressed not least in terms of awareness and familiarity with history , which humanity must consult increasingly closely if it is to avoid those huge errors which are currently being made , especially at the level of world stability and peace .
I feel that this resolution contains extremely positive points relating to the European Union 's active policies on elderly people , in terms of both free time , work and rights of citizenship , and , most importantly , in terms of the potential for action still possessed by the elderly which they can most certainly use to the benefit of the community as a whole .
Therefore , in expressing our support for this resolution , I feel we can say we have also made a contribution to the events in Spain and to the Second United Nations World Assembly too .
I should to take the opportunity offered by this debate and this resolution to reiterate my firm conviction on the important question of ageing in general , which I believe is the positive consequence of longer life expectancy and the ageing of developed society rather than of a fall in the birth rate . We have to move beyond the idea of ageing as a handicap and look on it as a valuable resource to society .
Obviously this means we need more social action and solidarity and benefits tailored to all ages and we need to safeguard pension schemes , but the importance of the elderly to society goes far beyond that .
It takes account of their experience , what they have lived through , their voluntary help and what young people can learn from them .
It imposes a different attitude towards ageing .
We need a real ' cultural revolution ' if we want to prevent an ageing society from being seen as a society in regression .
So-called modern society would do well to take a leaf out of the book of traditional societies here .
That concludes the explanations of vote .
( The sitting was suspended at 12.45 p.m. and resumed at 3 p.m. )

The next item is the debate on topical and urgent subjects of major importance .
The next item is the joint debate on the following motions for resolutions :
( B5-0210 / 2002 ) by Mrs Malmström and Mrs Thors , on behalf of the ELDR Group , on Moldavia / Moldova ;
( B5-0212 / 2002 ) by Mr Sacrédeus , Mr Suominen and Mr Posselt , on behalf of the PPE-DE Group , on the disappearance of a Member of the Moldovan Parliament ;
( B5-0219 / 2002 ) by Mrs Elisabeth Schroedter , Mr Staes , Mr McCormick and Mr Bouwman , on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group , on the political situation in Moldavia / Moldova and the disappearance of Vlad Cubreacov ;
( B5-0232 / 2002 ) by Mr Wiersma , on behalf of the PSE Group , on the political situation in Moldavia / Moldova and the disappearance of Vlad Cubreacov ;
Mr President , Moldova 's internal political situation has deteriorated fast since Parliament 's delegation visited the country last autumn .
Then it seemed that social and economic reform in Moldova was making headway despite the many difficulties and obstacles .
Now the news from Moldova is that the principles of human rights and the rule of law have been violated , the people 's democratic right to stage demonstrations has been disregarded , and , furthermore , restrictions have been placed on the activities of the media .
Members of Parliament are particularly worried about the disappearances of Moldova 's opposition leaders , which sparked unrest there .
We have reason to fear that there is a connection between these disappearances and the country 's political problems .
We obviously hope that everything possible will be done to find the disappeared persons unharmed , and that an independent and thorough study will solve the mystery surrounding these cases .
The motion for a resolution quite rightly calls on the Moldovan government to adhere to the rules and procedures of democracy , and give an assurance that it will respect the principles of human rights and the rule of law .
The Moldovan Parliament must also revise its decision to abolish the parliamentary inviolability of members of the opposition and desist from any renewed suppression of that inviolability .
It also has to be made clear to the ruling party that it cannot abuse the powers it has to disband the opposition .
When considering Moldova 's problems we have to remember that the country 's economy has collapsed since the break-up of the Soviet Union .
Poverty and sluggish social reform have led to an increase in crime and the growth of the shadow economy .
The internal political situation is being aggravated further by the problem of Transnistria .
A return to socio-political stability and a regard for human rights and the rule of law will also be vital if the country 's economic problems are to be resolved .
I think it is important that the European Parliament clearly states its position to the Moldovan Parliament and government , as well as the party in power there , which is what is being done in this motion for a resolution .
Mr President , just over a year ago , Vlad Cubreacov visited my office in the European Parliament in Brussels .
We talked about the conditions under which politics was conducted in Europe 's poorest country , Moldova .
Vlad Cubreacov told me about assassination attempts to which he had earlier been subjected .
As a Swede and as a Member of the European Parliament in Strasbourg and Brussels , I knew that here was a courageous man .
He is prepared to stand up for the values of freedom , as well as for the rule of law , political pluralism and democracy -things which cost so little in our own countries but which , for him , cost so much .
About three weeks ago , I received a telephone call from Brussels , telling me that Vlad Cubreacov had disappeared .
The person who had sat in my office and with whom I had talked warmly and companionably about politics had disappeared .
We in the European Parliament , and not only those of us who are Christian Democrats belonging to his sister party , are deeply concerned about his fate .
Moldova needs a new future .
It is therefore deeply worrying that one of the country 's foremost opposition representatives in Parliament has disappeared .
It is also a source of deep concern that the Communist government in Moldova has removed the political immunity of a large number of members of the Christian Democratic Party and that their political activities in Moldova may in the future be completely destroyed .
Moldova is a country in search of its cultural and political identity .
In the struggle concerning whether the country is to be Western- or Russian-oriented , political activity must never lead to political disappearances and to people 's lives and health being threatened .
We in the European Parliament are all working for a free and democratic Moldova .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , you are right : a serious political crisis is at hand in Moldova .
I do not share the opinion of the Council of Europe 's rapporteur , who believes that there is still a chance of the government itself finding a solution to this political crisis .
I suspect that , following the vote on the lifting of the immunity of two opposition politicians - something I regard as irregular - the ruling parties see themselves as victors and do not grasp what three months of mass demonstrations mean , namely that they have forfeited the confidence placed in them and that they themselves are no longer in a position to lead their country out of the crisis at the present point in time .
I fear that the crisis in this utterly impoverished country will escalate and thus make it ungovernable .
I therefore believe that immediate action by the Council and the Commission is required and that they should not wait until the chestnuts are back in the fire .
It is my view that the following must be done .
The EU , the OSCE and the Council of Europe must form a troika to mount a short-term mission to the country .
This mission must reach agreement with the government as to what steps have to be taken in order for the crisis to be resolved .
Sanctions will also have to be discussed so that the government does not take these steps half-heartedly .
The steps required include , in my view , exemption from punishment for those who have protested peacefully in the past or may do so in the future , the withdrawal of all resolutions on the Russian language and on the teaching of history , the revocation of all the measures that amount to censorship of the media , and the securing of basic conditions for political and economic development .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen - few on the ground though you may be - Moldova is a country with which the European Union has a privileged relationship .
It is also a TACIS recipient country and a country that may still be unstable , but is giving repeated consideration to strengthening its relations with the European Union and to perhaps , one , day , joining it .
Developments in that country are , though , deplorable in the extreme and give grave concern not only to us but also to most of its population .
There were , in any case , 80 000 people on the streets on 31 March , showing that quite a few are still going back on the streets to demonstrate despite repression and obstruction .
What worries us is the relationship between the government and the opposition , which is neither healthy not democratic , nor , in our view , acceptable .
We are , of course , concerned above all at the disappearance of a number of opposition politicians , including a number of highly prominent members of the opposition party and parliamentary deputies .
Some of them were threatened or assaulted before disappearing altogether .
That , as has already been said , is absolutely incompatible with democracy .
That other members of the parliamentary opposition have been threatened with the suspension of their immunity is also a cause for concern on our part .
That procedure is part of everyday normal life , but the way things stand in Moldova makes such suspension contrary to democratic practice .
This being so - and I do not want to repeat all that has been said by Mrs Schroedter - we cannot continue to be bystanders .
We must act , and act together .
It is not on for things to be done in the middle of Europe - and Moldova belongs to this Europe of ours , and is to be respected by us as such - that belong to the darkest days of dictatorship .
We find them unacceptable .
Mr President , the Commission shares your concerns at the current situation in Moldova , as you know from the last urgent debate on this question here in the House a month ago , at which Franz Fischler spoke on the Commission 's behalf .
What particularly concerns us at the moment , as it does you , is the disappearance of Mr Cubreacov , one of the leaders of the opposition , the man who in fact visited you , Mr Sacrédeus .
This incident , at a time when pressure on the organisers of and participants in the protest movement is being stepped up , is all the more worrying in that the Moldovan parliament has just voted to lift the immunity on several other members of the opposition , as Mr Swoboda has just pointed out .

What do we do when we meet the Moldovan Minister of Foreign Affairs , as we did in February ?
My colleague , Chris Patten , has described the political situation in Moldova , especially the outstanding question of the secessionist region of Transnistria .
The Commission will relay its concerns about the worsening political climate in Kishinev to its Moldovan counterparts whenever the opportunity arises ; the next opportunity will be at the cooperation council in Luxembourg next week .
That a politician - and leader of an opposition movement - can disappear without trace is alarming .
We support the urgent appeal in your motion calling for a complete and thorough investigation by the authorities .
We call on all the political players in Moldova to exercise restraint and not to take advantage of the deterioration in what is already a fairly tense political situation .
We shall remind the Moldovan government that it is vital not to exacerbate linguistic and ethnic tensions and to respect the principles of the Council of Europe and the OSCE which Mrs Schroedter referred to .
The fact that the Moldovan government suggested to the Council of Europe that it send an observer to Kishinev is a rare sign of encouragement and we hope that this measure will help calm the political situation .
Nonetheless , we feel that the terrible poverty in this country is not conducive to political equilibrium or compromise .
We are convinced that the main reasons for this poverty and malaise are political , caused by the failure to resolve the conflict in Transnistria , as Franz Fischler pointed out here last month .
The joint debate is closed .
The vote will take place today at 5.30 p.m.
The next item is the joint debate on the following motions for resolutions :
( B5-0209 / 2002 ) by Mr Maaten , on behalf of the ELDR Group , on the situation in Burma / Myanmar ;
( B5-0213 / 2002 ) by Mrs Maij-Weggen , Mr Van Orden and Dr Tannock , on behalf of the PPE-DE Group , on Burma / Myanmar ;
( B5-0221 / 2002 ) by Mrs McKenna and Mrs Lucas , on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group , on Burma / Myanmar ;
( B5-0234 / 2002 ) by Mrs Kinnock , on behalf of the PSE Group , on Burma / Myanmar ;
Mr President , once again we are reminded of the desperate tragedy that continues to afflict the people of Burma .
Much attention has been paid to the fact that talks have been going on between the military regime and Aung San Suu Kyi since October 2000 .
However , in reality , little in the way of substantive political progress has been made .
The military regime continues to deprive the National League for Democracy of its election victory of 1990 , keeping its leader and 20 of its MPs under arrest .
Moreover , it continues to violate in a most appalling way the basic human rights of its citizens .
While it is perhaps invidious to focus on any one individual , as so many suffer , I want to draw particular attention today to the case of 74-year-old Dr Salai Tun Than , retired rector of the Yezin University in Upper Burma , who is currently being held in the infamous Insein Prison .
Dr Than , who is not directly affiliated to any political movement , has had a long and distinguished career of public service , with the founding of the Myanmar Integrated Rural Development Association among his many accomplishments .
In any civilised country he would be held up as a pillar of the community .
Instead , on 29 November last year , he was arrested for handing out a petition calling for a return to civilian rule .
In February of this year he was sentenced to seven years in prison .
Dr Than has had no access to visitors since his arrest , save for the Red Cross , who have provided him with medicine for a chronic eye condition .
He is just one of more than 1,300 political prisoners languishing in Burmese jails , most of them guilty of nothing more than having the courage to stand up for their legitimate political freedoms .
I call upon the Burmese authorities to release Dr Salai Tun Than immediately .
It is now time for us to send a clear message to the military regime in Burma as a matter of urgency : it must heed calls for a return to democracy and political freedom .
Only then can it hope to qualify for much-needed international assistance that will enable this desperate country to halt its ruinous economic decline .
Mr President , May will be the twelfth anniversary of the elections which gave Aung San Suu Kyi and her National League for Democracy 82 % of parliamentary seats .
She is still under house arrest in Burma .
There are over 1 000 political prisoners in various jails in Burma .
They are being subjected daily to mistreatment and torture and are being denied adequate food and health care .
In November 2001 the UN General Assembly expressed concern at the very slow progress of talks between the State Peace and Development Council and the National League for Democracy and Aung San Suu Kyi .
An ILO mission in February was denied access to Aung San Suu Kyi , and the UN Special Envoy strongly criticised the slow progress of dialogue .
The Burmese army still continues to perpetrate gross human rights abuses against ethnic civilian groups including beatings , rape , destruction of food supplies , forced relocation , torture , forced labour , extra-judicial summary executions and disappearances .
It is worth noting that European investment in Burma is significant , particularly in the oil and gas industries .
All foreign investment - we should remember - takes place through military-backed companies .
The International Federation of Chemical , Energy , Mine and General Workers ' Unions called on oil and gas companies to cease investment in Burma while the use of forced labour continues .
The International Confederation of Free Trade Unions called for economic sanctions against Burma .
This Parliament must again call for the release of Aung San Suu Kyi and all who are wrongfully imprisoned .
The European Commission must ensure that humanitarian aid to areas most in need is delivered without political interference and that international NGOs are involved .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , it is a fact that , some dozen years ago , the National League for Democracy gained an overwhelming election victory in Burma .
Since then , though , the will of the people - of all ethnic groups , let it be emphasised - has been trodden underfoot .
For a dozen years , the elected president has been under house arrest , citizens who prove to be disagreeably uncooperative have been thrown into jail , forced labour convicts have been mistreated , women have been abused and ethnic minorities harassed .
Trafficking in drugs , small arms and human beings are the order of the day .
For a dozen years , the international community has been pressing for a return to democracy - so far , unfortunately , in vain .
Yet the EU troika 's indication of its willingness to enter into discussions - without , though , tying these to concessions - is right and should be welcomed .
The UN Special Envoy 's efforts at getting dialogue started with the elected president and the SPDC and seeking out a starting point for democratic change are particularly deserving of support .
That Razali Ismail 's visit , originally scheduled for March , has been delayed , gives little cause for optimism .
Those who lose by this are the people in the bitterly poor country , for whom things are constantly getting worse and of whose fate the democratic part of the world must not lose sight .
That it will not is also guaranteed by the European-Burmese Office , funded by the European Union and run in cooperation with the Friedrich-Ebert-Stiftung , which has experience of promoting development and democracy .
This gives us hope for new impetus to perhaps take us a bit further forward , even if we will need staying power .
Mr President , Burma , since the sixties , has isolated itself from the world at large , at great cost to its own people .
Burma is poor , under-developed and its population increasingly remote from the socialist military government , which refused , in 1990 , to accept the result of the last free election in that country and placed the victor of those elections , Aung San Suu Kyi , under house arrest .
According to the findings of the Asian Development Bank , quoted by the UN 's own rapporteur in his report , the country spends only 0.17 percent of its GDP on health care and a comparable amount on education .
Burma is now the world 's largest producer of heroin and significant parts of the country are controlled by drug lords , and I am concerned at China 's role in facilitating this process .
There are over 1 000 political prisoners in the country , including 15 elected MPs and a 74-year-old professor - as mentioned by my colleague , Mr Van Orden - Dr Salai Tun Than , whose only crime is to call for free multi-party elections- a man who bears no hatred towards his jailers but who symbolises , poignantly , the plight of his country .
Burma 's rulers have driven themselves and their people into a cul-de-sac .
I support the principle of targeted sanctions , including travel bans on the military leadership , but I am sceptical about the consequences of their indiscriminate application , as this may only hurt the people themselves rather than the military leadership , although it makes sense to make new investment dependent on improvements in human rights on a case-by-case basis .
Certainly , we recognise that some political prisoners have been recently released and that 25 of the offices of the National League for Democracy in Rangoon have recently been allowed to re-open .
This is great progress and we should encourage it .
That said , we need to ensure that aid is channelled through trusted organisations and we need to offer the leadership a road map for reform .
Lastly , I say to the military leaders , that by imprisoning a 74-year-old man , they show not their strength but their weakness .
A country that tolerates freedom of expression is a stronger country with better hope for the future .
I urge them to free Dr Than and Aung San Suu Kyi , and all other political prisoners immediately and to give their people hope for the future .
Mr President , the conclusions of the General Affairs Council held in October 2001 call for all political prisoners still in detention in Burma ( Myanmar ) to be released , including Aung San Suu Kyi . The Commission supported this demand and continues to do so .
We are convinced that a lasting solution needs to be based on an agreement between the National Council for Peace and Development and the elected democratic opposition and representatives of the ethnic minorities .
We - the Union - have no ambitions to impose an agreement , we merely want to support a solution agreed between the parties .
Although certain slightly less discouraging developments than in the past have been observed in Burma over the past year , we are still , in our view , a very long way from a clear commitment by the National Council for Peace and Development to restore democracy and respect international standards of human rights .
The recent Union troika which visited Burma ( Myanmar ) between 13 and 15 March expressed its hope that the negotiations under way between the National League for Democracy and the NCPD would continue and reiterated our hope that this process would at last bring about tangible results .
It also reaffirmed the Union 's support for the mission by the special envoy of the Secretary-General of the United Nations , Mr Razali Ismail .
The conclusions of the troika 's mission and the renewal of the Union 's common position will be examined by the Commission and the Member States over the next few weeks .
Our common position - the Union 's position - needs to be renewed by 29 April .
Generally speaking - and to reply to the concerns expressed by the members who tabled the resolution - we shall only change our common position if there are clear , specific signs of progress .
May I assure you once more that we are prepared to review our position one way or the other if there are any positive or negative developments in Burma which give us cause to do so .
To reply to the point raised by Mrs McKenna a moment ago on humanitarian aid , aid in the order of EUR 5 million a year is still being provided via NGOs and international organisations .
We are also in the process of preparing a specific AIDS programme which , if it is adopted , will be managed through the same channels and will be worth about the same as the humanitarian aid which we are currently distributing .
The joint debate is closed .
The vote will take place today at 5.30 p.m.
The next item is the joint debate on the following motions for resolutions :
Indigenous minorities in Vietnam and closure of the refugee camps in Cambodia
( B5-0201 / 2002 ) by Mr Belder , on behalf of the EDD Group , on the human rights situation in Cambodia / Vietnam ;
( B5-0208 / 2002 ) by Mr Maaten , on behalf of the ELDR Group , on the human rights situation in Cambodia / Vietnam ;
( B5-0214 / 2002 ) by Mr Nassauer and Mr Posselt , on behalf of the PPE-DE Group , on indigenous minorities in Vietnam and closure of refugee camps in Cambodia ;
( B5-0222 / 2002 ) by Mrs McKenna , on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group , on the refugee crisis in Vietnam and Cambodia ;
( B5-0235 / 2002 ) Mr Corbett and Mr Van den Berg , on behalf of the PSE Group , on the refugee crisis in Vietnam and Cambodia ;
Violation of human rights in Nigeria
( B5-0207 / 2002 ) by Mrs Dybkjær and Mrs Malmström , on behalf of the ELDR Group , on violation of human rights in Nigeria ;
( B5-0211 / 2002 ) by Mr Collins , on behalf of the UEN Group , on the human rights situation in Nigeria ;
( B5-0215 / 2002 ) by Mr Corrie and Mrs Maij-Weggen , on behalf of the PPE-DE Group , on the human rights situation in Nigeria ;
( B5-0225 / 2002 ) by Mrs Maes , Mrs Lucas , Mrs McKenna and Mr Rod , on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group , on human rights violations in Nigeria ;
( B5-0227 / 2002 ) by Mrs González Álvarez and Mrs Fraisse , on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group , on human rights violations in Nigeria ;
( B5-0236 / 2002 ) by Mrs Karamanou , Mrs Gröner , Mrs Valenciano Martínez-Orozco , Mrs Ghilardotti and Mr Van den Berg , on behalf of the PSE Group , on the violation of women 's human rights in Nigeria ;
Human rights situation in Guatemala
( B5-0202 / 2002 ) by Mr Salafranca Sánchez-Neyra , on behalf of the PPE-DE Group , on Guatemala ;
( B5-0206 / 2002 ) by Mr Malmström , Mrs Sanders-ten Holte , Mr Sánchez García and Mr Gasòliba i Böhm , on behalf of the ELDR Group , on the human rights situation in Guatemala ;
( B5-0224 / 2002 ) by Mr Mayol i Raynal , Mr Lipietz , Mr Nogueira Román and Mrs Frassoni on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group , on the human rights situation in Guatemala ;
( B5-0228 / 2002 ) by Mrs González Álvarez , Mr Manisco , Mr Vinci , Mr Sjöstedt , Mrs Ilka Schröder , Mr Miranda and Mrs Boudjenah on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group , on the human rights situation in Guatemala ;
Channel Tunnel
( B5-0200 / 2002 ) by Mr Van Orden , Mrs Foster , Mr Bradbourn , Mr Harbour and Mr Kirkhope , on behalf of the PPE-DE Group , on obstruction of rail freight through the Channel Tunnel ;
( B5-0203 / 2002 ) by Mr Marchiani , on behalf of the UEN Group , on the Channel Tunnel ;
( B5-0205 / 2002 ) by Baroness Ludford and Mr Sterckx , on behalf of the ELDR Group , on the obstruction of rail freight through the Channel Tunnel ;
( B5-0223 / 2002 ) by Mrs Lambert , Mrs Boumediene-Thiery , Mr Jonckheer , Mrs Rühle and Mrs Sörensen , on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group , on the situation of refugees attempting to cross the Channel and those arriving on the EU 's Mediterranean coasts ;
( B5-0229 / 2002 ) by Mrs Boudjenah and Mr Miranda , on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group , on the Channel Tunnel and the refugees at Sangatte ;
( B5-0233 / 2002 ) by Mrs Berès , Mrs Hazan , Mrs Roure and Mr Caudron , on behalf of the PSE Group , on the problems at the entrance to the Channel Tunnel ;
EU position for the next special session of the UN General Assembly on Children
( B5-0216 / 2002 ) by Mrs Banotti and Mrs Maij-Weggen , on behalf of the PPE-DE Group , on the EU position for the next special session of the UN General Assembly on Children ;
( B5-0238 / 2002 ) by Mrs Kinnock , on behalf of the PSE Group , on the EU position for the next special session of the UN General Assembly on Children ;
Indigenous minorities in Vietnam and closure of the refugee camps in Cambodia
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , why are citizens from Vietnam 's central highlands fleeing to the neighbouring country of Cambodia ?
This question remains unanswered , despite the way out of their misery that the Americans are providing by offering to receive them .
Unless this question is answered , we are only treating the symptoms while the problem continues to spread insidiously .
This evil is , quite simply , the Vietnamese government 's multiple disenfranchisement of ethnic minorities , whom the present resolution calls Montagnards , extending even to the persecution of the latter .
This disenfranchisement is social , religious and economic in nature .
The ' Kinh ' , the so-called real Vietnamese , consider themselves superior to the indigenous peoples of the central highlands .
With the help of the country 's Communist leaders , they have , in their capacity as migrants , simply robbed the indigenous people of the central highlands of their land over the past fifteen years .
We have also indicated the way in which the Montagnards have been deprived of their rights on a social and economic front .
Among the Montagnards , there are a relatively large number of Christians , specifically Protestants .
Their churches refuse to join the government-controlled Protestant unity church and are therefore deemed illegal .
This renders the Protestant Montagnards additionally suspicious in the eyes of the already strongly anti-religious authorities .
Add to this the element of the Montagnards ' foreign religious contacts , and their efforts to achieve more self-determination , and it becomes clear why the Vietnamese government considers the central highlands a risk area and treats it accordingly .
Let us face it ; this Communist government is as terrified as ever at the thought of any groups or opinions taking shape independently .
Is this , therefore , a hopeless situation for the Montagnards ?
They can rely on an alert security service in their vicinity .
Representatives of foreign donors and Vietnamese NGOs cannot travel freely in the area where they live .
It is therefore extremely difficult to set up local development programmes .
Meetings of representatives of indigenous peoples are either not allowed or are monitored by the security service .
Despite this , insiders in the shape of Western development workers in the central highlands , detect a glimmer of hope .
Within the Vietnamese government services , there are also opinions circulating which show some understanding of the legitimate religious , political and social demands of the Montagnards .
In their contacts with the Vietnamese authorities , I wish the Council and the Commission much wisdom and patience in treading a path that will put an end to the intolerable disenfranchisement of the indigenous people of the central highlands .
The present resolution should provide a welcome boost for them .
Mr President , Europe , too , alas , has a long history of the repression of ethnic minorities and peoples and of the expulsion and persecution of religions and faith communities , but our European Union sees itself as overcoming that and as a beacon for human rights . It is , then , of course , our task to ensure , as partners rather than as guardians , that universal human rights really are applied throughout the world .
It is precisely because South-East Asia is an important and valued partner for us in economic and strategic terms that it is also our right and our duty to intervene in order that these universal principles be adhered to there .
What we are at present witnessing is a vicious circle .
Ethnic minorities and the various peoples of the Vietnamese highlands are oppressed , with some of them fleeing to Cambodia and being accommodated in camps .
For this we thank the Cambodians , who had great problems of their own with expellees and refugees , and who are poor and are in this instance practising solidarity - that too is a sight to behold .
The Cambodians , though , of course send people , for all sorts of reasons , back to Vietnam , where they are again persecuted and oppressed , and there is another flow of refugees towards Cambodia .
A vicious circle indeed .
If we want to break this vicious circle , which is imperilling the stability of the entire region , we must press , firstly , for Cambodia to continue to discharge its international obligations and perhaps do so even more than hitherto .
Secondly , though , and this is of the essence , we must insist that Vietnam should at last treat its ethnic minorities and national communities with respect and protect them as it should , that it should not carry out settlement programmes to the detriment of the minorities , and that faith communities should receive proper protection .
We stand up for the rights of all faith communities without discrimination , but , just as Muslims stand up for the rights of Muslims throughout the world - something for which I have a high regard - we should show an increasing commitment to the Christian minorities throughout the world , and it is not least because of them that we are under a great obligation .
Mr President , the continued persecution of the indigenous minorities from Vietnam 's Central Highlands has to be deplored .
There is a major problem with the Cambodian authorities who are reluctant to grant political asylum to them .
They wish to close the refugee camps and to force the occupants to seek asylum in third countries , particularly the United States .
The decision by the Cambodian and Vietnamese governments to attempt to implement the repatriation agreement bilaterally has to be of great concern , as is the refusal by the Vietnamese government to permit the UNHCR monitoring teams to visit the villages of potential returnees .
The withdrawal of the UNHCR from the tripartite agreement means that asylum-seekers are exposed to even greater risk of being influenced , intimidated and coerced into returning to Vietnam .
The Cambodian government must uphold its obligations as a signatory to the 1951 Geneva Convention , in particular by ensuring that any repatriation is conducted on a voluntary basis , and by guaranteeing that asylum-seekers arriving in Cambodia are not denied their basic right to asylum .
We must stop the Vietnamese persecuting people who , it seems , have been forced to go back against their will .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , my thanks first of all to Mr Nassauer , chairman of the delegation for relations with the Member States of ASEAN , and to Mr Posselt , Mr van den Berg , Mr Maaten , Mrs McKenna and Mr Corbett for having taken this initiative .


I thank them all the more , because in our somewhat beleaguered position , we non-attached members find it practically impossible to table motions , which is why we particularly welcome initiatives such as this .
Next Monday , in Geneva , at the Human Rights Commission , the leader of the Montagnard Foundation , Mr Kok Ksor , will speak for the first time in defence of the rights of his people .
The situation is , I think , extremely serious , not just for the hill tribes but for the entire Vietnamese population .
I have a number of reservations on points 4 and 5 of this resolution , because I think that Mr Poul Nielson 's overall concept of cooperation needs to be challenged .
Helping the Vietnamese authorities fight poverty has not achieved anything , especially in terms of democratising Vietnam : there is the very serious problem of the hill tribes , but there is also the problem of freedom of worship for the Christian minorities and even for the Buddhist majority .
The patriarch of the Unified Buddhist church , Thich Huyen Quang , has been incarcerated for the last twenty years , as has his number 2 , Thich Quang Do , who has been incarcerated in his pagoda for several years now .
Such is the situation in Vietnam .
The European Parliament has stressed time and again that Poul Nielson 's policy has not brought about any improvements in Vietnam , despite massive funding from the Commission .
I do not think that the inefficiency of Poul Nielson 's policy surprises any of us , but we do need to remind ourselves of it whenever we can .
There are also long-standing ties with the Communist International in the region .
Mr Hun Sen , whose history with the Khmer Rouge is often glossed over , clearly still has close allies in Hanoi , which explains this connivance in the hill tribes affair , which I think we have a duty to condemn .
The Commission fully shares the concern of the members who have spoken about the situation of the Vietnamese Montagnards .
We have always recognised that complex events were behind the instability which started to take hold in the central mountains of Vietnam at the beginning of 2001 .
Like you , we have watched the exodus of the hill tribes from the region with concern and have supported efforts by the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees , working with the Vietnamese and Cambodian governments , to guarantee suitable conditions under which those wishing to can return .
We are therefore sorry to see that the tripartite agreement has been broken and , given the circumstances , we welcome the positive decision by the Cambodian government to allow Montagnards currently living in the refugee camps in Cambodia to return to the United States under the plan coordinated by the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees .
However , we feel that this measure does not offer a definitive solution to the problems at the root of this exodus .
We shall therefore continue to encourage Cambodia to face up to its international responsibilities .
It is subject to the 1951 Convention on the Status of Refugees and should continue to offer aid , asylum and temporary protection to asylum seekers .
At the same time , we share the views expressed by the members in their resolution that Vietnam should continue in its efforts to improve protection for civil , political and religious rights .
In the case of the hill tribes in particular , the Vietnamese government can obviously only deal with these problems at a local level and that is where they must be dealt with .
These issues tie in generally with the need for pro-active reform in Vietnam ; the Vietnamese administration needs to get used to the idea of pluralist opinion and the virtue of a political regime which brooks different points of view at all levels , which is not necessarily the case at present .
Vietnam also needs to extend its legal reforms and ensure that the constitutional rights of all its citizens are applied fully and fairly .
That is the Commission 's position .
With all due respect to Mr Dupuis , may I close by reminding him that our policy in Vietnam is not the policy of Poul Nielson , it is the policy of the Commission , the policy of the Council of Ministers , the policy of the European Parliament , in short , the policy of the European Union .
Mr President , a number of countries around the world have reintroduced Sharia law in recent years , including parts of Nigeria .
In the Sudan Sharia has even been used against Christians , which is contrary to Islamic teaching .
We are not talking here of the death penalty as such , which remains legal in international law and is still practised in a number of democracies , not only the United States , but also Russia , India , Caribbean islands , Japan and Singapore to name but a few .
Indeed , in my own party in the UK the death penalty remains a matter of individual conscience with many , myself included , in favour of its restricted application for the most heinous of crimes , such as child murder and serial killings .
Tens of millions of European citizens also share this view .
Nevertheless , in Nigeria we have the terrible spectacle of women being executed for simple adultery by a barbarically slow and painful method .
It is always difficult to interfere in the customs of others , but it is important that , as a parliament , we transmit our abhorrence at this practice without delay to the Nigerian Government .
Furthermore , I recently heard that Afghanistan has no plans to abrogate the Sharia Criminal Code , including stoning to death for adultery .
I am of the view that , given the fact that the EU is the largest donor to the reconstruction of this country , to the tune of over EUR 1 billion , we should make aid conditional on the cessation of these unacceptable practices .
Both Nigeria and Afghanistan are members of the international community and signatories to various international conventions guaranteeing human rights .
I , like most Members in this House , believe that such Sharia punishments are totally unacceptable at the dawn of the 21st century .
Mr President , Commissioner , the only reason the voices of these two women , Safiya Hussaini and Hafsatu Abubakar , have reached this Chamber today from the distant regions of Sokoto and Katsina in Nigeria is because their situation is the very epitome of all that is unacceptable .
Guilty of having given birth as divorcées and condemned to the most horrible of deaths , by stoning , Mrs Hussaini and Mrs Abubakar are guilty of being women in a region which fundamentalist Koranic or Sharia law has stripped of all semblance of humanity .
The citizens of certain regions of Nigeria bound and gagged by obscurantist customs are the victims not just of moral regression but also of the regression of civilisation itself .
We have heard the voices of these victims .
Thanks to us and because the entire international community has been moved and motivated , the authorities and national courts in Nigeria have pardoned these two martyrs to religious fundamentalism .
But how can we possibly think that these efforts suffice , when these precepts of times gone by , which victimise and condemn millions of citizens from the day they are born , continue to apply ?
The federal state of Nigeria condemns these practices and these courts through its constitution and its international undertakings .
Now it should prove that actions speak louder than words .
In doing so , it could take on the role and set the example which the calibre of its democracy and its transition to democracy have conferred on it within the African and international community .
If it effectively restores the rule of law and demonstrates intransigence in the face of ethnic , sexist or religious intolerance , Nigeria should be able to continue to benefit from Community aid .
If all Nigerians recognised the primacy of human rights , and of course women 's rights , over any religious precepts or principles , the European Union would respond by providing full support in a spirit of solidarity for the democratic and economic reforms under way in Nigeria .
Mr President , thanks to action by the international community and previous resolutions adopted by Parliament on human rights in Nigeria , Mrs Safiya Hussaini , who was under sentence of death by stoning , has been pardoned .
Even as we welcome this , we must remain vigilant .
Other women are at risk of the same sentence of death by stoning , especially Mrs Lawal in the state of Katsina .
The application of Sharia law affects women in particular , especially poorer women .
These arbitrary judicial proceedings and the sentences passed on these women are contrary to the fundamental rights recognised under the international conventions ratified by Nigeria .
We must denounce this selective judicial system which considers adultery a crime , which allows the men to walk free while the women are condemned , even if they are the victims of rape .
Parliament must insist that the Nigerian Government prohibit any death sentence from being executed and institute proceedings before the constitutional court on the application of Sharia law .
The Nigerian Government must abide by the international conventions on human rights which it has signed , as tangible proof of its intention to institute a process of democratisation and the rule of law , guarantee economic and social dialogue and foster dialogue between communities .
We call on the Council , the Commission and the co-presidents of the ACP to use every political and commercial means at their disposal to ensure that the Nigerian Government applies and abides by these conventions and the African Charter on Human and People 's Rights .
Mr President , when democratic procedures were restored in Nigeria and the country 's constitution was adopted in 1999 , how could we have imagined the events which took place two or three years later ? The ethnic , religious and political infighting which has cost thousands of people their lives , and the restoration of Islamic or Sharia law in the 12 states of the country in which there is a Muslim majority .
World public opinion was shocked recently by the sentences of death by stoning passed on women accused of adultery while , under this extremely fair law , the men of course get off scot-free .
The international outcry and the action taken by the European Parliament , civil society and the media may have saved their lives at the eleventh hour , but the issue of violations of women 's rights and blatant discrimination on the basis of sex remains .
And the case of Amina Lawal , sentenced by the Islamic court in Bakori , is still pending .
But the Islamic courts and the interpretation of Sharia law apart , there are other examples of the unequal , unfair and inhumane treatment of women , such as sexual mutilation - around 60 % of women in Nigeria are estimated to have suffered this gruesome practice - or the recognised right of men to mistreat women with impunity or the organised trafficking in and sexual exploitation of women .
We need to send a very strong message on all these points to the federal government of Nigeria from this House today , calling on it to ensure that the country 's courts operate in accordance with international law on human rights and the Charter of Human Rights , which has even been included in Nigeria 's constitution .
Above all , we must make clear not just to the Nigerian government , but anywhere else where Sharia law applies , that the best defence against intolerance is to strengthen the secular aspects of the state and legitimate democratic order .
We also need to send out a message that no religious or other tradition or practice can take precedence over respect for fundamental human rights and the rule of law .
At the same time , we call on the European Commission , in the run up to the elections in Nigeria in 2003 , to provide any technical assistance Nigeria may need in order to strengthen its legal and democratic structures and for lawyers and the police to be educated within the framework of the Cotonou agreement and the resolutions passed by the Joint ACP-EU Joint Parliamentary Assembly .
Mr President , Nigeria has ratified a number of international conventions on human rights , in particular the Covenant on Civil and Political Rights , the Convention on the Elimination of All forms of Discrimination Against Women , and the African Charter on Human and Peoples ' Rights .
Despite this , however , here we are once again discussing the violation of women 's rights , pointing out that the death penalty still exists in Nigeria , declaring that current practice and the countless regulations contained in the new codes of criminal procedure of the Sharia continue to further the severe violation of human rights , even to the point of enforcing the death penalty .
We , together with many men and women of democratic countries , have roused ourselves to action , and that is what saved the lives of Safiya and of Hafsatu , but , despite this victory , the Islamic court in Bakori has condemned another woman , Mrs Amina Lawal , to being stoned to death .
Now , I do not feel we can continue - although we must do so - to discuss these massacres .
We must demand that Nigeria , which is preparing for democratic elections and must therefore be supported by the European Union , not merely - as has been mentioned in the context of the Cotonou Agreement - consolidate pluralist democracy and social and economic justice , but that it put an end to these violations too .
I feel that we can no longer be content with just discussing the ongoing violations and waiting for something to happen .
We must be more resolute and take action using all the tools available to us .
Mr President , the European Union , as we all know , is unwavering in its strict opposition to the death penalty . In countries where the death penalty still exists we call for recourse to this practice to be gradually eliminated and insist that it be applied in accordance with minimum standards .
We are all in the habit of lobbying for moratoria .
We are all particularly worried , both in the Union and the Commission , by the cruelty of the punishments and executions practised in application of Sharia law in a number of countries .
A hanging in January of this year put an end to a de facto moratorium on the death penalty in Nigeria .
We were involved in Union representations to the Nigerian authorities on this issue in February .
We also intervened on several fronts in the case of Safiya Hussaini , especially when President Prodi launched a direct appeal to President Obasanjo .
We are currently closely monitoring the case of Amina Lawal , mentioned by Mrs Ainardi , Mrs Karamanou and Mrs Ghilardotti , which has now gone to appeal .
Now with regard to the impact of all this on relations between the European Union and Nigeria , the framework for which is laid down in the Cotonou Agreement .
One of the fundamental elements of this agreement is respect for human rights and , in this context , equality between men and women is one aspect of the same issue .
We welcome the fact that the Nigerian minister of justice has officially declared that the federal states must revise their criminal legislation in order to exclude punishments which fly in the face of the civil rights guaranteed under the Nigerian constitution .
The federal government would also appear to be worried by the incompatibility between the penal application of Sharia law and the international conventions signed by Nigeria .
We have funded a Nigerian study into Sharia law which indicates that Sharia law is poorly drafted and does in fact contradict other federal laws .
It is also applied in a somewhat incoherent manner because judges are inadequately trained .
We feel that the solution for the time being is still to be found in dialogue , especially on Nigeria 's compliance with its undertakings within the framework of the Cotonou Agreement .
As you and we both know , this agreement makes provision for procedures which can be applied if human rights are not respected .
This is the point we need to evaluate together so that we can exert the necessary pressure but avoid imposing sanctions on all the federal states of Nigeria indiscriminately or compromising the creation of an environment conducive to change because it is this change which will , in fact , be the outcome of our collective pressure and efforts .
Mr President , the European Parliament plays an undeniable leading role in the peace process in Central America .
It is now time to talk about the recent situation in Guatemala , six years after the conclusion of the peace agreements , in 1996 .
The time has come for Parliament to add its voice to those of other human rights defenders , trade unionists and religious leaders working with the indigenous communities to ensure that these peace programmes move forwards and do not stagnate .
It is vital that the Guatemalan government finalises the legislative reforms arising from the peace agreements , that the judicial authority consolidates its independence and its capacity to pursue and to prosecute those responsible for the wars and the breaches against human rights that have taken place before and after the peace agreements were concluded .
For this reason , the European Parliament sends a message of support to the Guatemalan people and to their Government , to encourage them to continue in their struggle , to guarantee respect for human rights , the Rule of Law and the independence of the judiciary .
It is vital that these agreements , which have been so successful not only in Guatemala but also in other countries in Central America , reach a satisfactory conclusion .
This means that governments must commit themselves to continue pursuing and punishing criminals , which can only be done by respecting and strengthening the independence of the judiciary .
This is this essence of the message of support that we want to send from Parliament to the Guatemalan people , to those who are fighting for their freedom and to their political authorities .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , we can see that human rights are still a current issue ; today , we are talking about human rights in a Central American country close to our hearts , at a time , furthermore , when the International Criminal Court is finally being established .
A few days ago I read an article , written by a Central American liberal , that I believe is relevant today .
He said that Central America is an area of natural disasters , situated on a fault line , that every now and then knocks down cities and buries entire populations .
It seems , however , that the region is also under threat from another kind of fault , one of moral order , where impunity appears to protect certain heartless individuals .
A 2001 report by Transparency International , a German NGO that monitors and condemns government corruption worldwide , states that Guatemala is in a situation in which the democratic system is discredited to the point where its institutions are in danger .
We in this House today condemn human rights violations in Guatemala , which are on the increase and , as Mr Pomés has just pointed out , affect workers , journalists and politicians , amongst others .
We regret the abuses committed by certain economic agents , who see nothing wrong in using arms trafficking , drugs trafficking , money laundering and even kidnapping to increase their wealth .
We in this House would ask the Guatemalan government to monitor and sanction clandestine groups , to guarantee citizens ' safety and to allow justice to be done , by investigating crimes that have been committed for some time now .
Impunity will only be brought to an end when the judiciary is independent and free , when international pressure is increased and when punishment is universal so that crimes do not go unpunished . In this way , democracy will also be strengthened .
Mr President , Commissioner , on behalf of my Group , the Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance , I support all those members who have previously spoken to condemn human rights violations in Guatemala ; to request that the peace and reconciliation agreements be respected ; to request that the crimes and atrocities committed during the dictatorship should be brought before the Courts and to condemn the atrocities that are still being committed , especially by so-called ' clandestine ' groups , who murder , torture , and violate human rights .
However , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to make a very specific condemnation with regard to an issue that appears very peculiar to many Latin American countries , such as Guatemala , Peru , Bolivia , Ecuador and other countries that are still living under a colonial regime .
There is a white Creole minority that continues to dominate and marginalise millions of indigenous people who , in spite of being the majority , are completely ignored by the State .
These States are not democratic and , in order to maintain the traditional privileges of ownership , they dominate and marginalise the indigenous minorities , and create dictatorial regimes that torture and murder if these minorities should dare to rebel .
In this way , this minority controls the judiciary , ownership , the police and the army , and I believe that , in these Latin American countries , until there is genuine democracy - as has happened in South Africa - until the indigenous minorities have power and until they are truly able to create their own State for themselves , there will be no solution to this problem of human rights violations in these countries .
On many occasions I compare countries that are very close to our own - the Spanish states in particular - with African countries : these are very often in a state of poverty and have dictatorial regimes , but one day they will become democratic regimes governed by the previously marginalised majority .
In Latin America the problem is much worse and we have to be aware of this in order for Europe to be able to help in the construction of truly democratic regimes , governed by the majority .
Commissioner , I must confess that I have found this week quite tiring , because of all these evenings we have spent discussing the lack of respect for human rights .
I am not talking about being tired of having to deal with this subject , but about being tired at the lack of results , despite constant pressure from this Parliament .
Many hopes were raised when the Guatemala and El Salvador agreements were signed in 1996 .
We have been talking about the need for dialogue in Colombia .
The problem , and the issue that we must deal with here in Parliament today , is that these agreements have not been honoured , and it is this factor that is frustrating the hopes of the majority of the population in places such as Guatemala , where , as Mr Nogueira rightly stated - a large proportion of the population is indigenous .
I believe that the best way of remembering Monsignor Gerardi , the author and person responsible for this extraordinary document of historical clarification , which should today be the guide for the majority of Guatemalan judges talking about crimes committed during the civil war , is to demand that agreements be honoured , for there to be true agrarian reform , which has not taken place to date , for there to be respect for the large majority of the Guatemalan people - a respect that currently does not exist , because these people continue to live in abject poverty - for there to be an end to the increasing violence against the people and their representatives , defenders of human rights , farm-workers ' representatives , trade unionists , religious leaders and people involved with the rights of the majority of the population .
Unfortunately , until now the majority of human rights have not been respected in Guatemala .
For this reason , I believe that what we should be calling for is for the European Union , with all of its available resources , to use its influence so that these agreements , to which it contributed so much , are honoured .
Mr President , we share the concerns of the members who have tabled this resolution on serious setbacks in Guatemala in basic areas such as protection for human rights , the administration of justice and proper management of public affairs .
We , like you , are most concerned at the increase in cases of intimidation in Guatemala , not just against human rights protesters but also against representatives of civil society , political leaders and members of non-governmental organisations and the clergy .
Consequently , the Commission 's main priorities as regards relations with Guatemala are as follows : first , to support the application of the 1996 peace agreements and then to encourage the modernisation of the state and set the management of public affairs on a firmer footing .
These priorities are set against a background of wholesale implementation of the recommendations set out in the Commission report on historic clarification which Mrs González Álvarez referred to and which is of crucial importance .
In this respect - and in line with the resolution on human rights in Guatemala which you adopted last June - the Commission has decided to take additional measures .
First , during the course of political dialogue , the Commission and the Member States of the Union regularly and tirelessly remind the Guatemalan authorities and local public institutions of the importance of discouraging any form of violence and of systematically examining any obstacles to respect for human rights and the rule of law .
Then , in a joint declaration published at the end of the meeting of an advisory group on Guatemala held in Washington in February , the Commission and the Member States insisted on the need for much more consistent progress in the peace process than has been seen recently .
We are calling - and we shall continue to call - on the government of Guatemala to take regular , consistent measures to follow up the conclusions and commitments made in the advisory group .
That is the first measure .
The second measure is to exert pressure on the government of Guatemala , within the framework of our cooperation , to comply with the 1996 peace agreements ; as you know , we are funding specific initiatives in this area , especially measures to reinforce and modernise the national constabulary .
The purpose of this programme is to encourage the Guatemalan authorities to take the measures needed to prevent any undermining of the rule of law and step up efforts to make the country much more democratic and fair .
This initiative will be relayed over coming months in a new programme of cooperation for the benefit of the judicial system in Guatemala .
Between 2002 and 2006 , which is the time scale for the Union 's cooperation strategy with Guatemala , we intend to step up action on human rights and the fight against intimidation and impunity .
Guatemala is , almost by chance , one of the main beneficiaries of the European initiative on democracy and human rights for the period from 2002 to 2004 , when we shall be concentrating on proper management of public affairs , the rights of the indigenous populations , the death penalty and the fight against impunity , the very points which the parliamentarians themselves identified a while back .
Mr President , the situation around the entrance to the Channel Tunnel has been chaotic for months .
Since last November , rail-freight services at Fréthun , near Calais , have been severely disrupted by the illegal activities of migrants .
I have already raised this matter on two occasions on the floor of this House , on 4 February and 11 March , and our urgency resolution reflects the desperate seriousness of the continuing crisis .
On 19 March , the French government replied to initial queries from the European Commission , stating that immediate steps had been taken to carry out new security work at Fréthun and to provide 24-hour police coverage .
However , on 27 March , along with some 150 parliamentarians , rail-freight operators , officials , police , media and others , but with the noticeable absence of any British or French government ministers , I visited the rail-freight terminal at Fréthun .
We were amazed to see illegal migrants clambering all over trains in broad daylight before our very eyes .
The situation was clearly out of hand and it has got no better , in spite of undertakings by SNCF to achieve a normal service from 2 April .
Only this last Tuesday , some 100 migrants broke out of a freight train at Dollands Moor in Folkestone .
This train had apparently waited virtually unguarded at Calais for 24 hours .
This situation is unacceptable .
Besides the human tragedy in the situation , I am concerned that British businesses and some 8 000 jobs are directly at risk , as a result of the state of affairs , including in my own area of the East of England .
There are also very serious environmental and other consequences .
It makes a mockery of the idea of the free movement of goods across the European Union .
Given the lack of action by the British and French governments on Tuesday , I took a deputation to meet the European Commission : Lord Berkeley , Chairman of the Rail Freight Group and Mr Alan Roberts , a constituent of mine from Hertfordshire , whose family rail-freight organising business has been very hard hit by the crisis at Fréthun , went with me to see Commissioner Bolkestein .
He was very sympathetic and expressed frustration at the lack of government action .
I now implore the Commission to take the necessary further action , including legal action against the French government , as a matter of urgency .
Businesses require urgent financial assistance in order to be able to continue trading , as well as compensation in the longer term for the losses that they have sustained because of the lack of effective action by the French and the British authorities .
Mr President , the desperate situation at Fréthun , which I have also visited , demands a response on two fronts .
The rail-freight operators and dependent businesses want a response which concentrates on the immediate and long-standing need for sufficient security to keep the freight moving .
They are perfectly justified .
Businesses should not be the fall-guys of government failure to cope with asylum-seekers .
Businesses need fences at Fréthun , but that is also crucial to stop migrants dying .
That is the responsibility of the SNCF and French government .
I am shocked that the Socialist Group refused to put that in the motion .
I call on them , especially British Labour MEPs , to back Amendment No 2 on this point .
Amendment No 6 by the Socialist Group is hopelessly weak , letting governments off the hook .
Businesses adversely affected also need finance and they need immediate support and compensation from the two governments .
I will also be shocked if Labour MEPs vote against that .
Amendment No 1 is an ELDR Group amendment , which calls for the strengthening of the current inadequate intervention powers of the Commission to clear obstructions to the free movement of goods .
I am told the Conservatives are reluctant to support this , but I hope it is not true .
The second response required in the Calais area is to address the asylum question in a humane and practical way .
My group cannot support Amendment No 5 by the Socialist Group because it attributes the situation at Fréthun purely to pressure people feel to migrate from their home countries .
Obviously that is the broad context , which is why the resolution in a paragraph I drafted says the long-term solution must be found in a concerted , European asylum policy .
There is also stress on the need for a sensitive humanitarian approach .
In the immediate future , the British and French governments must reach a practical agreement to process asylum claims on-site at the Sangatte centre , not close it - that would be counterproductive .
But the Socialist Group amendment , probably deliberately , ignores the responsibility of the SNCF and the government to deal with the asylum pressures .
This is unacceptable .
The rail-freight operators are on the brink of collapse .
Eight thousand workers could be out of a job .
I urge support for the motion and for Amendments Nos 1 to 4 .
Mr President , I am not speaking as one of the authors of the motion , because the Group of the Greens does not support this compromise proposal .
What exactly are we talking about here ?
Are we talking about Eurotunnel 's loss of earnings and the disruption to traffic under the Channel or are we talking about what should be the subject of this afternoon 's debate , human rights and , in this particular instance , the rights and the human tragedy of the Sangatte refugees ?
The refugees in Sangatte are not illegal immigrants .
They are living in a centre opened by the French government , managed by the Red Cross and subsidised by the French state .
The refugees are Kosovars , Kurds and , nowadays , mainly Afghans .
All the people who feature in today 's headlines are flooding into Sangatte .
If we want to talk about human rights , then let us do so and stop talking about money and the safety of traffic under the Channel .
There is something obscene about confusing the two .
This centre was opened thanks to important work by the associations who wanted to respond to the emergency , and to close it would be a humanitarian catastrophe .
We know what Calais and Sangatte are like without the centre .
We have seen the refugees risking their lives to get to Great Britain , wandering the streets of Calais with their children in the pouring rain , with the associations doing their best to get food to them every day .
Is that really the sort of situation we want to revert to in a debate on human rights ?
Frankly , this debate has got off to a very poor start , which is why the Greens do not support this motion and call on their fellow members to do likewise , because there is something improper about it .
The Group of the Greens , having taken the view that the French Government was demonstrating a measure of bad faith regarding the right of these people to demand asylum in France , supported the publication of a document , in collaboration with the associations , which is in huge demand among the refugees in Sangatte .
What does this document say ?
It simply tells the refugees how to demand asylum in France and what rights asylum seekers have in France .
This is the road we should be going down , obviously in the long term , with our sights set on a European refugee statute , in order to deal with this situation .
Mr President , today we face real problems as a result of the massive influx of families of refugees arriving with toddlers and babies in tow to seek asylum .
This situation is caused by the distress of thousands of refugees and displaced persons , who have had to leave countries in which they are politically , economically or socially oppressed and in which wars and conflicts are raging , often against their will and sometimes at the cost of their life .
We need proper refugee centres , otherwise it is all down to the local authorities and they can no longer cope .
They do not have the human resources , infrastructure or funds needed to respond to this distress .
So what we have to do is find a satisfactory long-term response to these problems and adopt a humane approach in terms of asylum and immigration policy .
We cannot continue to close our eyes to these problems .
We cannot continue to bury our head in the sand .
That way we are heading for a catastrophe .
If serious problems persist at the entrance to the Channel Tunnel despite the joint efforts of the French and British governments to stop refugees trying to cross illegally , it is because we have no joint asylum policy at European level .
Every country in the European Union is affected because the difficulties we face stem from the fact that we have no harmonised asylum procedures in Europe .
We therefore need to adopt a package of measures to implement a European asylum policy post haste .
We need to all join forces and examine the problems facing us .
The European Union needs to demonstrate its determination to take fast decisions on various instruments , on minimum standards in refugee centres and on procedures for granting and withdrawing refugee status in the spirit , lest we forget , of the Tampere European Council .
Mr President , my constituents in south-east England will be delighted that this House has found the time to discuss the repeated closures of the Channel Tunnel .
Very few people outside my region appreciate the seriousness of the situation .
The regular stoppage of freight transport is now reaching crisis proportions .
Businesses are unable to ship their produce , the transport infrastructure of the southern English counties is clogged , the single market is violated as the circulation of goods is impeded , the police forces of Kent and Sussex are over-stretched and the influx of illegal migrants is placing a serious burden on local authorities and their ratepayers .
It is all very well to demand greater security at the Calais-Fréthun freight terminal but this is to address the symptoms of the problem , not the cause .
If we are serious about bringing the situation under control , we must stand back and ask the question : what is making tens of thousands of people so desperate to get out of France ?
France after all is not a country that persecutes its citizens .
On the contrary , it is one of the oldest and freest democracies in the world .
In short , it is hardly a country from which we would reasonably expect people to claim political asylum and yet , night after night , hundreds of people are risking their lives in order to enter Britain through the Channel Tunnel .
The British Government must take primary responsibility for this state of affairs .
The chief difference between Britain and France in this field is that when an asylum claim in the United Kingdom is refused , deportation almost never follows .
Consequently , and quite understandably , illegal migrants are determined to reach the one EU State from which they know they will almost certainly not be repatriated .
As long as this state of affairs continues , there will be a limitless supply of young people in the Sangatte camp seeking by any means to cross the Channel .
This is an international problem , but it has an essentially domestic solution .
The British Government must amend its approach to asylum .
It must cease to entertain asylum claims when the last point of embarkation is a manifestly safe State , such as France .
Doing so will reduce the pressure , not only on the Channel Tunnel , but by extension on France 's eastern borders as fewer migrants seek to make the journey .
Without urgent action from the British Government , the strain on the south-east can only become heavier .
Mr President , I am speaking in a debate on human rights - although you would have found that difficult to believe if you had been listening closely to the compassionate words of Mr Hannan .
It is a human rights issue that we are discussing here .
It is not an easy one and nobody should suggest it is .
It has not just become urgent because of the economic effect on business or on the freight industry , for which I have great sympathy .
It is a very serious and distressing situation which does nobody any great credit .
It has concerned , as others have said , large numbers of people and governments - both in France , the UK and other countries - and local authorities .
It is one that my committee in Parliament has also discussed on more than one occasion .
People could go back and search for different reasons why there are numbers of people there .
I reject the very simplistic and inhumane proposals from Mr Hannan .
It is a situation that has worsened over recent years and the problem is much more extensive than he implied .
But just as Parliament must protect business and the freight industry , so Europe - but not exclusively the United Kingdom or France - has a duty to care for and protect those seeking refuge .
These are desperate people .
Some have fled in fear of their lives , and we should be able to offer them sanctuary and give them every opportunity to put their claim for asylum .
This is what the Dublin Convention , which we sought to review earlier this week in the Marinho report , is all about .
We need a Dublin Convention that enables asylum-seekers to feel safe and secure , to put their claim for asylum in the first EU country which they reach .
Earlier in the week the other side of the House tabled amendments suggesting that they should be informed of their rights in any language , not necessarily a language that they understand .
That is not the way , and it explains why sometimes people move to another country .
It is not a question of who supports which amendment and who does not .
I personally have no problem with Amendment No 2 , which I was questioned about earlier .
We have to get the system working for the sake of all of the people who are moving around Europe .
We have to make it safe and working for the industries .
We need to work towards a common European asylum system .
Without that , Europe will not function and we will be coming back to these issues over and over again .
We need to have a common European asylum system throughout the Member States that is understood and that works .
I and my colleagues on this side of House and some others will be working consistently for that in the months ahead .
Mr President , two months ago we held a debate in this Chamber on obstacles to traffic in the Channel Tunnel caused by the presence of numerous refugees on the French side trying to cross to Great Britain , apparently in order to seek asylum there .
But , as this first debate was lacking , to say the least , our Conference of Presidents decided , in its wisdom , to arrange a second debate today on the same subject .
Unfortunately , to judge by the motion which is to be put to the vote , this debate will be just as unsatisfactory as the first .
Without repeating everything I said on the subject two months ago , especially on the vanity of a harmonised asylum policy supposed to resolve all these problems , I shall merely point out that the simple truth has yet to be stated anywhere .
At present , the life of the French population in the region is being ruined , economic activity is being disrupted at the expense of our British neighbours , the railway companies are collapsing under the weight of unwarranted security costs and all because of total negligence on the part of the French Government , which lets illegal immigrants congregate in public , 90 % of whom have no right to stay and should be sent home .
If we fail to react to this new form of immigration , the situation will soon get out of hand and become uncontrollable .
To top it all , on Tuesday the House adopted a text which helps enormously in resolving the problem .
I refer to the Council regulation establishing the criteria for determining the Member States responsible for examining asylum applications , which was the subject of the Marinho report .
The state responsible is of course the state of initial entry .
And Article 12 , which we adopted , stipulates and I quote , that the ' Member State which has knowingly tolerated the unlawful presence on its territory of a third-country national for more than two months shall be responsible for examining the asylum application ' .
So in this case , it is not Great Britain , it is in fact France which is entirely responsible and the least we can do is to say so clearly in our resolution .
Mr President , the Commission is obviously aware that repeated incursions by illegal immigrants into the transport installations between Calais in France and the United Kingdom are creating problems for security , the proper functioning of the rail transport network and freight traffic .
This phenomenon , and I think the various interventions illustrated this , is the result of a combination of fairly complex factors and , in my eyes at least , demonstrates yet again that the Union needs a common immigration and asylum policy now more than ever .
I agree with Mrs Ludford and Mrs Roure here .
This being the case , the Commission has , for its part , already taken the relevant initiatives by submitting , to the Council and Parliament , all the proposals needed in order to ensure some sort of equal treatment between the Member States on what are obviously difficult issues .
As far as political asylum is concerned , the aim of the Commission proposals is to create a fair , efficient and fast European asylum system .
We proposed a Council directive on asylum procedures in September 2000 .
As you know , several Member States are opposed to binding deadlines for completing procedures .
So we shall be submitting a revised proposal within the next few weeks , as instructed by the Laeken European Council .
Parliament is due to vote within the next fortnight on a proposal for a directive submitted by the Commission a year ago in order to harmonise the conditions under which asylum seekers are kept .
The Council may reach a political agreement on this Spanish Presidency priority within the next few weeks .
Of course , it would also help if Parliament took a stand .
Another proposal for a directive adopted last September is designed to harmonise the definition of refugees and people in need of international protection and should be negotiated between now and 2003 .
The main purpose of all these proposals is to reduce what we might call pressure differentials between the Member States which motivate what it the bureaucrats have been agreed to call secondary movements due to de facto and de jure differences in asylum law .
These initiatives all aim to guarantee that everyone who needs it has access to protection - and that appears to apply to a great many people in this case - in accordance with all the terms of the 1951 Geneva Convention on the status of refugees .
Finally , the Commission has also proposed a regulation on responsibility for examining asylum applications which includes , as Mr Berthu has just reminded us , a clause stating that a Member State which has knowingly tolerated the unlawful presence on its territory of a third-country national for more than two months is responsible for examining their asylum application .
Negotiations on this subject are still under way , even though Parliament has also worked on them , and should be concluded during the Danish Presidency .
So we are still drafting this text , Mr Berthu .
The Commission subscribes fully to the objective of developing a global approach to the management of migratory phenomena , including their external dimension .
This is one of the objectives of the common asylum and immigration policy laid down by the Tampere European Council .
We shall be discussing the matter in general and the fight against illegal immigration in particular in Luxembourg next Monday and shall be launching an in-depth debate on the connection between development and immigration .
As far as the fight against illegal immigration is concerned , the Council adopted an action plan on 28 February , broadly based on our proposal and highlighting the importance of cooperation with countries of origin and transit .
The fight against trafficking in human beings and illegal immigration gangs are obviously one priority and should be backed up by assistance for victims willing to help prosecute traffickers .
And we intend to launch a very broad consultation procedure on this aspect of a global immigration policy very soon on the basis of the Green Paper on the policy to repatriate illegal residents which the Commission adopted yesterday .
Finally , and this testifies to the complexity of the matter , we are preparing a communication on guidelines on the integrated management of external borders .
As for the specific responsibility of hauliers , this is regulated by the Schengen Agreement and defined in a directive designed to harmonise the sanctions which apply here .
Nonetheless , we are aware of the fact that there is more to the problem than that and we have taken various initiatives to sit down and discuss the matter with the industry , administrations and humanitarian organisations .
Finally , as regards the specific situation at the SNCF Fréthun terminal , we have made representations to the French authorities under Community legislation , asking them to take any measures needed to guarantee the free movement of rail freight .
The French authorities have told us that work to secure the Fréthun site has almost been completed and that work to extend the enclosure , install video cameras and various other devices is being completed .
They have promised to complete the programme of work in time for traffic to get back to normal , pre-October 2001 conditions by June 2002 .
We have also been assured that security staff numbers have been increased on the SNCF site .
At the Transport Council on 26 March , the Commission , basically following a number of parliamentary interventions , put this item on the Council 's agenda so that the two ministers in question could state their opinion , and that is a euphemism I do not use lightly .
On this occasion , the two delegations , the French and the British , intimated that they had agreed on the measures to be taken to ensure that traffic returns to normal under normal safety conditions .
Armed with this agreement , the Commission now considers that it is up to them , given that the Commission has performed its duty of vigilance , to take any measures needed to guarantee the free movement of goods .
You will notice that I refrained from addressing this aspect of the question , important as it is , before I had addressed aspects of asylum and immigration policy , which are of course the core points here .
Mr President , a society that calls itself civilised , such as European society , which prides itself on its defence of human rights , cannot remain impassive when faced with the situation of many millions of children worldwide who are denied the rights we claim we want to defend ; children condemned to death by AIDS or malnutrition , or through a lack of medical care , or who are destined to live in absolutely wretched conditions .
It is true that the Convention on the Rights of the Child and the Action Plan approved at the 1990 World Summit attempt to guarantee that children are able to exercise their fundamental rights , but unfortunately , there has been no improvement at all in the situation , and children continue to be the main victims of poverty and underdevelopment , amongst other things .
The statistics speak for themselves , and we should not forget that behind each of these figures hides the face of a child , whose eyes are pleading for our help .
For this reason , the special session of the UN General Assembly on Children , which is about to take place , should result in a firm commitment to transform the obligations arising from the Convention on the Rights of the Child into real action , establishing control mechanisms to supervise the extent to which these obligations are complied with , especially with regard to the fight against abuse , exploitation and violence to which children are subjected and to guarantee children the right to education .
But also , and above all , the Assembly should lead to a commitment to adopt more coherent and more generous development cooperation policies and policies to combat poverty , in order to guarantee every child 's fundamental right to decent living conditions .
And , since the family is the fundamental unit of society and bears the main responsibility for protecting and raising children and the monitoring of their development , it is crucial that we also promote family assistance policies that contribute to the creation of the human environment that is essential to a child 's development and to his or her being able , in the future , to become a useful member of the community to which he or she belongs .
Parliament must give a clear mandate to the European Union in this direction .
Therefore , on behalf of the PPE-DE Group , I would ask this House to support the joint resolution we are debating and the amendments we have tabled and which were already part of the text that this Parliament approved in July 2001 for this very sitting of the United Nations , which should have taken place in September ; because , with this vote , we will make the cause of children our own , the cause of the European Parliament and the cause of the European Union .
Mr President , Commissioner , I wish to emphasise the child 's and children 's need for community .
It is family and relatives who , in the most basic way , can give children the home , and the childhood and adolescence , which they naturally require .
I therefore wish also to emphasise how important it is for the amendments tabled by the Group of the European People 's Party and European Democrats to be adopted in the European Parliament .
With reference to a resolution from 5 July 2001 , we would emphasise that children are the first victims of the breakdown of family life .
We would also point to UNICEF 's splendid draft final document emphasising that the family is the basic unit of society and bears the main responsibility for the protection , upbringing and development of children .
We also want to underline what we said in the European Parliament last year , namely that a world fit for children must also be a world fit for the family .
The breakdown of the family and of family life are among the greatest and most serious challenges and threats faced by Europe .
In my own country , Sweden , a leader of the country 's third largest political party openly pronounced the words , ' Death to the family ' to the Swedish general public .
The European Parliament has a quite different view and instead emphasises the family as the basic unit for providing love and care to the next generation .
As we did in 2001 , we can highlight these values .
It is a message to the world that even so-called modern Europe still realises that the family is the basic unit in which love is given to the next generation .
More than ever , we need the family and the appreciation of its importance .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , children are worth their weight in gold .
This is an expression mostly used by parents and grandparents , but we should henceforth also use this expression when we discuss the policy .
Just as two-way communication has been established between parents and children , such communication must also be established between children and the policy in all areas .
In this connection , particular attention should be paid to the fact that children have changed a great deal over the past few years .
This is due to the fact that families no longer necessarily live together and the division of roles is no longer self-evident .
The traditional family is no longer the norm .
Children want to belong 100 % , the age aspect is no longer an issue .
It is a message which policy-makers must take to heart .
Children must be treated as fully-fledged partners in the decision-making process .
It is up to the policy to provide adequate procedures and consultative bodies in this respect .
It would be of particular importance if the European Parliament were to take an initiative to offer children from the Member States , and also from third countries , a forum in the buildings of the European Parliament .
Mr President , the special session of the UN General Assembly on Children will be an excellent opportunity to take stock of the progress made since 1989 , when the declaration on the Convention on the Rights of the Child was made , and should bring the states face to face with their responsibilities in terms of abiding by their undertakings .
In this sense , I am delighted that the resolution proposes creating mechanisms designed to control governments ' compliance with these undertakings in the future .
I hope that this sitting will not be just another meeting .
Children 's rights are flouted every day throughout the world , with access being denied to medical care and education , child soldiers , sexual exploitation , crimes against children , trafficking , child labour and malnutrition .
Not to mention the particular type of discrimination to which little girls are prey in numerous countries ; my fellow Member referred earlier to genital mutilation .
Finally , children are the first to suffer in war situations and from poverty and social exclusion .
Even in our own countries within the European Union , how many children fail to receive the care to which they are entitled or an environment in which they can flourish , quite simply because their parents are poor , socially excluded or immigrants with no papers ?
It is time the international community reiterated its undertaking to put the welfare of children throughout the world at the top of the agenda .
Putting this undertaking into practice means spending money .
I believe it also means promoting women 's rights as the sine qua non to advancing children 's rights .
Europe has a very important part to play .
It needs to develop partnerships between European institutions and associations , NGOs , governments and associations in candidate countries .
We also need to involve children in certain decision-making processes at appropriate levels .
Finally , I would add that we need to be much more coherent in our ambitions .
Insisting that candidate countries , where children already face severe difficulties , reduce public spending , which includes health and education , seems to me to be incompatible with improving the rights of the child .
Mr President , the Commission too is impatient to see a specific international agenda on the child adopted for the next decade , based on specific measures agreed by our leaders at the special session of the UN General Assembly next month .
Our action plan covers four major causes for concern : health , education , protection of childhood and AIDS / HIV , all of which receive special attention under development cooperation .
The Commission feels that assistance and protection for vulnerable children should be set against the wider context of the fight against poverty and hence within the framework of the Community 's development cooperation .
Children , from this point of view , are an important target group for external aid , especially in sectoral policies such as education and health .
As far as education is concerned , we recently adopted a communication on education and training as part of the bid to reduce poverty in developing countries .
This communication recommends improving the quantity and quality of the education aid we give these countries and reiterates , as many of you have just done , the importance of a rights-based approach .
As far as children involved in armed conflicts are concerned , aid is granted under a number of programmes managed by the Commission , especially the European initiative for democracy and human rights .
In addition , the promotion of children 's rights was one of the priorities for allocating resources in 2001 and has been integrated into funding planned for 2002 to 2004 .
Finally , we are also making children a horizontal priority in terms of action under humanitarian aid .
This takes the form of specific projects , action to protect children deployed inside the Union and research conducted with a view to improving the humanitarian response of the international community .
Our actions are in keeping with the wishes which you have just expressed and cover various dimensions of the Union 's internal and external policy .
The joint debate is closed .
The vote will be taken at 5.30 this evening .
The next item is the joint debate of the following five motions for resolutions :
( B5-0204 / 2002 ) by Van den Bos , on behalf of the ELDR Group , on the situation in Angola ;
( B5-0217 / 2002 ) by Cunha and others , on behalf of the PPE-DE Group , on the situation in Angola ;
( B5-0220 / 2002 ) by Isler Béguin and others , on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group , on Angola ;
( B5-0226 / 2002 ) by Ribeiro e Castro , on behalf of the UEN Group , on Angola ;
( B5-0230 / 2002 ) by Miranda , Ainardi , Vinci and Cossutta , on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group , on the situation in Angola .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , once again Angola warrants the attention of the European Parliament .
Today , it is for happier reasons than those behind our last discussion of Angola in this House .
The entire international community , and especially the European Union , must make it clear that we expect all parties to do everything they can to ensure that this peace process is definitive and irreversible .
The Angolan government has done well to cease all military offensives and Unita 's political leaders and military command have acted properly .
All concerned have demonstrated the ability to enter into dialogue , which is to be emphasised and applauded .
It is crucial now to lay the foundations for a shared democratic life .
Military units must be disbanded and the State administration must be extended to cover the whole country .
Unita must be integrated into democratic life .
Conditions must be established for the democratic rule of law to take root , respecting the rights of the opposition , press freedom , increasing the transparency of public authorities , fighting against corruption and influence peddling , combating poverty and social exclusion and promoting the country 's development in an environment of peace .
Those who were previously dedicated to war must be reintegrated into normal civilian life and all those who were forced to flee their native areas by the violence of the civil war must be returned to their homes .
As soon as the necessary conditions are in place , elections must be scheduled .
I also wish to call on all parties to commit themselves to ensuring that the situation of the Portuguese children who disappeared months ago is quickly cleared up .
The key word , therefore , is to stimulate : to stimulate the good faith of all parties and to trust in the ability and the determination of the Angolan people .
So that , even thousands of kilometres away , they hear our voice in Luanda !
The very best of luck , Angola !
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , for far too long , life in Angola has smacked of caricature , a caricature of a country which brutal decolonisation left high and dry , of an African country torn apart by endless civil conflict between fratricidal factions and of a civilian population wracked by poverty and sorrow , scratching a living on land overflowing with oil and tramping barefoot over diamond mines .
However , having been reduced to a pathetic caricature of a country , with its people living a life of hell on earth , hope came to this long-suffering nation the day after the Unita rebel leader Jonas Savimbi was shot to death .
The new dialogue , set up immediately between the government and Unita representatives and born of a common will to restore peace , has the support of the entire international community .
This promises to be a turning point in Angola 's history .
Angola could become a model of national reconciliation , normalisation and return to the rule of law .
In a word , it could bring its people back to life .
Angola has acquired the resources and is making the efforts needed to reunite its people and remould its society .
Nature has given this country sufficient resources and wealth to deliver it from need and give it the best conditions of life on earth .
It is by counting on us and on action by the entire international community , especially multiple support from the Union , that Angola will be able to assure itself of a future .
The Union can no longer use the excuse of danger from armed forces and can now send food aid to the starving population .
There is no country more in need or more willing to follow the democratic rules and respect for human rights suggested by the European Union .
What better example than our European history to avoid the horrors of neo-colonialism in Angola and lead the country , in transparency and independence , towards sustainable economic development and the emancipation of its people .
Mr President , Commissioner , we have sufficient grounds for holding today 's debate on the situation in Angola with a considerably greater degree of optimism and hope than in previous debates .
The rapid development of the situation and the positive prospects that are currently opening up for the country and for the Angolan people do , in fact , allow for a different approach to the country 's situation , which is now fundamentally geared towards implementing measures that will bring about the consolidation of peace and reconstruction and the development and progress of a country and of a people who have suffered inordinately as a result of decades of war .
Today , furthermore , we must emphasise and applaud the enormous steps forward already taken in this short period of time since the death of Jonas Savimbi .
In particular we welcome the significance and scope of the memorandum of understanding signed on 30 March in the framework of and as a supplement to the Lusaka protocol , in addition to the amnesty proposed by the government and approved on 3 April by the National Assembly , and also the formal signing of the ceasefire , on 4 April , by the Angolan armed forces and Unita .
These are measures that , in addition to the emergency programme put forward by the Government , designed to return four million displaced people to their home regions , to reintegrate the 150 thousand demobilised soldiers and ex-combatants and to rehabilitate 100 thousand people who have been mutilated and 50 thousand children orphaned by the war , make up the basic framework for launching the country into a new era .
In order for this new era to become a reality on which there can be no going back , however , what is needed now more than ever before is the support and the commitment of all Angola 's political and social forces to ensure the mobilisation of the commitment and resources which exist and which are crucial to the new country that seems to want to come into being .
In this context and at the same time as the essential and definitive end to Unita 's military activity and its total demilitarisation , it is also important to guarantee and provide incentives for its full integration into the normal political life of Angola as an unarmed political party .
Still crucial , furthermore , is the active and positive contribution of the international community , including the European Union , specifically in terms of providing urgent humanitarian aid for the Angolan people and , more generally , in terms of the country 's reconstruction .
Where the European Union is concerned , and given the state of weakness and destruction that country is in and the enormous amount of work on reconstruction and rehabilitation that must be undertaken , as well as the importance of this country in the regional framework , special attention and support are clearly justified as is even , perhaps , the adoption of a specific aid programme for the consolidation of peace and for the reconstruction of Angola .
The way in which the situation is developing is encouraging .
The measures and instruments already adopted appear to be a step in the right direction .
The very prospect of holding elections , which have already been announced , indicates the desire to continue along the path of political normalisation , even if the path is pitted with difficulties and with hard choices to be made .
This is a time for optimism and all our action must be determined by unlimited support for turning the hope that the Angolans have today into reality .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , by awarding the Sakharov Prize recently to the Angolan archbishop , Zacarias Kamuenho , the European Parliament wished to support the struggle of all those who were working for peace in Angola , against the implacable logic of violence and war .
We could scarcely have imagined at that time that events would move on at such a pace that , today , great expectations for peace and reconciliation have appeared in that long-suffering country .
The award of that Prize certainly helped to strengthen the spirit of peace and the demands for peace to be achieved that were made to everyone following the death of Unita 's leader .
Angola is now emerging from that tragic category of countries that have come to be known as ' war-torn countries ' , and is embarking on a period of building a lasting peace .
All humanity must welcome this , particularly those who love Angola and who feel infinite pity for the indescribable suffering of its people , who , for decades , have been the victims of a bloody conflict between the two factions fighting for power .
All of those who make up the anonymous population of Angola are , quite simply , heroes and martyrs !
This extraordinary people now has the right to peace , to freedom , to democracy and to progress .
It has the right to bread and freedom ; it has the right to the future .
Only in this way will the enormous hopes raised by decolonisation and by independence finally be fulfilled .
The international community must , now more than ever , demonstrate moral and material solidarity with the Angolan people .
There are thousands and thousands of children abandoned and missing .
On this point we must also demand the truth about the young lives of two Portuguese citizens who were killed recently in a brutal ambush , an event that is shrouded in mystery .
Angola has thousands and thousands of mutilated people and millions of displaced people .
They are all hoping for a solution to their tragedy .
The return of peace and the reconstruction of Angola will have to address this situation , which is a genuine human disaster .
Peace and democracy will only truly be achieved in Angola when the monopoly of power is brought to an end and the diversity of political opinion can be expressed without hesitation or fear , when power is made truly democratic and when there is a fair and equitable distribution of resources .
We must be at once optimistic and prudent .
We must be optimistic because Angola is now heading in the right direction ; prudent and vigilant in order to ensure that there is no change of mind or backsliding .
We are surprised , in particular , that the voices of prestigious independent intellectual , religious and political figures should have been so discreet .
In fact , unless civil society comes fully to the fore in Angola , everything could become more fragile , limited and uncertain .
In any event , it is time to say : long live Angola !
Mr President , like all the Members who have just spoken , the Commission welcomes the news of the long overdue ceasefire between the Angolan armed forces and Unita .
The declaration by the Angolan Government giving Unita a bone fide role on the political stage and time to reorganise is , in our view , a step in the right direction .
We are encouraging the two sides to take measures to involve representatives of the whole of Angolan civil society , including the clergy , who have played an active role here , as Mr Lage has just pointed out , in discussions to bring about national reconciliation and sustainable peace .
As far as humanitarian aid is concerned , to which Mr Miranda referred , we are providing important humanitarian aid to displaced people inside Angola and constantly calling on the government to take additional measures to help get emergency aid to zones which , for the moment , are still accessible .
We are also encouraging the government to include the extension of humanitarian aid to the entire country in its negotiations with Unita as a matter of urgency .
We are well aware of the fact that the presence of land- and antipersonnel mines is a huge obstacle to humanitarian aid convoys , to the return of displaced people and to various recovery operations .
From this point of view , it is by improving safety on the ground that we shall be able to start using specialist organisations in mine-clearing operations , for which serious financial resources have already been earmarked .
As far as political rights are concerned , we are calling on the Angolan Government to strengthen democracy by improving human rights and freedom of the press as a sine qua non to the restoration of lasting peace .
Basic political rights , freedom of movement , constitutional reform , electoral reform , a census - all predicated on the ceasefire - will all determine whether or not free and fair elections are held in the future .
We are prepared to support the organisation of elections as soon as local conditions allow .
The strategy in the long term is currently being discussed both with the government and civil society and at Commission and Union level .
We are endeavouring , with this strategy , to forge very close , very permanent and very coherent links between aid , rehabilitation and development , which are the three problems we have to cope with .
We need to release important financial resources to help the return of displaced persons , including under micro projects , and to restore agricultural means of production and livestock structures so that social and economic life can gradually resume in the zones affected by the conflict .
We all know from experience that zones which have been prey to conflict and mined as these have are very delicate zones when it comes to development operations .
We will of course continue to provide aid for health and education and to strengthen the capabilities of the provincial administrations because , in the final analysis , they will be the ones in charge of setting up and maintaining structures , systems and the social and local fabric .
Finally , we also welcome news of the Angolan Government 's stated intention to organise an international conference on reconstructing the country .
We stand by our conviction that all sections of society must be taken into account in the reconstruction project which is to be presented and which - subject to examination of course - we are prepared to continue to support .
The joint debate is closed .
The vote will take place at 5.30 p.m.
The next item is the joint debate of the following three motions for resolutions :
( B5-0218 / 2002 ) by Fernández Martín and others , on behalf of the PPE-DE Group , on flooding in Santa Cruz in Tenerife ;
( B5-0231 / 2002 ) by Marset Campos and others , on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group , on torrential rain in Tenerife and climate change ;
( B5-0237 / 2002 ) by Medina Ortega and others , on behalf of the PSE Group , on torrential rain in Tenerife and Eastern Spain and climate change .
Mr President , on 31 March , in the space of two hours , 224 litres / m2 of rain fell on Santa Cruz de Tenerife , in the Canary Islands ; a violent downpour which caused a great deal of destruction .
Such climate changes were also seen in the Autonomous Community of Valencia , causing a great deal of destruction to districts such as la Marina and la Safor .
The local community , European neighbours , the fire brigade , medical services , the police , the regional government and the Spanish Government all lent their support .
I think that Parliament needs to be sensitive to this loss of both human life and over 400 homes , and ask the Commission to provide economic assistance , to provide European support for the Canary Islands and the Autonomous Community of Valencia , which have both suffered the devastating effects of the climate change that has been affecting the Mediterranean region recently and , on this particular occasion , the Canary Islands .
Therefore , we would ask the Commission to show solidarity and we ask the Commissioner what can be done in this regard .
For example , large infrastructures under development in Santa Cruz de Tenerife , created under the Urban programme , have been destroyed , and they need to be rebuilt .
Budgets will clearly have to be revised because everything that had been done - in this case using Community contributions - has been lost .
We have the sad task of having to pass on our sincere condolences to the families of victims who died in the floods and of all those who were injured but next , and in order to provide for all eventualities , we also need to adopt the appropriate means to demonstrate , in real figures from the budget , the solidarity of all Europeans with the suffering caused to families , goods and infrastructures in these two Spanish regions .
Mr President , I think that Mr Pomés has explained the situation : torrential rain in the Canaries and in south-eastern Spain , which has caused a great deal of damage , especially in the town of Santa Cruz de Tenerife , where eight people died and 400 homes were lost , with many cars and much private property being destroyed .
From the Community point of view , the most striking feature , naturally , is this issue of climate change , which we addressed in our joint motion for a resolution , and the need to comply with the provisions of the Kyoto Protocol , in the aim of stopping climate change from causing the damage it is causing at the moment , which could get even worse .
We need to take into account the fact that competition in local building and construction work is undertaken on a local , regional and national scale .
The relevance of this from the Community point of view is that the European Union was generous enough to make a large financial contribution to the Urban plan in the city of Santa Cruz de Tenerife itself .
The issue now , without questioning whether these funds were used properly , or whether they took due account of environmental considerations , is that we are clearly failing to see that urban development in island regions such as the Canaries , and in other outermost regions , has resulted in what we could call abusive land use , without taking other considerations into account .
Perhaps the lesson we can learn from this type of occurrence is that the European Union now has a wealth of knowledge on building in areas that are exposed to potentially catastrophic torrential rain , not only in Spain , but also in France , the UK , Germany , practically throughout the Community , in fact .
Although we must not forget that this issue fundamentally falls within national competence , this is an area in which the European Union could contribute to the well-being of all of its citizens by making use of these experiences and in seeing how its assistance to projects such as the Urban projects can be more effectively implemented .
For this reason , in dealing with , for example , the Urban plan for a specific population , we should not confine ourselves to what might be called purely ornamental external characteristics , but should also look at the impact that this type of plan would have on the situation as a whole .
In concrete terms , the town of Santa Cruz de Tenerife is built on steep riverbanks that have been blocked off , yet construction has continued due to demographic pressure and the need to use the land .
It would probably have been useful , in studies carried out prior to the Urban plan being set in motion , for this other type of consequence to have been taken into account .
It is always , of course , much easier to talk with the benefit of hindsight and we cannot undo what has been done , but given that the Urban plan is still in force and that the European Union can have learnt from this situation , I would ask the services of the Commission to take this opportunity to consider how community aid could have prevented this kind of catastrophe and how this could be used as an example for other kinds of project in the future .
Mr President , firstly I would like to express my sympathy to those who were affected .
Anyone who has seen the effects of flood damage , as we have in many regions throughout the European Union , will know how devastating it can be , not only to infrastructure but to life and indeed to roads and buildings , as the previous speaker mentioned .
But we must also look at the further-reaching effects .
People say that floods happen and they cannot be controlled .
I want to look further , at the whole situation of climate change , which cannot be overlooked , either in the short or the long term .
We must increase our efforts , not only to achieve agreement , but to encourage those who do not and are not prepared to cooperate with the European Union .
We saw the effects after Kyoto , with certain large nations deciding not to support the position taken by the European Union .
I would urge many of these major nations to support what the European Union is trying to achieve regarding climate change , to improve the situation .
We must also make clear that we are prepared to condemn those large nations that believe they can do whatever they want to do , without any thought to the effects on others .
It is not only the United States - which is the prime mover in this - there are other countries such as Australia , and countries in Eastern Europe , where this problem needs to be tackled .
Their position is deplorable .
We must ask the question how long can we continue to allow people to disturb the rainforests and destroy the balance that has existed for so long .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I would firstly like to remind you that the outermost regions of the EU are located in areas where the inhabitants live in the shadow of cyclones from the Caribbean and violent storms coming in from the oceans , and for this reason we should not be surprised that some natural disasters will take place in these areas from time to time , such as the one which occurred recently in Tenerife in the Canary Islands , where , fortunately , some of us who are Members of Parliament happen to live .
Unfortunately , on 31 March , Santa Cruz de Tenerife , one of the capitals of the Canary Islands , which is an outermost region of the European Union and an Objective 1 region , some of whose works are being carried out under the Urban initiative - as has just been pointed out - suffered a natural disaster on a huge scale .
In only two hours , heavy rainfall of more than 200 litres / m2 flooded the capital .
Thousands of citizens , hundreds of homes and business premises , thousands of vehicles and a large proportion of public infrastructure were affected by the devastating consequences of this storm .
The saddest fact , however , is that eight people died as a direct result .
In addition to this tragic human loss there was a huge amount of material loss , estimated at more than EUR 100 million .
For this reason , a public campaign was launched to repair the damage caused and to make Santa Cruz de Tenerife a town fit for habitation once more .
Fortunately , Santa Cruz is recovering , thanks to solidarity and to collective efforts , and trusts in the official support of the public authorities of the Canary Islands .
However , we think that the Commission should adopt a series of measures in cooperation with the aforementioned authorities to make an exceptional contribution to alleviate the damage caused and , in this way , the citizens of the Canary Islands can feel that European institutions are close to them at this time of need .
This also applies to similar occurrences that have happened in the Autonomous Community of Valencia .
Mr President , like you , the Commission was shocked at the damage caused by the torrential rain which hit the Canary Islands and Alicante on 31 March ; we sympathise with the families bereaved by the disaster and deeply regret the damage caused .
I can confirm , on behalf of the Commission , that we intend to apply every means available under regional policy , agricultural policy and rural development policy in order to help reconstruct the areas damaged and restore production .
As far as regional policy between 2000 and 2006 is concerned , the damaged areas in both the Canaries and the region of Alicante are eligible for Objective 1 aid under the Structural Funds and the Commission and , as you said , the Spanish authorities will consider whether resources available under ERDF programmes can be reallocated in order to reconstruct infrastructure damaged by the torrential rain within the ERDF monitoring committees .
As regards rural development policy , which is cofinanced under the EAGGF-Guidance in the Objective 1 region , the integrated operational programme for the Canary Islands on preserving the countryside and the agricultural economy includes action to prevent and correct soil erosion and work to prevent possible damage and restore and regenerate ecosystems .
The Community funds this measure to the tune of over EUR 20 million and , again under rural development policy for the community of Valencia , the integrated operational programme includes a forestry measure which makes provision for reforestation following natural disasters and preventive instruments .
The Community provides over EUR 13 million for this and , as with the ERDF , it is up to the Spanish authorities to restructure their priorities within their programming budget as and where necessary in order to deal with the consequences of this disaster .
On the aspect of the subject addressed by Mr Medina Ortega , these flash floods are , unfortunately , quite a frequent phenomenon in the Mediterranean and in coastal regions , which is why we and the Member States have developed several specific projects on the subject , the results of which will allow us to decide if guidelines on reducing these floods need to be introduced under Community action programmes .
Generally speaking , and with the scientific information currently available , no connection can be established between this sort of inclement weather and climate change .
However , we consider that climate change is the most serious ecological threat we have to face and , as such , the agreements brokered in Bonn and Marrakech are successful additions to the multilateral approach to the fight against climate change .
As one speaker has just reminded us , this progress has given the Union and third countries the technical parameters needed in order to ratify the Kyoto Protocol . As you know , the Council of Ministers of the Union took the decision to ratify the protocol at the beginning of March and we shall all do our best to ensure that the ratification acts are filed by 1 June , i.e. before the world summit on sustainable development , as a symbol of the leadership which the Union has demonstrated here and in the run-up to the Johannesburg summit .
The joint debate is closed .
( The sitting was suspended until 5.30 p.m. pending the vote )
. I have previously stated in this House how vital the Channel Tunnel link is to industry in Scotland and to the viability of Eurocentral at Motherwell as the northernmost end of a trans-European network .
We must get the tunnel open again as a matter of urgency .
This resolution could be even stronger but I give it my hearty backing .
I did not want to say anything on this point , but rather on the agenda , in order to address an appeal to the bureau and to the Conference of Presidents concerning the use we make of our sittings .
On Tuesday , Mr President , Question Time was omitted because we had such a full agenda , which was actually contrary to the Treaties and to the Rules of Procedure .
Yesterday , Wednesday , Questions to the Council were cut by 35 minutes because the agenda was so full up .
We have had a less tight agenda today and are finishing as early as 5.36 p.m.
I wish to ask that the sittings be organised better .
We are no less numerous today than at the earlier part-sessions , when Thursday 's sitting went on until 6.30 p.m. , or fewer in number than we used to be on Fridays - or maybe perhaps we are -- and there are no fewer of us here today than there will be tomorrow , which is Friday .
So I ask for better use to be made of Thursday afternoon