Resumption of the session
I declare resumed the session of the European Parliament adjourned on Friday , 20 February 1998 .
Approval of the Minutes
The Minutes of Friday , 20 February 1998 have been distributed .
Are there any comments ?
Mr President , I would like to go back to the discussion on crime in Brussels which we kept having in the course of the last part-session .
Assurances were given by the Presidency that appropriate talks would take place with the various offices in Brussels that might actually be able to do something about this .
We would be grateful if the House could be informed as to what sort of talks have taken place and what results these have produced .
Last week two more Members of Parliament , namely Mrs Pack and Mr Schiedermeier , were attacked .
I know about these two attacks but perhaps it has also happened to many more people .
It would not be an understatement to say today that this is an intolerable situation . We have long since exceeded the level of what is acceptable .
I would be very grateful if this House could receive more information from the Presidency as to what is actually happening in these cases and what we can do to really increase safety in Brussels .
I would like to point out to all the Members that there is an oral motion available for signature and would ask them to sign it so that something can be actively done to combat this criminal behaviour in Brussels .
Thank you very much .
As you will appreciate , that matter does not relate to the Minutes , nor is it a suitable subject for debate here and now .
I will be very happy to inform you in writing of the steps we are already taking with the Belgian authorities to guarantee security , as far as possible , in the vicinity of the European Parliament buildings , since Brussels is a very big place .
Mr President , I refer to Friday 's Minutes , where you wrote in a letter to me : ' rest assured that I share your concern and shall do my utmost with the Belgian authorities to find a satisfactory solution where the safety of the Members and staff of the European Parliament is concerned . ' I would like to express my thanks for these kind words .
I would also like to state that I have completed a survey of my own .
A colleague of mine was in over 300 offices , in more than half the offices of Members of the European Parliament .
She told me that exactly one third of the offices had given accounts of criminal incidents in Brussels .
I would also like to inform you that the perpetrators of the attack against my assistant were apprehended and appeared in a line-up this week .
I therefore thank you for your efforts in this area !
Thank you very much , Mr Rübig .
I would refer you to the answer I have just given Mr Habsburg-Lothringen .
( The Minutes were approved )
Mr President , unfortunately , at the opening of almost every Parliament sitting , you are called upon to express the Chamber 's grief over the victims of despicable terrorist attacks .
Only a few days ago , a Catholic and a Protestant fell victim to the fanaticism that uses the language of arms instead of ideas .
Recently , in a declaration made by Prime Minister Lionel Jospin , the French government declared its intention not to grant the extradition , requested by Italy under the Schengen agreements , of 200 Italian terrorist refugees in France after the lead wars that caused so much grief for Italy .
This refusal can be interpreted as indirect encouragement of the impunity and immunity of the terrorists of yesterday , today and tomorrow .
At the moment , France also risks coming within the terrorists ' sight ...
( The President cut off the speaker )
Mr Tatarella , the European Parliament is not competent to deal with questions of extradition law between Member States .
Furthermore , you have exceeded the time of one minute allowed for these matters .
Mr President , last Friday there was a disastrous train crash in Finland in which ten people died and almost forty were injured .
On behalf of the Finnish delegation from the Group of the European People 's Party I would respectfully ask that you , Mr President , on behalf of Parliament , might express a few words of sympathy and consolation .
It will be done .
Resignation of a Vice-President
Ladies and gentlemen , I must tell you that Mr Capucho has written to inform me that he wishes to resign from his position as Vice-President of Parliament , with effect from 10 March 1998 .
I would like to thank Mr Capucho for his work throughout his vice-presidency .
The deadline for tabling candidacies for the vacant post of Vice-President is 6.00 p.m. today .
The election will be held on Wednesday , at 11.30 a.m.
Order of business
The report ( A4-0073 / 98 ) by Mr Kreissl-Dörfler , on behalf of the Committee on External Economic Relations , on negotiations in the framework of the OECD on a multilateral agreement on investments ( MAI ) , should be taken at 4.00 p.m. so that the Commissioner concerned can take part .
The PSE Group and the PPE Group support this proposal .
( Parliament approved the proposal )
The PPE Group requests that the debate on the report ( A4-65 / 98 ) by Mr Cornelissen , on behalf of the Committee on Transport and Tourism , on road safety in the European Union , which was originally scheduled for Wednesday , should be reinstated on the agenda for Tuesday , before the other three reports from the Committee on Transport by Mr Watts , Mr Novo Belenguer and Mr Bazin respectively , so that the Commissioner responsible can take part .
( Parliament approved the request )
Wednesday :
I would remind you that Mr Cornelissen 's report has been added to the agenda for Tuesday .
Thursday : no changes .
Friday :
The ARE Group has requested that Mr Cunha 's report , on behalf of the Committee on Fisheries , on the Commission 's annual report to the Council and the European Parliament on the results of the multiannual guidance programmes for the fishing fleets at the end of 1996 , be taken off the agenda .
Mr President , I rise to support this request , not just because the issue is important but because this Parliament is in danger of making a fool of itself by saying that Friday votes are not important .
We have a report from my good friend Mr Cunha which I think makes some fundamental mistakes , and in particular challenges the legal base of the common fisheries policy in an own-initiative report .
There is no other mechanism for challenging this and I believe it has to be dealt with by Parliament as a whole .
I would therefore move that we postpone this report until we can be sure of a full House , which , as you know , is not the case on a Friday .
I note that the Commissioner for fisheries is here .
I hope she will take note of this , because it is an important point .
If this Parliament were to give the impression that it does not care about the Treaty basis of the common fisheries policy , that would be a terrible signal to send out to the industry and to the Commission .
I beg to move .
Mr President , we have discussed this report sufficiently within the Committee on Fisheries ; we are convinced that Parliament should give its opinion now , and so we fail to understand the reasons for a postponement .
Mr President , I would like to rise in support of Mr Macartney .
All too often this Parliament and those who arrange its agenda seem to put fisheries debates on a Friday .
It is time that was ended .
This is a very important report and fisheries are extremely important to the regions of this Community .
I would agree with and support Mr Macartney on this issue .
I put the ARE Group 's request to the vote .
( Parliament rejected the proposal )
Mr President , I asked for the floor earlier to raise two issues .
With regard to the statement on Kosovo on our agenda for Wednesday , the contact group is meeting this evening to discuss the situation .
I wonder therefore if we could have an extension of the deadline for the submission of resolutions until midday tomorrow , which would allow us to take into account the outcome of that meeting .
That is my first request on behalf of my group .
Secondly my group has informed you that we would like to vote in the plenary on removing from the agenda the oral question on the Mediterranean programme which was scheduled for Friday .
I gave notice of this in the Conference of Presidents last week .
As I said in the Conference of Presidents , the Budgetary Control Committee of this House is dealing with exactly the issues raised in this oral question .
It seems entirely incongruous that certain groups are raising it in exactly the same way on the floor of this House before the Committee has completed its deliberations .
My group would like it to be removed from the agenda for this week .
If the plenary decides not to support that view - although I very much hope it will - it is my group 's view that this is a very important and sensitive political issue and I would like to ask that the gentlemen 's agreement on taking such issues on a Friday morning should be adhered to and the vote be held at a later date .
Thank you , Mrs Green .
On your first point , the services say that it is perfectly possible to hold over the deadline for resolutions until noon tomorrow .
Mr President , as Mrs Green said , the matter is still pending and has not been finalized by the Committee on Budgetary Control yet .
We therefore think it is quite inappropriate that it should be raised as an oral question in the meantime .
We know that during the most recent sitting there was a disagreement between Mrs Fabra Vallés and the Commissioner , who , we should add , gave a rather crude reply , but that should be no reason to devote a rushed debate to it here on Friday morning .
We request that the matter be completed by the Committee on Budgetary Control , and not hastily on a Friday morning amongst other things which have nothing to do with the core of the issue .
Mr President , I fully agree that this is an important matter .
But it is also important for Parliament to come to some decision about the way we are being blamed .
When the Commissioner appeared before the Committee on Budgetary Control , he blamed Parliament for blocking the MED programmes .
The following day , on the 26 , a DirectorGeneral spoke at a MED-MEDA conference and in front of twelve ambassadors from the Mediterranean zone he said that the European Parliament was responsible for the fact that the MEDA programmes were blocked .
In the evening of that same day , in Madrid , the Turkish Ambassador took me to task , as a Member of the European Parliament , because he thought we were responsible for having blocked the MED programmes .
All we are trying to do with this question is make it quite clear that Parliament is not responsible , and that is why I think it is urgent .
The responsibility lies with the Commissioner , who has been blocking the programmes since 17 July .
So we cannot accept that we are responsible for blocking the MED programmes . The reputation of this House is at stake .
Mr President , I hope Mr Fabra Vallés made that case to the Turkish Ambassador and others who raised the issue with him .
We can deal with this issue in the Committee on Budgetary Control .
There is no reason why that cannot be dealt with there .
It is as much a ...
( The President cut off the speaker )
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , if the item stays on the agenda we agree that we should not vote on Friday , but at a later date .
I would like to add that I do not really understand why this cannot be discussed in a democratic Parliament , even though it is a sensitive issue .
A democratic Parliament is in essence a place where difficult and sensitive matters can be discussed .
We submitted an oral question and we wish to hold a debate .
We are calling on Parliament to give us this opportunity , but we are prepared to vote on it at a later date .
I put the request from the PSE and GUE / NGL Groups to the vote .
( Parliament approved the request )
Women 's rights
The next item is the joint debate on the following statement and oral question :
statement by the Commission on International Women 's Day and the violation of women 's rights ; -oral question ( B4-0177 / 98 - O-0044 / 98 / rev. ) by Mrs van Dijk , on behalf of the Committee on Women 's Rights , to the Commission , on International Women 's Day - 8 March 1998 : combating violations of women 's rights .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , as Mr van Dijk rightly recalled , yesterday was International Women 's Day .
The Commission fully shares the analysis made and the statement that women 's rights form an integral , inalienable and essential part of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights .
Women 's rights are human rights and I believe that , based on this statement , the Commission should follow the Beijing Conference with a whole series of initiatives I would like to mention .
Mr van Dijk will allow me to begin this brief speech by thanking the European Parliament for the idea , expressed in its resolution passed on 23 October , to dedicate 8 March to the women of Kabul , a symbol of the violations and discrimination that are still present in many parts of the world .
I would like to point out that this is a very special case , particularly because the women of Kabul have had great difficulties , at least in the urban areas , and certainly that of Kabul , which has been at war for 20 years and is therefore in a very difficult situation , particularly for the civilian population and for women and children , obtaining a series of rights , including freedom of the veil , as long ago as 1960 , and university entrance , and played a more active part in society , as teachers , doctors , nurses , midwives , perhaps because the male population has been primarily engaged in war for 20 years .
Whatever the reasons , women in Kabul and in other urban areas played the more active part .
Unexpectedly , these rights have been lost and denied in 24 hours , and not on account of religion as far as I know .
I would like to point out that religion has nothing to do with this situation because it was actually a question of making the obsessions of one person into law .
However , as the Moslems taking part in this campaign did not fail to point out , neither religion nor Islam , nor the Pushtu traditions of these women was in dispute .
One positive factor , I believe , is that , starting from an idea put forward by the European Parliament , supported by the Commission , and particularly by the Office for Humanitarian Aid , women of all religions , cultures and leanings have come out throughout Europe , but also in Sarajevo , in the African countries , in the USA and in Japan , to say " no ' to this step backward we have just witnessed .
I think we should be pleased that , for once , they are in favour of an idea put forward by Europe and the European Parliament , contrary to the statements we usually here , when public opinion protests against the initiatives taken by a European political institution , whether it be the Commission , the Council or the Parliament .
We are also too accustomed to seeing our citizens come out against the European initiatives and , for once , I think it should be pointed out that citizens , and women in particular , have come out to declare themselves in favour of an idea first put forward by the European Parliament .
With regard to your question , I think several points should be made : it should be stated very clearly that violation may take various forms , that exclusion from political participation , from education and from employment are violations of human rights , that physical violence and harmful and cruel practices are a violation of human rights because they are detrimental to the most fundamental human rights , and to reaffirm that respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms is one of the main objectives of the Commission 's policy , both in internal policies and in the policies applied to third countries , starting with Community cooperation in development .
A series of initiatives has been taken and has been supported by the Commission within the scope of the action platform stemming from the Beijing Conference and from the Council Resolution of 20 December 1995 .
To fulfil this commitment , the Commission is exercising its political influence where it may be a means of ensuring respect for women 's rights , it can and does invoke the human rights ' clauses included in its cooperation agreements , subjecting official cooperation to respect for fundamental women 's rights , it is endeavouring to introduce the dimension of equality into its policies , particularly in its development activities , with regard to strategies , programmes and projects , adopting laws such as the draft Council Regulation on the integration of the man / woman theme , as well as appropriate administrative procedures .
The Commission is also taking positive action , for example by helping the partner countries prepare to implement their national plans stemming from the Beijing Conference through the UNIFEM in the Mediterranean countries , and by preparing an observatory on equal opportunities policy for Africa , which should be based on Ethiopia .
The Commission is contributing towards improving the situation of women by supporting non-governmental organizations and citizens ' groups promoting human rights , working for full participation in political , economic and social development in their countries , and is seeking to foster an improvement in the condition of women in various sectors , incorporating this policy into the projects of the ACP countries .
The Commission is also financing micro-credits for women , awareness campaigns on the role of and relations between men and women , and the Beijing Conference action platform .
I think it would be useful to draw up a detailed written list of the programs , their financing and their state of implementation . There are too many to list them all in detail here , but I believe in particular that this equal opportunities policy should be a transverse policy , present in all Union policies , both internal and external .
The policy on women is not separate , it is not completely isolated , but , according to the Commission , it should be the inspiration of all its own policies .
I would also like to recall that the Commission will note the conclusions of the Committee meeting at the United Nations to monitor post-Beijing actions , which still has one week 's work .
The Commission therefore reserves the right to take the idea from the conclusions reached by this Consultative Committee and be able to implement any suggestions and specific measures deriving from it .
Mr President , Mrs Bonino , thank you for the campaign you initiated on behalf of the women of Kabul .
It was in Copenhagen in 1911 that the first International Women 's Day was proclaimed by the International Conference of Socialist Women , as a day of action for the rights of women .
There had already been some initial success : women in Scandinavia had won the right to vote , although other countries had still to wait for this .
We broke into a male preserve - politics .
Step by step , we women fought for access to university education and parliamentary representation .
At management level , however , in business , the media and leading social positions , we have remained largely on the periphery .
Despite four world conferences on women 's rights , the list of inequalities and discrimination against women is a long one .
Every year on 8 March , we train the world 's spotlight on it .
This year , International Women 's Day focused on the flagrant violations of women 's rights by fundamentalist regimes and movements , and thousands of events sought to highlight these violations .
Afghanistan and Algeria in particular were cited .
We debated this in the last part-session , adopted a resolution and your campaign is now off the ground .
However , offences against women are being recorded everywhere .
As socialists , we must speak out against events such as this , for instance the fact that yesterday in Istanbul women who demonstrated were deprived of their right to speak and dispersed with tear gas .
In our compromise resolution , we have summarized the most urgent demands for women , and I shall not grow tired of calling for women 's rights to be seen as an indivisible , integral part of universal human rights , which means there are obligations in this respect for the EU and our Member States .
The platform for action negotiated in Beijing now needs to be implemented , and I should like to say on behalf of my group that we will insist that a woman 's right of self-determination in relation to her body is at the top of the agenda .
We must demand the sexual self-determination of women and their right to decide when and how many children they will have .
That is the unique right of every woman .
Genital mutilation is one of the most abhorrent violations of this right of self-determination , and we must do everything to ensure that , firstly , this does not occur in the European Union and that , secondly , this inhuman practice is brought to an end as far as possible globally .
We sometimes appear to have made greater progress in developing women 's rights in Europe than other regions have .
We have had to fight hard for all these advances , and there is still a lot to be done .
Where , for instance , have we ensured in the Union that we are paid the same for identical and equal work ?
Nowhere in Europe !
And where in Europe has male violence towards women been eradicated ?
Nowhere !
Male violence towards women is a phenomenon which , according to Union-wide independent studies , will befall every third or fourth woman once in her life .
That is why I most urgently appeal again to the Commission and the Council and call upon them to act .
1999 needs to be declared European Year against Violence towards Women , and it must , as Mrs Bonino has explained , be launched as a Union-wide campaign of zero tolerance towards violence within the Union .
We will need to have requested this ruling in the Council of Ministers and have implemented it by 30 June , or else the deadline will have passed .
Budgetary or other reasons should not be allowed to get in the way where the well-being of our women and children are concerned .
The European Parliament has sided with the oppressed .
We should not remain silent .
As long as equality between men and women is not a universal reality , democracy will not really be in force .
Mr President , every year we celebrate Women 's Day and every year we come to the same sad conclusion that equality , if it exists and where it exists , concerns a minority of women in the world .
For the majority of women even the most basic human rights are an unattainable goal , for the simple reason that they were born women .
This year we decided to dedicate Women 's Day to those women who are oppressed by religious fundamentalism .
It is therefore not by chance that we should be paying particular attention to the unprecedented oppression that is taking place in Afghanistan : the women held by the Taliban are in the worst position of all .
For this reason , the initiative of the Commission is worthy of our congratulations .
Mrs Bonino also deserves our congratulations for the very fine poster she produced for the occasion .
We spoke at length about these women during the previous part-session .
Bearing in mind their hardship and the fact that we must never cease in our efforts to help them , we must not forget that a great deal still needs to be done for the women who live in more developed societies , where religious fanaticism , imported or not , is nevertheless very real .
In addition to this fanaticism , the exploitation of women by international crime networks and the violation of basic human rights against women who , for a variety of reasons , are more vulnerable and unprotected than others , are events which still occur throughout the world , and we must not forget , in my opinion , those regions of our planet where women are not allowed to go on living , simply in order to solve the problem of overpopulation .
There are very many women for us to think about today .
We must think about the women who have become refugees of the recent wars .
We must think about the women who are threatened by exclusion , by unemployment and by poverty , and all those women who are unfortunate enough to be treated as unequal .
We must continue to demand again and again , perhaps monotonously , what is self-evident to all , that is , basic human rights , which are women 's rights too .
Mr President , women 's rights are human rights , and therefore universal rights , and all women derive rights from these , whether they live on European Union territory or not , and whether they are Member State nationals or not .
The international community , including the European Union , has made moving statements about this .
But what can and must we , the European Union , the Commission , the Council and the Member States do to actually implement these paper tigers , these paper rights , these statements of principles ?
My group , the Liberal group , is presently focusing its attention on nonEuropean Union nationals .
Firstly , as regards non-European women living in the European Union , I think it is essential that the Commission and the Member States pursue a much more active and much more accessible education and information policy on what their rights are .
These non-European women who live within the European Union must be actively supported in putting their rights into practice .
This means a ban on sexual mutilation in Europe and the enforcement of this ban , but it also means that they should receive the same treatment Member State women are entitled to , and that these rights should be asserted in all areas .
Secondly , in terms of the many millions of women outside the European Union whose human rights are being violated , Mrs Bonino , what would the Commission do without you ?
I need say no more , we totally support your initiative . The women of Kabul are a metaphor for all countries in which human rights are violated .
International political pressure is needed , in particular towards the fundamentalist regimes , and , Mrs van Dijk , it is not just to do with clothes , that is too narrow a view , nor is it to do with the Koran , it is to do with the interpretation of the Koran .
The Commission , as Mrs Bonino pointed out , must use its powers much more consistently .
You would like to do so , but we would like the entire Commission to be permanently behind it .
This means consciously and critically putting to the test the human rights clause in the association agreements , and to draw the necessary conclusions from this .
The same goes for development cooperation .
Mrs Bonino would support this , but I would like the entire Commission to do the same .
I think Mrs Bonino could use a great deal of support from Parliament to turn fine words into practice , so that human rights are actively asserted , both in association agreements and in development cooperation , otherwise we will just keep on talking and no one will take the slightest notice of what we are saying .
Mr President , Mrs Bonino , I am very pleased that you are here today because we have a lot to thank you for . Your work helped to ensure that all of us in the European institutions had a very positive , very active attitude towards the celebrations on 8 March , and that the public all realized that the denial of rights to women in Afghanistan is a denial of rights to all the women of the world .
Anyway , I wanted to say that here in the European institutions we are still experiencing difficulties and this year , once again , we are seeing that the problems suffered by women in matters relating to work still amount to a lack of rights . Furthermore , domestic violence continues to be a blot on our society , which also merits some self-criticism .
Since I have barely a minute 's speaking time , I especially wanted to say to you , to the Committee on Women 's Rights and to all the Members of the European Parliament , both male and female , that we should work to make 1999 the year against violence against women .
Because if , by commemorating a single day , the European institutions have made society come to that realization and support us in our defence of women 's rights , then I think there will also be a lot of public support if we manage to designate 1999 as the year against violence against women .
Since we need to keep on fighting , that is an appropriate objective .
Mr President , first of all I would like to say how pleased I am that after all these years Women 's Day has taken on a real importance ; this is an important step forward from some time ago .
Remember the half smiles , the scepticism , the derision with which it was greeted back then .
Have those working women won at last who , on a certain March 8 , marked in history with their sweat and blood the day to day fight of women ?
Unfortunately , despite obvious advances and considerable efforts , we note the inadequacy of the results so far which , in come cases , are the exact opposite of what we were hoping for .
Sadly , there is a long and familiar list of the ill-treatment to which women are subjected nowadays .
The European Union must continue to fight on a daily basis for the respect of the equality of rights , even within its own territory . This is why my group strongly supports the compromise resolution which has been presented today .
I think we ought to use Women 's Day to place the emphasis on the fight of some women who are particularly in need of our active support .
Here I am referring especially to the women in Afghanistan . In this respect , I would like to pay tribute to and thank you for the remarkable work which you , Commissioner , are leading on behalf of the women of this country to restore their fundamental rights .
I would also include Algerian women and their exemplary fight , and I do not want to forget the women of Kosovo , who came out into the streets yesterday to protest against the repression which they are suffering at present .
In addition , allow me this display of chauvinism in paying tribute to the Corsican women who rose up with courage and dignity against the terrorism which is still rife in that region .
There too , the women expressed the need for enlightenment , hope and freedom , which are as universal as human rights which , as everyone knows also encompass women 's rights .
I have received six motions for a resolution pursuant to Rule 40 ( 5 ) of the Rules of Procedure .
Madam President , women are the victims of many forms of violence , either invisible and silent , through pressures , threats or dependence , or glaring forms of violation , aggression and total oppression .
There is an ever-present terror experienced by women when they witness violence inflicted on themselves , on their children and on the elderly , so often without even knowing why !
Their lives , and the lives of their loved ones , are constantly threatened , although they have never done anything to deserve it , and can do nothing to prevent it .
We must do all in our power to condemn this situation , and particularly what is happening to the women of Algeria , Afghanistan , and Timor , so distant and yet so close to our hearts .
We must be the voice of the women who have been denied the right to have a voice .
I asked Commissioner Emma Bonino to lend me the cloak that the Afghan women are forced to wear as they live their daily lives , so that everybody here may see with own eyes the nature of the prison in which women are forced to confine themselves .
Putting on this garment made more of an impact on me than any number of speeches .
I felt like a prisoner , isolated although surrounded by people , looking out onto the world through bars , able to see no further than my own feet , with barely enough air to breath , unable to move my arms far enough to write the words that I am reading to you , unable even to make the woman 's natural gesture of picking up a child in her arms
We must cry aloud : free these women from this prison , from this torture , from this violence !
Our cry of alarm , our solidarity , our friendship must reach these women .
They must know that they are not alone .
They have been deprived of everything : the right to study and to teach , the right to health care , the right to a free and responsible job , the right to respect as individuals , the right to live freely and in peace , even the right to see and breathe freely .
No human being can remain silent in the presence of this inconceivable violence .
We certainly will not , and we will do all in our power to designate 1999 the year against violence towards women .
Madam President , human rights are the foundation of each national constitution and a major benefit for every man and woman .
Yet at the end of the 20th century , the distance between professed intention and reality is still great , despite all the successes achieved .
International Women 's Day , which yesterday saw not only women take to the streets , but also a substantial number of men , including myself , has focused attention on Islamic fundamentalism .
The joint campaign launched by the European Parliament and the Commission ' A flower for the women in Kabul ' condemns the reign of terror in Afghanistan , in which women - as we saw today - are robbed of their personal dignity and status .
They must wear veils .
Their view is limited by a guard of fabric , as if they were looking through a cage .
They have become second-class citizens who are no longer able to express themselves publicly , and Afghanistan was once a progressive country !
They are no longer allowed to practise their previous activities as doctors , teachers , members of parliament .
The Islamic regime has degraded women to second-class citizens .
You , Madam Commissioner , have experienced it first hand .
Our respect and all our sympathy goes out to you .
We will do our utmost to mobilize international publicity against the Taliban regime and conduct a sustained campaign .
Nor let us not forget today that the idea of equality has still to be realized in Europe .
A start has been made through the directive regulating the burden of proof in questions of discrimination , the new equality article in the Amsterdam Treaty and the Marshall judgement supporting women in promotion .
The advancement of self-assured women is unstoppable .
The support for women at the Luxembourg summit is a good basis for further integration in professional life , yet picking up a career after child-caring is still a vital problem .
Careers at management level are the exception , and we are miles away from equal payment for equal work .
Hence , 8 May is an incentive to implement the concept of main-streaming in all areas of society .
If I had one wish , it would be that in May the flowers for the women in Kabul blossom in full view throughout the world , in both the western and the eastern hemispheres !
Madam President , yesterday thousands of women and several hundred men , so I believe , were out in Sweden 's towns and cities supporting the campaign ' A flower for the women of Kabul ' in various different ways .
On the same day there were almost as many who lit candles for women who had died during the year either from injuries caused by or directly at the hands of men who claimed to be the people who loved them most in the world .
I therefore agree with Mrs Gröner and others who have said that we would convince both the women and the men in the EU that we must also carry out a campaign against violence against women in the European Union .
Madam President , I would also like to thank Mrs Bonino wholeheartedly for her work on behalf of the women in Kabul .
Not only has she finally put the spotlight on the women in Afghanistan , but she has given International Women 's Day a new impetus , and made the women 's movement stronger than before .
You said yourself , Madam Commissioner , that Afghanistan was a symbol of the suppression of women throughout the world .
So I presume you will not mind us expressing our particular sympathy towards the thousands of women in Algeria who for years have been the victims of barbaric rapes and massacres by the fundamentalist terror groups of the GIA .
These are religious fanatics , not ordinary Muslims , who , through the massacre of more than 80 000 people , including many women , children , and elderly people , want to do away with peace and democracy in Algeria once and for all .
Violence is indeed the instrument of fanatics , of terrorists , but let us not forget that this violence is thriving in a country where democracy has been suppressed for a long time and which suffers from extremely high unemployment and great poverty . It is a country where a large section of the population is not accorded any human rights , and I am referring here in particular to women , whose rights have been suppressed for years because , since 1984 , Algeria has one of the most backward systems of family law .
It degrades women , treating them like creatures without rights , wholly governed by their men and guardians and , for that matter , it contravenes international conventions which Algeria has signed , but does not implement .
There is a very broad movement of women 's organizations in Algeria which is pursuing a non-violent battle for peace , democracy , human rights - and women 's rights - and which is therefore opposing this family law , with exceptional courage .
I hope we can count on you , too , Madam Commissioner , in this battle for Algeria , for Algerian women , for perseverance .
Barbaric violence can only be fought when democracy is supported .
But a democracy cannot exist without respect for human and women 's rights .
I think we should give our full support to this women 's movement in Algeria .
Madam President , Madam Commissioner , Parliament has designated this Women 's Day , on which particular attention is drawn to the situation of Afghan women .
We express our solidarity towards the victims of this particularly extreme manifestation of discrimination which lends full weight to the designation of this day and to the struggle that gives it meaning .
However , although nothing must be allowed to detract from this solidarity , it cannot overshadow the need to be fully aware that Women 's Day originated as a result of the working hours of female textile workers in New York and that , closer to home , other particular gestures of solidarity are essential , as in Portugal , where abortion is made a factor of the party political struggle , to the detriment of the rights of women in defence of the perpetuation of a situation that is unacceptable in legal , health and moral terms , with the hypocritical justification of moral principles that are declared to be unassailable .
The defence of women 's rights is a struggle to be waged by all , men and women , and in all areas .
Madam President , 50 years since the Universal Declaration of Human Rights , too often women 's rights have still not been affirmed , are still not being applied and are still being violated .
More than three years since the approval of the Beijing action platform , should we be satisfied with the actions taken by the EU and its Member States with regard to European women and women throughout the world ?
Unfortunately , no !
It is not the fault of this Parliament , nor that of the Commission , that the fourth action programme which , while including the Beijing guidelines , does not have a budget that is able to finance the many , necessary initiatives planned by the women 's associations in our countries , often in vain .
In many countries , either the national action plans intended to make the Beijing platform into a national reality have not even been presented or the action has not followed the presentation .
The years go by and women continue to suffer various forms of violence , ranging from physical to sexual , including harassment at the place of work .
Violent practices connected with cultural and patriarchal traditions continue .
Discrimination continues over access to education , training and the world of employment , careers , access to justice , health services and playing a part in decisions .
It could be said that some of this discrimination concerns women in developed countries and some concerns those in developing countries , but that is not the case , because it all concerns all women on the whole planet , even if we should remember that those most affected are women from poor countries , countries with violent dictatorships and countries at war .
To this depressing view we should add phenomena we are already aware of , but which have become of enormous numerical and social significance , such as trading in women for sexual exploitation , and the greatest problem of all , unemployment .
There has been no shortage of initiatives and it is only fair to recall , as others have already done , the great undertaking made by Commissioner Emma Bonino , that has been made by the European Parliament and by national and international organizations , by women 's associations in many countries , not only in the EU , in favour of Afghan women , as well as Commissioner Gradin 's active undertaking against the trade in women for sexual exploitation , of which the victims are women in the southern hemisphere , but also European women and those from countries once oppressed by the Soviet Union .
Today , however , on the eve of the 80th anniversary of 8 March , we should tell ourselves , the Commission and the Council , that we need to do more to affirm and establish the principle that women 's rights are the rights of human beings and should be interpreted , recognized and , at all costs , established as such .
Madam President , during the course of this century important advances have been made for women 's rights , but there still remains a great deal to be done as regards gaining complete and total equality and recognition of their place in our societies .
So , in many countries within the Union , they must fight against discrimination at work , disparity of salaries and tackle unemployment and the uncertainty of work , which affects them in particular .
They must also resist regular attempts to challenge the fundamental experience of controlling fertility .
I am delighted that demands for equality are on the agenda in France .
This could prove to be a lever to firmly establish the desire for full and unrestricted citizenship for women and their access to the full range of political responsibilities .
The plight of the women in Kabul has shocked us all , and I welcome the initiative which the Commission has taken on this .
Their situation provides a clear , if horrifying , illustration of the conception which the Muslim fundamentalists have of women .
And again it is Islamic fundamentalism which is responsible for the rape and murder of courageous Algerian women .
Unfortunately , the list of countries where women are looked down on and ill-treated is much longer than this .
It has been said that you can judge the degree of civilization by the situation of its women .
This gives us a measure of the fight which is still ahead , far beyond the symbolic day of 8 March .
Madam President , once again everything seems to be conspiring towards helplessness .
The institutions of the European Union are more and more coming to resemble some great machine carefully prepared to promote helplessness . Meanwhile , we in those institutions hypocritically split ourselves in two between our wishes , on the one hand , and the facts , on the other .
So , Madam President , remembering the case of Ana Orantes , the woman from Granada who was tragically burnt to death by her ex-husband , and in view of the scandalous statistics of male violence against women in my country , Spain , where there were 91 cases last year - far more than from ETA 's violent acts of terrorism - , I wonder whether today 's discrimination , today 's hypocritical non-discrimination , is any better than yesterday 's discrimination .
It is also hypocritical - ridiculous even - that even at this stage we are unable to recognize discrimination in terms of salary .
How is it possible that we can detect water on the moon , but cannot see that discrimination at work is tolerated and permitted in this hypocritical Europe , without us even acknowledging it ?
We agree to it .
It is not allowed , but we prefer not to notice it .
Madam President , yesterday millions of women asked us to do something about it once and for all - to follow up our words with deeds .
Madam President , before we finish the debate I should like to bring to the House 's attention the many women whose children have been abducted to countries where these women have no rights whatsoever before the courts .
Many of them have lost their children for ever .
This is an ongoing human rights issue and I agree with Mrs Larive that when looking at our relationships with many of the countries to which these children have been abducted , we must regard this as being one of the essential human rights .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place on Wednesday at 11.30 a.m.
Sale of consumer goods and guarantees
The next item is the report ( A4-0029 / 98 ) by Mrs Kuhn , on behalf of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Protection , on the proposal for a European Parliament and Council Directive on the sale of consumer goods and associated guarantees ( COM ( 95 ) 0520 - C4-0455 / 96-96 / 0161 ( COD ) ) .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , where consumer goods are concerned , we have a single internal market .
In 2002 we will have the euro in the majority of EU states .
This will allow consumers to make price comparisons much more easily .
Teleshopping , cross-border mail ordering and Internet selling could all profit from this .
However , according to a survey , consumers generally have reservations about purchasing goods outside their own country because they fear problems , should a product be defective .
This fear is completely justified at present .
Within the European Union , not only does the statutory guarantee period vary in length , but the concept of a defective article is also defined differently .
Both the legal claims for remedying a defect and the terms for claiming on a guarantee are not standard .
The Commission has highlighted the differences between the Member States in its Green Paper ' Consumer Goods Guarantees and After-Sales Service ' .
In a resolution on the Green Paper , the European Parliament has called on the Commission to produce a draft directive for the minimum harmonization of the statutory guarantee and for a legal framework for the commercial guarantee .
Mrs Oomen-Ruijten was the rapporteur at the time .
The proposal put forward by the Commission is to be welcomed from the consumers ' point of view .
It provides for the minimum harmonization of individual state provisions for the statutory guarantee and greater transparency with the commercial guarantee .
This statutory guarantee should be for two years .
During the first year consumers can choose between four types of redress which they can assert with the vendor : free repair , replacement , reduction in purchase price or cancellation of contract .
In the second year , they have only the right to free repair or a price reduction .
As rapporteur , I have said from the outset that this freedom of consumer choice is too consumer-friendly and unreasonable for retailers or manufacturers .
Many consumers would not have defective products repaired , but instead choose an alternative product or cancel the transaction altogether .
The retailers would then be effectively sitting on virtually new , used goods , which would have to be sold as second-hand products .
Hence , both the advisory committees and the main committees are proposing a hierarchy for the two-year guarantee : free repair without depreciation , if sensible and feasible , a replacement if repair proves to be neither sensible nor feasible , and should both not be possible , cancellation of contract or reduction in purchase price .
This proposal should help to remove the serious reservations normally expressed by the retailers .
Therefore , false cost accounting should no longer end up with the elected representatives , as has happened again today .
With the greatest sympathy for certain representatives of industry , some of whom have even furnished us with a complete voting list - another novelty since presumably parliamentarians are not considered capable of independent thought - , the consumer has a right to a defect-free product .
You almost get the impression that defective products are the general rule .
The draft directive also applies to second-hand goods .
Automobile clubs have welcomed this .
The Committee , however , is proposing that buyers and vendors should be able to impose contractual restrictions on second-hand articles .
I have one other point : most Member States want second-hand goods to come under this directive because so far this has been the case under national law .
Affected parties have also criticized the fact that the manufacturer 's public declarations are also included in the defect definition .
In my opinion , this is only right and proper since it is often the statements in advertisements that cause consumers to purchase a particular product .
The Commission 's proposal assumes that any defect that occurs in the first six months after parting with the product must have been present at the time of sale .
This is only of limited application , however , if the vendor is able to prove the contrary .
Hence , the buyer may not , as is sometimes suggested , complain about his canvas shoes five months after buying them because these have since developed a flaw through wear .
Nor can I present the glaring crack in a new expensive vase that was there when I bought it as a fault some six months later .
I would ask critics of the directive to consider that , in contrast to the commercial guarantee , claims under the statutory guarantee can only be made if a lack of conformity with the contract was evident at the time the product was surrendered .
The same critics should also kindly consider that the internal market has brought suppliers great benefits , while the consumer still needs to make up for lost ground .
I am of the opinion that consumers have a right to expect that the statutory guarantee claims are not dependent on the country of purchase , but instead that they have the same minimum rights across the Union .
The directive should lead to a balanced relationship between suppliers and buyers because consumers in many Member States , including my own , are better placed through it and consumer confidence in cross-border purchases is enhanced .
In this sense , the proposed directive represents an important step towards increasing the level of consumer protection in the European Union .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I share in principle the opinion of the rapporteur , who has told us that this directive is basically pointing in the right direction .
It means that we will be able to coordinate an important area in the European Union , which is also crucial for the smooth-functioning of the single market .
I am thinking of the problems experienced in the area of cross-border traffic , where today a customer who lives in Germany , say , but would like to shop in the Netherlands or Belgium , is not so certain which rights he has as a purchaser in these countries .
To this extent , the directive is a genuine contribution towards achieving harmonization .
I do not wish to deny either that I am sympathetically disposed to the possibility that , through us now getting this European legislation , the debate surrounding the law of contract , which for some time has been dormant , will start up again , in my native country of Germany as well .
Nevertheless , I am of the opinion that this proposal which the Commission has made is unbalanced in a lot of aspects .
Hence it will require the necessary changes being made by this Parliament .
This particularly affects - Mrs Kuhn has said so - the question of maybe limiting the right of option .
Under the Commission 's proposal , it is theoretically conceivable that , for example , a buyer might buy a car , drive around for months in it , clocking up some 50 000 km , park up and claim once there is damage to the engine , ' I 'd like to have a new car , please . '
That would be unreasonable , without question , since such an expensive item normally should be repaired first .
Let 's take a second , reverse scenario : I buy a hair dryer for 30 marks in a cut-price supermarket .
According to the wording of the directive , in theory the consumer could insist on the hair dryer being repaired eleven months later .
That would be absurd , too , because such cheap products are not repaired but replaced .
That is why I actually think this change in the right of option is crucial .
I also believe , and this is a proposal from my group , that we need to provide exemption clauses for the low-grade products sector as well and not just for second-hand goods .
I do not consider it prudent of us to create a directive at the end of which is the possibility that certain low-grade products might need to be raised so much in price in order to cover the risks incurred by the warranty .
Ultimately that would be a disadvantage for the consumer .
That is why we will also be requesting through an amendment that the low-grade products be included in the exemption provisions that allow this to be circumvented .
We have problems too with the manufacturer 's liability decision made in the Committee on Environment , Public Health and Consumer Protection .
We refuse to go along with this as the Group of the European People 's Party .
It failed to meet with support in the Committee on Legal Affairs and Citizens ' Rights , too .
On the question of shifting the burden of proof , we have come up with a solution in the Committee on Legal Affairs and Citizens ' Rights that is better because it does not envisage the drastic ruling of the directive , from which there is no possibility of deviating , even in cases where injustice has occurred .
Against the background of the changes I have partly addressed - there are more amendments in the motions file - we are nevertheless of the principled opinion that this directive is heading in the right direction and therefore support in principle the Commission 's proposal , albeit with the corrections which I have outlined and which proceed from our amendments .
Madam President , my group warmly welcomes the fact that this directive is now at long last before Parliament , and congratulates our colleague , Mrs Kuhn , on the sustained work she has put in to achieve a desirable result .
This proposal will give a minimum standard for sale of goods right across the whole of the single market .
With a fair wind , it will come into effect by the time that the final fruition of that single market is achieved with the currency reforms at the end of this century .
If that is so , consumers will , for the first time in all Member States , have the opportunity for redress and restoration of what properly should be theirs , which all too often is denied them .
In the 1993 Green Paper on guarantees and after-sales services , this Parliament called on the Commission to present a proposal for a directive .
We are extremely glad that this has now come before us .
In my own country the legal provisions are already running strongly in this direction so under the UK presidency there will be a mood to move to bring this into law very quickly indeed .
We have found over the past six years that in trans-European transactions , which are now becoming an increasing part of our intra-Community trade as individuals , 70 % of cases brought concern faulty products .
52 % of consumers mention the difficulties they encountered in exchanging goods or having repairs done as the main barrier to purchasing goods across borders .
Far more people quoted that , rather than language difficulties , as a reason .
Surely , therefore , something is wrong .
Mrs Kuhn has done a remarkably good job in addressing this issue , with the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Protection , to look at ways in which compromises can be found .
We have a reasonable compromise now over the length of time of the guarantees .
One year is not long enough , and those who propose five and six years are unrealistic .
They were voted down and the reasons will no doubt be put once again by Mrs Bonino .
We believe in a hierarchy of remedies which is rational .
A hierarchy of remedies which is rational , of course , attempts to maintain and protect the rights of the consumer whilst at the same time not burdening the seller with entirely unrealistic propositions , like having to replace a motorcar which is brought back with a few scratches after a couple of months on the road .
The wording of Amendment No 45 is actually better than EMAC 9 - the amendment which was adopted in the Environment Committee - because it sets out a form of words where the natural economic interest of both the buyer and the seller must coincide if the hierarchy of remedies must mean repair rather than replacement .
It also looked again at the question of the timetable for a rescission of the contract or a reduction in price .
There are one or two things where I think we need further time and perhaps further consideration .
This is , after all , only the first reading .
One is the question of second-hand goods .
There are areas where this directive ought properly to apply to second-hand goods and areas where we can all see , despite all the complaints in this field , it would be inappropriate to apply the full rigour of the directive as though the goods were new .
My last point is that , on consumer information , the area where industry complained bitterly about offices being set up in each Member State , we think we have found an appropriate amendment which suggests exactly the right level of information which the consumer needs state by state .
Madam President , I would like to start by thanking Mrs Kuhn wholeheartedly for the excellent way in which we have been able to arrive at a satisfactory result for this directive .
I hope that our cooperation will last until the vote on the first reading tomorrow , because our group sees major advantages in this directive .
The consumer will become a major player in the market .
This is necessary if we believe there should be an internal market which should ensure that the consumer is able to buy products throughout Europe , and that there should be a service attached to the products he buys .
Our group recognizes this , but when I say that the consumer should be a major player in the market , this does not mean that we should start laying the burden disproportionally on small and medium enterprises .
That is why we have tried to improve some aspects , in particular with the amendment to Article 3 , Clause 4 , where we are introducing a hierarchy in the way the consumer can claim or recover his losses when his agreement is broken .
I believe that with this hierarchy we have solved many of the problems for small and medium enterprises .
This means , and a journalist has asked about this , that with respect to the hierarchy , we have removed some rights from the original European Commission proposal .
But I can back this up , because it means that we have ensured that the ecological , energy-consuming , throw-away economy which we would end up with if people just took everything back , is removed from the draft in Amendment No 45 .
I therefore believe that from an energy and environmental point of view , we have achieved something with this amendment , but that it is also good for small and medium enterprises .
It is a heavy burden for small and medium enterprises that when selling goods to consumers from abroad , they have to produce whole lists for the consumer in case they want to make a claim .
I therefore ask Mrs Kuhn if we could have another good look at the amendments on that front .
We would in any case advise you to vote against .
There is one problem : the trapped small retailer .
The trapped small retailer , who might be dependent on products delivered by the manufacturer in a faulty condition , or with faulty information , must be helped .
I think that , when the amendment to this section , Amendment No 31 , is supported by this entire House , we will have a solution to these problems .
Reversal of the burden of proof .
The text as it is before us might pave the way to abuse , and I therefore think that the amendments submitted by the Committee on Legal Affairs and Citizens ' Rights is much better .
Mr Lehne has already mentioned this a short time ago .
Then there is the issue of the second hand market .
We would like our amendments to be taken over .
We would like second hand goods to be included in the directive , but in a reasonable form .
This means that when you pay a high price for a car , you should be able to get a guarantee .
An organization such as BOVAG in the Netherlands would concur with such a view .
Let expensive goods come under the scope of the directive , but allow for exceptions .
I have a few more amendments of which I would like to ask the Commission , Parliament and other groups to have a look at .

I am referring to Amendments Nos 6 , 8 , 9 - I am using the Dutch text - 22 , 25 , 28 , 29 , 34 - I just mentioned these , 35 , 36 , 37 , and the new amendment replacing Amendment No 41 .
If this can be arranged I believe we will have a decent text which will show us in a good light to small and medium enterprises , but also most definitely - because that is who it is intended for - to the consumer .
Madam President , there are provisions in the Consumer Credit Act ( 1995 ) which ensure that consumers are made aware of the nature and content of any credit agreement or financial accommodation which is advertised by banking institutions .
In addition , advertisements of consumer credit must contain details of any charges additional to payment of capital and interest ; a statement of any security which may be required ; a clear indication of any restrictions on the availability of credit and the cash price of relative goods and services ; the total cost of credit ; particulars of the number , amount and timing of instalments ; the amounts of any deposits and the number of any instalments which must be paid before the delivery of the goods .
The content and requirements relating to credit agreements are defined and set out in the legislation .
Consumers are able to assess any agreement before they enter into it and are made aware of the type of agreement involved : for example , hire purchase and hire agreements etc .
In the light of the forthcoming commencement dates for our economic and monetary union , all these provisions must be analysed , reviewed and updated in the context of future banking transactions for the Irish and European consumers .
From 1 January 1999 all non-cash transactions can be carried out in the euro denomination .
Mortgage-holders and those consumers seeking mortgages at a future date must have confidence in the terms they are given in the new euro denomination from national and European banking institutions .
I congratulate Mrs Kuhn on her report .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , the Liberal Group is in favour of harmonized rules on after-sale guarantees , but is a little disillusioned with the Commission proposal , and for the following reasons . Firstly , for the time being the problem of the internal market will not have been completely resolved for the consumer .
Secondly , the proposal will lead to additional costs for shopkeepers , costs which are disproportionate to the protection of the consumer .
At the same time it could result in job losses in the labour intensive repair services sector .
Finally , it will cause more waste , and this while the Commission is working on a document on competition in the recycling sectors . In this document it apparently expresses its concern about the scrapheap of electronic equipment .
In order to arrive at a transparent and balanced piece of legislation , my liberal colleagues and I have drafted a few proposals , first and foremost with respect to means of redress .
My group cannot agree that a consumer , in the case of a fault in the purchased item , is given four means of redress . We therefore propose a hierarchy .
In the case of a fault the vendor is obliged to repair the product to full working order within a reasonable period .
How this is done is his business , as long as he guarantees that it is the quickest and most efficient method , and as long as the customer is satisfied .
If this fails , then the consumer has every right to demand a price reduction or the cancellation of the agreement .
Secondly , the consumer should be able to turn directly to the manufacturer in three instances , namely when the vendor is located abroad , has ceased trading , or when he cannot be reached .
I am referring to our Amendment 25 which was approved by a large majority in the Committee on Environment , Public Health and Consumer Protection .
Finally , we believe second hand goods should be excluded .
They do not belong in this directive .
We would like a clear and explicit exception for these goods , but do not rule out that they will be subjected to separate regulations at a later date .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , our group wants to work towards a clear and balanced text , which not only benefits the consumer , but also employment , business and the environment .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , we welcome the draft directive from the Commission in so far as it envisages at least a two-year guarantee .
That is a step in the right direction , but it is not enough .
It would be an improvement for countries at the bottom end of the EU like the Federal Republic , which only provides for an extremely short warranty period of six months .
But what we want is actually a breakthrough to sustainability in production , and that is why five years would be better in our view .
We need to get away from the disposable product mentality and the short life of goods and move towards sustainable production .
Manufacturers and distributors should not be released from responsibility either .
I have absolutely no sympathy with all the whining and whingeing letters we receive from industry .
Industry is always telling us it is prepared to accept responsibility .
I think manufacturers and distributors need to be called to account .
We therefore need to stem the flood of rubbish and demand a longer life for products .
That is why we have introduced an amendment providing for a 5-year guarantee , so as to finally achieve this breakthrough to sustainability .
This also enjoys the support of Finland , by the way , which makes it clear that even in the Council of Ministers there is support for sustainability in production .
We want to see that both the average life and the rate of consumption of products is disclosed with the manufacture and use of the product .
It is quite clear to us that repair must come first .
We want to put an end to the wasting of resources and create an incentive for curtailing production of non-recyclable goods .
We believe that with this directive the European Parliament needs to come clean at the vote tomorrow as to just how serious it is about sustainability in production .
Madam President , most Member States already have some legislation on guarantee periods and consumer rights , but it varies considerably .
Now that goods are produced and consumed on an increasingly international scale it is high time we had harmonization and consumer protection .
We therefore support the drawing up of a European directive on after-sale guarantees .
Each time a product is found to be faulty , the question will arise : was it already faulty or did the user break it ?
In practise it turns out that it is sometimes impossible to answer this question .
Sometimes the consumer will lie .
He knows he was responsible for the defect , but acts dumb .
In such circumstances should an extensive procedure be undertaken to establish proof ?
A company will not want to do so if it concerns a relatively low-cost item .
Sometimes the fault was already present at the time of purchase , or occurred shortly afterwards through no fault of the consumer .
It is clear that an arrangement must be made to indemnify the consumer .
But the first case is of course the most difficult .
The report by the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Protection clearly takes the side of the consumer when it comes to burden of proof .
He is not to blame .
This comes back to an imbalance in power between buyer and seller .
We back this choice .
It will occasionally lead to an increase in cost for the manufacturer .
But on the other hand a good reputation will benefit him , both with respect to the product and to his service .
Nothing is better advertised than the quick replacement of a product .
I am therefore not terribly impressed with the many letters from the business lobby saying that it will all be so expensive and that in the end the consumer will have to pay more .
The shopkeeper will need right of recourse which he can use to recover his costs from the manufacturer .
If the legal guarantee is used too often to make claims , then there must be something wrong with the product .
We can therefore support many of the amendments in the Kuhn report .
Madam President , the draft directive before us is an example of how standardized , trans-European rulings can antagonize the people and shake their confidence in the Union .
Open borders and an open market demand uniform consumer protection guidelines .
This also applies to the buyer 's statutory right to protection from defects in acquired products , in short to a standardization of warranty law .
However , if a proposal for a directive is presented , as it is here , where the periods within which the seller is liable for defects in his product are quadrupled - as in the case of Austria , for example - this is hardly indicative of great tact and sensitivity .
There is little fine feeling too in the arrangement planned for allowing the consumer a free option in the first year of warranty between repair , price reduction , rescission of contract and replacement .
It seems reasonable to suppose that , in the majority of cases , the buyer will prefer to receive a new product rather than have the old one repaired , a solution which , we believe , is neither economically nor ecologically sensible .
And if one brings the proposed change in the burden of proof into the equation , i.e. the supposition that the fault was already present at the time of purchase , this overall arrangement represents an increased burden on the small and medium-sized enterprises in particular , who would in no way be in a balanced position in relation to the improved consumer protection brought about by this change .
It is precisely in today 's difficult employment situation that this additional imposition is not acceptable and will in the long term reduce the number of consumers protected .
We therefore share the opinion of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and Industrial Policy , of waiting for the study into the impact of this directive to come out , which has been commissioned due to the contentious nature of the subject matter .
There is no reason to be overhasty in approaching this issue .
It would do the cause more harm than good .
Madam President , I do not have a script , just two observations .
There is no competence of the European Parliament for coordinating civil law .
There is no coordination taking place , as it happens .
Only minimum standards are being set down , i.e. we will probably be left legally with a patched-up job .
Where then is the coordination that might perhaps be still justified ?
I do not believe , incidentally , that within the European Union of the single market there has ever been a cross-border purchase made or omitted simply because another warranty system operates in the other country .
That is an utterly ridiculous assumption .
One other word , on the shift in the burden of proof , since I cannot say more about the substance .
This has become something of a magic formula : ' shift in the burden of proof . '
It is quite clear that we can do nothing to change the facts of the matter , namely that the one who asserts a claim has to prove the facts justifying the claim , and a reversal in the burden of proof can only come into it if the one making the claim has absolutely no access to the information justifying his claim .
Only then can shifting the burden of proof be considered .
This clearly is not the case here .
This shift in the burden of proof means that fundamentally the seller can never produce the proof .
He took his iron that was all packed up down from the shelf and gave it the customer - and then three months later he is expected to prove that this iron was in order .
Legally this is rather suspect .
Madam President , in the internal market the consumer is free to obtain products and services from other Member States , and he sees this as one of the biggest advantages of that internal market .
But an important obstacle stands in the way of his being able to enjoy this freedom fully , namely uncertainty about after-sale guarantees , and about what he can do when a product he bought turns out to have hidden defects .
I welcome a proposal for a directive to harmonize a number of things in this field .
It is also positive that this directive offers the consumer a high degree of protection .
But a degree of protection is not the same as absolute cover against a host of things at the expense of something similar .
Consumer rights must also be economically and legally justifiable .
Sadly , this balance is lacking in several places .
It is lacking where the Commission systematically gives the consumer complete freedom of choice as to the means of repairing a defect .
It is also lacking where there is resolute reversal of burden of proof .
I fully agree with the comment made by Mr Rothley on this issue ; on both fronts it is necessary for some serious adjustments are made .
But unfortunately the lack of balance is reinforced by some of the amendments submitted by the Committee on Environment , Public Health and Consumer Protection .
I would mention only Amendments Nos 6 and 34 on the contact addresses in the other Member States .
In our group we are really amazed at the misjudgment of the economic and legal reality as far as distribution in the internal market is concerned .
But , if we think it is good we say so , too : Amendment No 31 receives our approval .
This amendment should prevent the seller , often a small or medium enterprise , being squashed between the devil and the deep blue sea , between a non-reducible liability towards the consumer on the one hand , and liability shifted onto him because of the supplier on the other .
We insist that the seller 's right of recourse can be exercised effectively , and we would like to emphasize this as one of the essential conditions for our ultimate approval of this resolution .
Balance does not stand in the way of a high degree of consumer protection .
Let us use this notion as a starting point for consultation between the groups so that we will arrive at consensus .
Madam President , let me first of all make it clear that I am not at all enthusiastic about this proposed directive , neither as presented by the Commission nor with the proposed modifications of the Environment Committee .
Even if the Environment Committee 's policy document appears to improve on and clarify some points , there are nonetheless many uncertainties and problems remaining in relation to the consumer , the seller and the Danish legal tradition in the area of the Sale of Goods Act .
It is worrying when even someone who is not a lawyer is able to find several unclear formulations and other problems in the text .
What , for instance , is ' appropriate after-sales service ' ?
Moreover , these proposals for a directive appear excessively intrusive as touching the Sale of Goods Act , which , indeed , lies at the heart of transactions .
We have vastly different trading cultures in the various nations of Europe and therefore , in my view , this is not an area that either can or should be legislated on .
Incidentally , the proposed directive does not solve the problems the consumer experiences with cross-border transactions .
There are huge gulfs separating consumers and sellers in different countries , both in terms of geography and in terms of language .
Therefore , it could be asked whether harmonization serves any purpose whatsoever and whether it will have any effect on this area .
I am , in fact , against the idea of harmonization for harmonization 's sake .
Here and now I can only point out one single specific problem of the policy document , that is , the rights of the consumer in the case of defects or deficiencies .
The proposal of the Commission is completely unacceptable on this point .
It would be horrendously expensive if a large number of consumers required agreements to be waived when not strictly necessary .
And at the end of the day , these costs will have to be borne by the consumer .
Moreover , this is also completely untenable from an environmental point of view .
Conversely , the proposals of the Environment Committee are unacceptable from the consumer 's point of view .
We are really talking about a right to repair and replace for the seller without taking into consideration whether this is a great inconvenience to the consumer .
As a minimum requirement , the consumer must be given a choice where there are recurring defects , and the consumer should under all circumstances be allowed to opt for replacement rather than repair .
Therefore , this motion should be rejected in order to allow us to achieve a reasonable sharing of the burden between consumer and seller .
Ladies and gentlemen , as you know , following the Green Paper published in November 1993 , on 18 June 1996 the Commission adopted the draft Directive on the sale and guarantees of consumer goods .
The draft Directive seeks to guarantee for the consumer a minimum common basis of rights that may be exercised under identical conditions , irrespective of the place of purchase of the goods in the EU .
This is simply to enable consumers and economic operators to make full use of the benefits of the single market and to guarantee a high level of protection of consumers ' economic interests .
It is somewhat surprising , by the way , to me at least , to note in this debate how consumers are regarded as irresponsible or incapable of understanding what something reasonable is , or of being consumers , i.e. citizens who , as described here , should benefit or want to benefit from knowing what 's what .
If we want to talk of a balance between industry and consumers , frankly I would not want to waste more time explaining to this House where the balance lies between the producer or the seller and the consumers .
Without any desire to always want to regulate everything , we are simply talking about establishing minimum rights for European citizens and consumers , equal for everyone , irrespective of the place where the consumer goods in question were bought .
In November 1996 , the Economic and Social Committee gave a favourable opinion of this proposal .
However , I have heard references to high costs echo in this Chamber .
You are familiar with the final report on the study which the Commission has begun on the economic impact of this proposal , which has been forwarded to the Parliament in its provisional and final versions : you can all see that these costs are not so huge .
However , the Commission would like to point out that the consumer 's trust is of value to the seller , and is specifically of value in a competitive market , so this value probably merits investment in some cases .
With regard to the amendments being discussed and voted on , I would like to congratulate the rapporteur , Mrs Kuhn , for her work , because I believe it is thanks to her work that the Commission can accept many of the amendments drawn up by her .
To be more precise , the Commission can accept Amendments Nos 7 , 8 , 9 , 11 , 14 , 15 , 17 , 19 , 20 , 21 , 23 and , if Amendment No 46 is not accepted , No 29 ; it also accepts Amendments Nos 30 , 32 , 35 , 36 , 37 , 38 , 42 and 45 and Amendment No 46 as an alternative to Amendment No 29 , as I said earlier .
Amendments Nos 12 , 16 and 40 will be accepted provided there are amendments to the wording , while Amendment No 33 , in the Commission 's opinion , requires a fundamental change .
With regard to Amendments Nos 41 and 54 , the Commission accepts their logic and accepts them provided there are a few amendments to the wording .
Finally , Amendments Nos 2 , 13 , 24 , 26 , 31 and 41 will be partially accepted .
I would now like to make a few comments on Amendment No 45 , which seems to me to be the key factor in this debate , to emphasize the importance the Commission attributes to the possibility of giving the consumer a choice at two different levels in the hierarchical scale , enabling him to apply these rights : it seems essential to us that this choice should not be with the seller failing to observe the contractual obligation to provide goods as stipulated in the contract , but rather with the consumer .
For example , if I bought a camera for a trip and I find there is something wrong with it three days before the trip , there is no point the seller repairing it if the repair will take three weeks ; in this case , it seems logical to me to demand a replacement before leaving .
The same applies to a whole series of other examples we can give .
The British Presidency intends to reach a political agreement at the end of the " Consumers ' Council on 23 April .
The Commission , for its part , will endeavour to present an amended proposal to the European Parliament and the Council on the basis of Parliament 's amendments , according to the procedure I have just described .
Finally , I hope that this legislation , which I consider important , will make fast progress to enable the European Commission to establish a key aspect of the single market and consumer protection .
That concludes the debate .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12.00 noon .
Green Paper on food law
The next item is the report ( A4-0009 / 98 ) by Mrs Graenitz , on behalf of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Protection , on the Commission Green Paper on the general principles of food law in the European Union ( COM ( 97 ) 0176-C4-0213 / 97 ) .
Madam President , Madam Commissioner , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the Green Paper on the general principles behind food legislation in the European Union has , after lengthy discussion , been presented at a point in time which is marked by changes in the organizational structure of the Commission 's services and in the economic debate .
This became clear not only from the lengthy discussion I mentioned , within the Directorate-General concerned , but also through the fact that , whilst in the original version of the Green Paper the prime aim of legislation was formulated as being the free movement of goods within the single market , priority was given to safeguarding health and to food safety following the submission of the report from the BSE committee of inquiry and the assurances given in this regard by the Commission President , Mr Santer .
The priority of health protection is something that has greatly shaped our debate on food law from this time on .
The principle is self-evident - for the European Parliament , for the other parliaments , in fact for every individual : each item of food legislation should guarantee that the permitted foodstuffs , including all additives and methods of production , are consistent with good health .
This is a sine qua non , and it would seem unnecessary to keep stressing it .
Yet the events of the last two years have shown just how much the market relies on consumer confidence and how dangerous , and ultimately expensive , it is for all concerned to permit lax standards in food safety .
Equivalence of procedure is easier to verify and calculate in the mechanical and technical field than it is when dealing with organic materials .
So it is in this context I think that Parliament -we will be having a further debate on this area tomorrow -welcomes the amendments to Articles 129 and 129a adopted in Amsterdam , and I hope that ratification by the national parliaments will take place in a short while .
We all know that perfecting the single market requires clear , plain legislation , where compliance can be suitably monitored .
Not only your rapporteur , but the majority of Member States and very many of those who have commented on the Commission 's Green Paper , are of the opinion that a framework directive on food law would be the very way to create concise legislation and a clear framework , and thereby adapt , if necessary , existing legislation , removing or coordinating overlapping or conflicting sections and to design the legislation in such a way that consumers and producers alike enjoy stability of the law and know how to proceed in which circumstances .
Such a framework directive for foodstuffs should , of course , mirror the legislation on hygiene so that it is clear exactly which hygiene belongs to which food legislation in a particular area .
I think that the submission of a framework directive may be the very thing the Commission has in mind in the foreseeable future .
I believe there is already some work in progress , and I think that there should be no need to wait here for further findings and deliberations or for additional reports to be submitted by the Commission .
I also consider it necessary in this context to come up with an arrangement as to how vitamins are added to foodstuffs and this has then to be labelled , and - as the Commission proposes and can then be adopted by Parliament -how one should deal with health claims , that is to say claims regarding the effect on health of certain foodstuffs .
A very important area is the HACCP .
I think this area , which has not yet been universally recognized in terms of its significance and effectiveness , should be investigated further and that a lot of assistance needs to be provided , especially for small and medium-sized firms , chiefly agricultural enterprises .
I believe that this would be a lot easier if consumers were involved .
Where consumers are concerned , information is the most important aspect .
Here it is a question of giving the consumers clear and easy-to-understand labels and information on the food .
Proceeding from the labelling , more information can be provided through other media , perhaps on the basis of voluntary arrangements too , because it is apparent to everyone that labelling has its limits .
The area is very broad , and I do not have the time in my six minutes to refer to all its significance in detail , what sort of economic relevance it has and how important the question is in connection with the World Trade Organization and the Codex Alimentarius .
I also think it necessary to continue to discuss , albeit through a further report , how a food and health policy can be promoted by the Commission as part of an overall nutrition policy and general health education .
Finally , I would like to voice my conviction that legislation should contain a clear declaration of preventive consumer protection , that this would be the political dimension to strengthening consumer confidence in the single food market and that food safety is definitely necessary as a counter-balance to the economic dimension and internal dynamics of the single market in the food sector .
Mr President , on behalf of the Agriculture Committee I wish to congratulate the rapporteur on her excellent report and thank her for her acceptance of most of the points made in the opinion from the Agriculture Committee .
It is a measure of just how far we have moved over the last two to three years that there is such a large degree of unanimity between the Environment and Agriculture Committees on the principles which must form the basis of European food legislation .
There is now widespread recognition of the need to reassess some aspects of modern farming methods , particularly high-tech , high-import intensive production , which can lead among other things to the loss of many jobs in rural communities .
What exactly should be put into high-protein animal feeds ?
There must be clear labelling of the contents , which should also be appropriate to the animals to which they are fed .
How densely should animals and poultry be herded together - something which could lead to the rapid spread of disease ?
The answer must not be the routine administration of antibiotics which then find their way into the human food chain , but ensuring that animals and poultry are kept in humane non-overcrowded conditions .
There must be strict rules in abattoirs to maintain the highest levels of hygiene .
Furthermore , rules on collection and collation of animal zoonosis need to be improved to ensure best practice throughout the European Union in dealing with animal diseases presenting risks to human health .
High use of artificial fertilisers , pesticides and herbicides can lead to harmful residues in fruit and vegetables and other plant products and must be carefully controlled and monitored .
Good farming practice and animal welfare cannot be considered in isolation from food legislation as a whole .
Wholesome raw ingredients from the farm gate are the basis of good-quality safe food .
I welcome very much the acceptance by the Environment Committee of the recommendation from the Agriculture Committee that producer liability should only go back to the point in the food chain where responsibility for any defects actually lies .
This will allay the anxiety of many farmers .
Likewise , whilst welcoming the proposals for hazard analysis and critical control points systems , the Agriculture Committee is concerned that there should be an assessment of their impact on small farmers and food processors , who should continue to be guided by clear regulations .
What is important for consumers is to know that their food comes from healthy plants and animals and that all along the food chain at each stage there is sensible , comprehensible legislation in place with effective monitoring and that the food eventually sold in shops carries clear informative labelling to ensure a wholesome quality product .
We have all become only too used to food scares concerning salmonella in eggs , risk from BSE and e-coli in beef and pesticides residues in carrots .
I hope that the revision of EU food legislation incorporating the European Parliament 's proposals will help to consign such scares to history .
Mr President , on this very day the Phillips inquiry into BSE and its relation with CJD opens in London , in my country .
It is a great tribute to Mrs Graenitz that she has brought these clear and lucid proposals before Parliament at a time when we are reminded of the dark side of food production in the BSE tragedy , and also of the high hopes that we had after the Treaty of Amsterdam was passed , that we would take an entirely new view of our responsibilities for health and safety in the food field .
It is in the spirit of Amsterdam , Commissioner , that we are all addressing you today .
The progress of this Green Paper through the European Parliament has been accompanied by detailed conferences and major debates .
I think it is timely that we now hear the view of the Commission .
There are just two or three points that I would make , briefly , from the consumer point of view of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Protection .
Firstly , we want the Commission to state here that there will be a framework directive on food and to tell us what the timetable for that directive would be .
We support - and hope to hear a robust view on this from the Commission - the notion that primary products should be included in any product liability directive .
Whilst I hear what my colleague , Mrs Hardstaff , has said , we hope that our colleagues in the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development will listen to what we say about the need to encourage consumer confidence in foodstuffs , which is also in the interests of the primary producers themselves .
We also wish to see the consumer voice integrated into European Union policy-making procedures .
In the wake of BSE , DG XXIV was given a significant role in the whole area of food policy .
But we still see the agriculture and industry directorate taking the predominant role .
We do not for a moment question that all these directorates have their own responsibilities , but we would ask Commissioner Bangemann and his colleagues to tell us that the consumer voice and the consumer interest should always be taken into account - formally so - when legislation concerning food and food safety is before the Commission and this Parliament .
My last point is on labelling .
We had a great march of the farmers a couple of weeks ago in London .
But the petition that was handed in to Downing Street this week , bearing a million signatures , referred to the need for proper food labelling , which can counteract the misleading claims that are often made .
We believe that the labelling provisions currently buried in myriad different directives need to be drawn out and brought together if we are to have a proper and effective control of this area .
We have to sustain the European Union as a major food producer and a major exporter .
The best way we can do that is by setting standards that can command the admiration of the whole world .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , we are all delighted with the Green Paper and all of us sitting here would wish to have - and we would also like to hear this from the Commissioner -a framework directive .
Please allow me to say that the present report can be judged very positively .
I , too , would like to congratulate Mrs Graenitz on it , though I would also like to clarify one particular point of her report , namely paragraph 59 , in which Directive 79 / 112 / EEC is addressed .
The European Commission envisages in its proposal to amend this directive that the Advisory Committee on Wine of the European Commission will be responsible for determining appropriate labelling requirements for wine , and not the food committee permanently set up by the directive .
In its first draft , the Economic and Social Committee still intended the food committee to be responsible for the labelling .
In its final opinion , the ESC comes out in favour of the Commission 's proposal .
Parliament too declares itself in favour of the Commission 's proposal in a draft opinion .
Please allow me to state at this point that beside the practical reasons for a special approach to the labelling of wine and wine products -where all wine producers and all wine-producing regions are of a like mind -there are many arguments in law in favour of the Commission 's proposal .
And I would not want the opposite view to arise through any misunderstanding in the present report .
In March 1997 the Legal Service delivered an opinion on the legal base for the proposed regulation introducing a system of labelling and registering of cattle and for identifying beef .
The issue centred on whether Article 43 of the EC Treaty ( agricultural policy ) or Article 100a ( Single Market ) applied as a legal base .
The report concluded from reference to numerous judgments of the European Court of Justice that Article 43 of the EC Treaty is the correct legal base .
Legal instruments on the production and marketing of the agricultural products specified in Appendix II of the Treaty may contain provisions for the harmonization of the national regulations without Article 100 or Article 100a of the EC Treaty being referred to .
In pursuing the aims of the common agricultural policy , the demands of the general interest , such as consumer protection or the safeguarding of the health and life of man and animals , should not be overlooked .
Health protection should be regarded as being paramount with any agricultural measure .
Hence we have the European Court 's embargo on British beef .
Because of the reservations I have cited , the respective market organization provisions and the procedures contained therein should be adhered to where the more detailed labelling requirements for additives in wine are concerned .
I can only hope that a majority of this House shares my view , and I would not want this report to give a false lead in any way .
Mr President , after thirty years of food law harmonization , the European Commission quite rightly wants to start a debate on " whither now ' , by means of a Green Paper .
Does the present legal situation surrounding food law still meet the needs of today ?
In view of the BSE crisis in the United Kingdom and the outbreak of swine fever in my own country , the Netherlands , this is very much a relevant question .
The Graenitz report is a serious attempt at giving the debate more substance .
More attention must be paid to labelling , and consumer confidence will increase as a result of the farm-totable approach , which means that complete information on production methods must be given .
It is also important that the issue of liability is developed further ; a proposal for this is ready and waiting at the European Commission .
Attention is quite rightly drawn to the provisions made by World Trade Organization , the Codex Alimentarius , although this should not lead to lower levels of food protection .
The report is also about transparency .
Of course it is essential that results and proposals made by special forums and scientific committees can be monitored , but the Group of the European Liberal Democrat and Reform Party is against the proposal of a forum to monitor the conversion and implementation of Community regulations which includes Members of the European Parliament .
The European Parliament has a different responsibility , and should not get involved in such a forum .
After all , by not being represented on such a forum , the European Parliament 's independent position is guaranteed .
That is why we oppose the last sentence of paragraph 18 of the report , and this we already made clear by way of preparation in the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Protection .
Finally , Mr President , despite that one reservation , I would like to express , on behalf of my group , our support for the Graenitz report .
Mr President , very briefly I should like firstly to thank the rapporteur , and secondly to welcome this proposal for a Green Paper . It has opened up a debate which is necessary for two reasons : firstly because of the results of the committee of inquiry into BSE - and also the follow-up committee - , but most of all , because of Agenda 2000 and the common agricultural policy reform .
So we need to know the results of this debate and put them into effect .
Nevertheless , I think there are already some clear ideas , which are included in Mrs Graenitz ' report .
Examples include : the need for clear , transparent labelling , especially for new products and foods ; secondly , the consumers ' organizations should have a clear role in this debate ; thirdly , we need a very clear idea of what Community law should consist of as regards food , given that at the moment there are so many regulations , sometimes contradictory - as in other sectors - , which need to be simplified and clarified ; and lastly , we have to welcome the relative speed with which the Commission has implemented the new scientific committees and the new type of inspection .
Only experience will tell whether these measures are effective , but the work of the scientific committees will need to be clear and transparent , and they must also have a clear agenda for each of their sessions .
Mr President , I am speaking in place of Mrs Barthet-Mayer who was due to make this speech but is unable to for health reasons .
Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to read her speech to you .
I would like to congratulate Mrs Graenitz on her hard work on this report .
In fact , by publishing the Green Paper , the Commission officially recognizes the huge shortcomings in the Community food system .
Although the Union has a strong agricultural policy , its policy on food remains to be defined .
Over and above what appears to no more than anecdotal , there are real economic , political and public health issues at stake .
The presence of hormones in beef , the fat content of chocolate , the consumption of cheese made from milk straight from the cow , the use of genetically modified seed , all these are not insignificant questions for the public , their elected representatives , the producers and especially for the legislators .
The main difficulty lies in the actual definition of security and quality , for without a common definition there can be no harmonization .
What criteria do we use , which scientific basis is our point of reference ?
How do we make allowances for the irrational or the emotional ?
Where do cultural differences stop and protectionist manoeuvring or commercial opportunism start ?
The Commission is proposing to sort out the multitude of regulations and directives which deal directly or indirectly with food .
This is absolutely necessary , for at the moment it seems that , without having succeeded in defining a real food policy , the Union has drawn up too much legislation , which paradoxically has not resulted in better harmonization .
So we can only welcome this initiative in the more general context of efforts undertaken to guarantee food safety .
Mr President , the Commission 's Green Paper should have been used to present an in-depth critical analysis of the situation , but all it does is describe the problems .
They are all presented at some length , but none of them is examined in any depth .
This is in direct contrast to the reality of the situation we are all experiencing day by day .
Public opinion still has no faith in the Commission 's ability to exercise control .
The European Parliament has not been given reliable answers to the many criticisms it has raised during the past few months . Even international bodies such as the World Health Organization have expressed great concern and alarm at the risk of the spread of epizootic disease within the European Union , because of the lack of an effective coordination system at local , regional , national and Union-wide levels .
Faced with this social alarm among the citizens of Europe , the European Commission has failed to offer a guarantee of food safety .
It has even withdrawn its proposal to create a food safety agency , to this House 's surprise . All it has done is implement an administrative reorganization - which will not achieve anything - and increase the number of scientific committees which , unless they are co-ordinated , given muscle , and balanced one against another , will not be at all effective either .
We still think there is a need to set up a European food safety agency , and to coordinate and stimulate the great potential of the Member States as regards scientific ability and , of course , inspection . We must not forget that more than 45 000 inspectors throughout Europe are a great deal more than the small handful of inspectors which can be created from scratch , and would be much more efficient .
What we need is to create high-level inspection , and boost the abilities of the Member States , because that will increase consumer confidence .
Mr President , the European consumer needs to have increased confidence in food , not least after the BSE crisis .
In this context I would like to congratulate Mrs Graenitz on a good report which raises many issues , perhaps even too many sometimes .
However , there is one thing I do not agree with : Amendment No 28 .
We must have food production which means that there are no residues of chemicals or medicines , for example , in our food .
However , we must also have food production and a production system which means that we do not handle foods in the wrong way during production .
On this point there is a mistake concerning the use of antibiotics as growth stimulants in our food , not because there is any problem with the food , but because it means that antibiotic-resistant strains of bacteria will also become a problem for human health .
This should therefore be added to the text .
Mr President , I would like to ask a rhetorical question . How do you explain a situation in which ECU 1.5 billion worth of animal hormones are sold in the EU every year , although their use is prohibited ?
I will provide an answer to my own question : an insatiable thirst for profit .
We were once in a position to avoid animal and plant disease through border controls , preventing the importation of vermin and pests .
In our common market we are at the mercy of others , and Mrs Graenitz ' observations are mostly quite justified .
I do wonder a little at the attitude of the European National Party when it intends to revise and thus weaken them .
In Holland and other countries the original nature of national identity is being stripped away in the name of chicken and pig feed .
We possibly need antibiotics for the prevention of salmonella and other diseases .
And how can we explain away the fact that genetically altered maize , soya and other natural produce may be used in the production of food without notifying consumers ?
The same goes for irradiated food .
Choice means being able to make conscious choices .
The Green Paper is not enough .
We must dare to face up to the reality of the matter .
Mr President , a major problem with the EU 's food legislation is that from the beginning it was not actually aimed at producing better food , but at guaranteeing free movement of food products .
Mrs Graenitz has a completely different approach , a consumer-friendly approach , which is quite admirable , but she has not dealt properly with the question of the extent to which harmonization for the purpose of securing the Single Market is perhaps not always such a good method for bringing about the highest possible food standards .
As an Austrian , she knows that this has created problems for the newest Member States .
For example , because of EU rules , Sweden has already been forced to permit banned feed additives , relax controls against salmonella and relax labelling requirements , especially with regard to allergy risks . And we now risk being forced to permit irradiation of food and the use of antibiotics .
If instead we had made use of minimum standards , giving the Member States complete freedom to go further , developments could have been aimed more unequivocally at promoting good food quality .
I would therefore like to put the following question to Commissioner Bonino : would it not be a good idea if the Commission concentrated more on minimum standards which raised levels everywhere , but which did not prevent some countries from going further ?
Would that not be better than total harmonization , which is fundamentally a commercial rule aimed at promoting commercial interests , not food quality ?
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , first of all congratulations to Mrs Graenitz .
She has handled an extremely wide-reaching area very well , because it is clear that food law in the European Union has gained considerably in importance with the realization of the Single Market and the pursuit of an active consumer policy .
In view of the large number of regulations and amended provisions , as in relation to BSE , to say nothing of changed expectations , we cannot avoid thinking about simplifying and rationalizing food law , of reviewing the existing provisions .
Certain basic aims , I think , need to be taken as the starting point of the discussion .
All foods must be guaranteed to be both safe and harmless .
The consumers must be able to rely on foods being safe and harmless , and do so in the full knowledge that the diversity and quality of foods in the European regions has been preserved .
This involves both a healthy and competitive agriculture and food industry .
A few points about the key words ' simplification ' and ' rationalization ' .
It should be the obvious aim of European policy -and we have been fighting for this for some time now - to make European law clearer and easier to understand .
Inconsistencies need to be eliminated , and above all the comprehensibility of the legal text needs to be improved in the interest of consumers .
It is also a question of greater transparency for the citizen .
This is not anything new , but in the area of food law the creation of confidence is vital for people .
They need to understand what they read .
Hence a framework food directive is necessary here , which includes both a unified definition of central concepts and the regulation of the general principles governing food law in one outline text .
Let me quote a second example : the directive on the labelling of food has been in existence since 1979 and has been amended six times since then .
In addition , there is a wealth of special provisions that make reference to the labelling of individual foods , such as wine , fresh fruit and chocolate .
The subject of wine has already been addressed today , and I must say to you quite simply , Commissioner , that we are striving for another position to Mrs Flemming 's , who is no longer here incidentally .
I do not find it proper that a Member of Parliament should not claim their vested right to codecision in this matter .
I think we need to agree that codecision applies to wine every bit as much as to chocolate and fruit .
That is the way to make progress .
Mr President , I would first like to thank not only the rapporteur , but also everyone who has taken part in the debate , because it is clear from the general tenor that Parliament is thinking along the same lines as the Commission .
We have 150 opinions on the Green Paper before us .
We want to summarize our own opinion on this in a statement before the summer .
That is all I can say on the timetable .
We agree with Parliament that we should present a framework directive , but I cannot say when .
It all sounds very nice to demand that such a framework directive should include a general definition of the various terms and so on , but that is precisely where the problem lies .
We obviously need to proceed with caution when doing something like this .
We need to ensure we make it clear , too , where individual provisions need to be amended .
That is to say , I cannot tell you exactly when we will do this ; we will do it as quickly as we possibly can .
Certainly , we want to implement a clear overall concept .
The framework directive is part of this process .
It is quite clear to us that this tangle that has arisen needs to be removed and that the recent deliberations on consumer and health protection need to be taken into account more than they have been in the past .
It might not be our intention to depart from our successful horizontal regulations , because these are good for innovation and encourage consumer choice .
Yet there is to be no conflict with quality assurance requirements either .
Here you find , I hope , the common interest of consumers and producers alike , especially agricultural producers .
We have already made it clear on various occasions that European industry is essentially competitive through the quality of its products , and agriculture should be the same .
There should be no unnecessary inconsistencies .
If the aim is to ultimately arrange things legally , then you can bet we will fall out over this .
It is always funny to observe how someone who wishes to defend their particular little interest quickly sets up a committee for the purpose , which no-one can look into .
Things really should not be this way .
Simplification is a very important goal we are pursuing , as is transparency .
We will probably be able to rescue ourselves from the dilemma that has so far existed with a series of modern information options .
The more transparent and comprehensive information you wish to give a consumer , the more the labelling overlooks the consumer 's interest in having simple , clear and easy-to-understand rules .
That is the dilemma in which we find ourselves , so to speak .
Since today , in the age of the information society , we have very easily accessible information facilities at our disposal , you could imagine that labelling should include the most important information and actually go into detail if particular consumer interests need to be taken into account . However , the great mass of information needs to be available in other ways or else we would run the risk of the labelling not being looked at all .
As regards genetically modified organisms , I said months ago that , if we take this as far as certain sections of Parliament envisage , then practically 90 % of all foodstuffs will have to carry an appropriate label .
I recently heard - to my amazement as well as to my satisfaction -the same opinion expressed , if I am not mistaken , by a German member of the Green group , who said : well , if 90 % is labelled , what significance does that have for the consumer ?
I have always made a point of saying this too at conferences we have held and I hope we will be able to agree on what is really in the interest of the consumer and what does not amount to simply translating quasi-religious convictions into practice .
I would like to note on the question of food control that we want to build up our own team of inspectors and begin training European veterinary and foodstuff controllers .
It goes without saying that inspectors from the Member States can be included in this too .
I think those are the main points .
I have just another brief comment on the foreign trade aspect .
There are two reasons why we share Parliament 's view that we need to be careful here .
Firstly , the proposals for the legal provisions will obviously need to bear in mind the international obligations .
There is no other alternative .
If we are a member of an international rights community , then we must stay with it .
We cannot take our leave when it suits us .
Secondly , we should try to implement the things we believe to be right at international level and actively collaborate on the work programme of the Codex Alimentarius and the World Trade Organization , instead of simply reacting defensively towards them .
We have been actively involved in this sense in trying to get other legitimate factors , besides the scientific findings , included in the elaboration of food standards within the framework of the Codex , because , as we have all bitterly experienced , scientific findings merely epitomize the state of knowledge at a particular point in time and become dated at another .
That is to say , it is possible to do more for the consumer in terms of prevention .
And this is precisely what we wish to do !
The debate is closed .
The vote will be taken at 12.00 noon tomorrow .
Decentralized Community institutions
The next item is the report ( A4-0035 / 98 ) by Mr Kellett-Bowman , on behalf of the Committee on Budgetary Control , on the proposals for Council Regulations amending : I. Regulation ( EC ) 40 / 94 on the Community trade mark ( COM ( 97 ) 0489 - C4-0601 / 97-97 / 0253 ( CNS ) ) II .
Regulation ( EC ) 2100 / 94 on Community plant variety rights ( COM ( 97 ) 0489 - C4-0602 / 97-97 / 0254 ( CNS ) ) III .
Regulation ( EEC ) 2309 / 93 laying down Community procedures for the authorization and supervision of medicinal products for human and veterinary use and establishing a European Agency for the evaluation of medicinal products ( COM ( 97 ) 0489 - C4-0603 / 97-97 / 0255 ( CNS ) ) IV . Regulation ( EEC ) 1210 / 90 on the establishment of the European Environment Agency and the European Environment Information and Observation network ( COM ( 97 ) 0489 - C4-0604 / 97-97 / 0256 ( CNS ) ) V. Regulation ( EC ) 2062 / 94 establishing a European Agency for safety and health at work ( COM ( 97 ) 0489 - C4-0605 / 97-97 / 0258 ( CNS ) ) VI .
Regulation ( EEC ) 302 / 93 establishing a European monitoring centre for drugs and drug addiction ( COM ( 97 ) 0489 - C4-0606 / 97-97 / 0259 ( CNS ) ) VII .
Regulation ( EEC ) 1360 / 90 establishing a European training foundation ( COM ( 97 ) 0489 - C4-0607 / 97-97 / 0260 ( CNS ) ) VIII .
Regulation ( EC ) 965 / 94 setting up a translation centre for bodies of the European Union ( COM ( 97 ) 0489 - C4-0608 / 97-97 / 0261 ( CNS ) ) IX .
Regulation ( EC ) 1035 / 97 establishing a European monitoring centre on racism and xenophobia ( COM ( 97 ) 0489 - C4-0609 / 97-97 / 0262 ( CNS ) )
Mr President , this report proposes revised financial rules for the statutes of the nine decentralized bodies or agencies .
It is complicated because it deals with all nine separately and it is necessary to submit amendments in nine sets .
It was passed in Budgetary Control with one vote against .
This is explained in the minority opinion which suggests that on three of the agencies Parliament is not clawing back as much power as it should .
The amendments from Budgets are contained in Mr Tappin 's excellent opinion which was supported unanimously in the committee , and the amendments were all taken on board in Budgetary Control .
So much agreement , Mr President , that there have been some criticisms .

Perhaps it would helpful if I explained what the report is not : it is not an attempt by Budgets and Budgetary Control to do the work of the appropriate spending committees ; it is not an exercise which is being carried out without consulting the agencies themselves ; it is not an attempt to turn agencies into milch cows which will feed the EC budget .

The second-generation agencies were put in place by the Commission with statutes which did not contain the financial safeguards which exist for the two first-generation ones .
Upon which safeguards are we insisting ?
First , European funds should be expended only with the positive approval of the Commission 's financial controller .
With the help of their financial controller proper arrangements will now be legislated for .
Secondly , there was no provision for discharge to be granted by this Parliament .
The Director-General for the EC budget has cooperated so that EP grants discharge for six of the agencies ; but three of them , those that are fee-earning , will be allowed to grant themselves discharge on the recommendation of this Parliament .
Thirdly , the same three agencies , which can be funded by fees , are to be controlled by the rules whereby income should be considered Community own resources .
Mr Tappin will explain how it is proposed to deal with possible problems in his area .
Faced by a united front of the Budgets and Budgetary Control Committees , the Commission has been very helpful in assisting Parliament to regain control over the agencies .
Unwittingly , this Parliament conspired to assist the Commission in its original proposals .
The founding documents were passed to the spending committees but the Budgets and Budgetary Control Committees were not asked for their opinions .
Much extra work could have been avoided if European Parliament officials had not been blind to the financial aspects of the Commission 's proposals .
More care should be given to the task of allocation of reports to committees .
Failure to do so clearly weakens Parliament 's position .
All the agencies but one seem happy with our proposals , and it is very much in the area of Mr Tappin 's opinion that their opposition is founded .
But , in the main , that agency resents the fact that Parliament considers itself responsible - jointly with the Council - for providing funds .
Its own responsibility for dealing with the matter of discharge is a matter which has raised a lot of correspondence , often ill-informed , and when I have had to deal with correspondents , the first question I asked them was : ' have you read the report ? ' .
And of course , they have not .
That is the problem : you cannot comment on things that you have not read .
Mr President , I invite the house to support this report .
Mr President , I also take this opportunity to thank not only my friend Mr Kellett-Bowman , the rapporteur for the Committee on Budgetary Control , for his excellent report and also for the great support he has given me as draftsman for the Committee on Budgets but also to Mr Mingasson and his team for the very positive approach they have adopted in this matter .

The background to this report goes back several years when both the Committee on Budgets and Committee on Budgetary Control were concerned about the lack of clarity in the founding regulations of the nine satellite agencies with reference to own resources , financial control and discharge .
The report you have before you is the culmination of two or three years ' work behind the scenes by Mr Kellett-Bowman , myself and the Commission to bring forward a document which will harmonize the regulations for the satellite agencies .
We have had a number of disagreements on the subject but at the end of the day , while I could wish for some tightening of the proposals in certain cases , on the whole I feel that we have achieved a reasonable workable compromise .
The work carried out by the agencies of the European Union which currently employ over 1 000 people is of great importance .
They were set up by the European Union for a specific purpose .
In fact , it is clear that although these bodies have legal personality , they would have no existence if they were not required to serve the EU and its citizens .
So , it is necessary that they are able to carry out their tasks efficiently and with all the independence of action required to make the sort of operational decisions necessary to complete their assigned work programme .
Equally , because they are not independent commercial organizations but part of a public corpus , they must be held accountable and responsible to the public through democratic and transparent processes .
That is why this report has come about .
It is to increase the levels of transparency , accountability and efficiency of the decentralized satellite agencies .
It is not efficient to have a hotchpotch of different organizations and it is not accountable to have half a dozen different types of accounting , report-back systems and discharge processes .
We also wanted to improve partnership relations between the decentralized bodies of the EU and those at its heart .
Our research has shown that these agencies do not need more controls .
They , in fact , need fewer but more efficient ones .
I shall concentrate on the own-resources part of the report since the discharge and financial control aspects have been covered excellently by Mr Kellett-Bowman both in his speech and in the Committee on Budgetary Control .
Despite the scare stories generated by one agency , what we are proposing is that self-generated resources - the own-resources component - which are surplus to requirements of that year 's budget , after the needs of the reserve to cover the obligations of the coming year have been taken into consideration , and fully respecting the fact that fees shall quite rightly be renegotiated as a matter of course , shall be returned to the European Union budget .
This should be done in line with the Financial Regulations which apply to all other generated resources .
It does not indicate that Parliament intends to turn for example the Trademarks Agency or any other agency into a milch cow for the European Union , as Mr Kellett-Bowman has said .
Nor do we intend to make the ordinary business of those who wish to register an EU trademark subsidize singlehandedly the common agricultural policy or the enlargement of the Union .
Such stories are irresponsible .
But what is also irresponsible is the commitment of one agency in Alicante to purchase an ECU 24 million building without properly informing either the budgetary authority or the Commission , which have responsibility for it , or without making any mention of that project in the budget estimates passed by the Commission and Parliament .
If ever there was a case for mandatory transparency and accountability , I have to say that the director and the management board , including the Commission representatives , of the Alicante Agency have made it admirably .
If this or any other EU agency ceases to be able to fund itself , there is no question that , according to the current regulations , the EU must have a responsibility for the bodies we establish , just as they have a responsibility to the institutions of the Union .
We do not set up monopoly businesses and turn them loose to stand or fall .
This report is about safeguarding those responsibilities .
I urge the House to support it .
Mr President , the agency is a matter for the initiated .
That is why I would like to congratulate Mr Kellett-Bowman and Mr Tappin on their report , for the agencies are indeed something for specialists particularly from a budgetary point of view .
As general rapporteur for the 1998 budget , I had the pleasure of gaining an insight into the activities of the agencies .
I would like to report on this . We had a meeting with the agency director in March of last year .
We reached agreements on the needs of these agencies in the 1997 budget and the 1998 budget , and we discussed the problems already mentioned here .
We agreed on working together and developing the greatest possible transparency in order to create trust between the agencies and the section of the budgetary authority representing Parliament .
Today I have to say that the majority have adhered to this , but some have not .
The translation centre , for example , decided to increase its staff from 68 to 115 , while Alicante - Mr Tappin has just spoken about this - and London quickly allocated ECU 300 000 from surplus income before the end of the budget year so as not to have to justify this in principle to the budgetary authority .
Those are actions in themselves , which perhaps have their own reasons , but to take action without informing the budgetary authority is the surest way to generate mistrust .
I consider Amendment No 1 in the Kellett-Bowman report to be the key element for the agencies in London and Alicante and for the Trademarks Agency .
Here both the Commission and the Council should take the position of the European Parliament very seriously .
For three years we have constantly decided in the budgetary procedure on zero growth for the staff of the Commission , as well as the other European institutions .
Where the agencies are concerned , there has been an average annual growth of 17 % in staff .
I ask myself whether this is an honest or dishonest game the Commission and the Commissioners responsible are playing , or have the agencies already escaped control here if such abuses are able to occur ?
The Group of the European People 's Party will not tolerate the EP being deprived of its rights through the formation of agencies and all that comes with it .
I am not bothered about the work of the agencies ; observing the Financial Regulations and respecting the budgetary authority is what concerns me .
We cannot fight for the full democratic control of budgetary expenditure in the European Union , whilst the agencies continue to evade the Financial Regulations .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the financial control of the activities of the decentralized Community agencies was simple when there was only a few agencies and they managed activities which had limited impact and small budgets .
But the situation is very different today .
There are now many more decentralized agencies which meet much more widespread needs .
The difficulty in terms of financial control is that of organizing this diversity in order to arrive at a standard method which is simple and efficient .
Mr Kellett-Bowman has proposed to include in one report the eleven discharge procedures which cover simultaneously the three agencies which are not financed by the European Union budget , but from financial resources resulting from their own activities , and the eight other agencies which are not self-financing .
Basically , we want common standards applied to all Community agencies in terms of financial control , and to offer similar guarantees in terms of the legal and administrative management of credits .
The proposal by the European Commission responds to this concern .
However , the rapporteur proposes an approach which is more pragmatic and efficient in order to avoid the delays in unfreezing credit and payment commitments caused by the waiting period required for the approval of DG XX in Brussels .
The rapporteur 's solution has the advantage of side-stepping the pitfalls both of financial management which is too centralist and which could lead to freezing or at least blocking of the activities of the Community agencies , and a dispersal of financial control under the pretext of autonomy , running the risk of an upward drift in the use of public funds .
The law must adapt to reality , and it is essential to give agencies which are undergoing full expansion the means to develop .
I will quote only one example , that of the Office for Harmonization in the Internal Market in Alicante which has been hugely successful and whose achievements are generally greater than expected .
Experts were expecting an annual volume of 15 000 registered trademarks in 1996 .
It received 40 000 .
Currently , the office publishes 1 000 registered trademarks each week , that is , twice as many as predicted .
This sort of progress should be encouraged for other agencies too , and the control of their financial activities should not stand in the way of their development .
So in this spirit , myself and my group welcome Mr Kellett-Bowman 's proposals and we will vote for them .
Mr President , we in the Green group have fought for and supported several of the decentralized EU bodies to which the report applies in various different contexts , for example , the European Environment Agency in Copenhagen and the European monitoring centre on racism and xenophobia in Vienna .
Since these bodies are financed partly by the EU 's budget , it is both logical and desirable for the European Parliament to be involved in granting freedom from liability through our role as a supervisory body .
It is also necessary and logical for any income of these bodies to be shown in the EU 's budget so that we can get a complete picture of the financial situation .
These amendments are a step in the right direction , because they increase transparency and openness concerning EU bodies .
It is a goal for all institutions and bodies in the EU to have increased openness , not least so that irregularities are prevented .
The best system of supervision is openness and publicity .
The Green group is therefore going to wholeheartedly support the KelletBowman report .
Mr President , I wish to say that the report that is being submitted for approval by the part-session is one that we must support since it is the culmination of long and assiduous research and debate in the Committee on Budgetary Control and , I assume , in the Comment on Budgets .
I would also like to say that , as a general principle - and this is also proposed by the Commission - there must be provision for a procedure of discharge for those independent organizations which are funded exclusively by Commission funds , as is proposed for the two formerly independent organizations , one of which is the well-known CEDEFOP .
The problem arises for those independent organizations which are fee-earning and which are partly funded by the Community budget .
In these cases the Commission simply requests in its proposal that there be a recommendation on the part of the European Parliament .
I wish to say that , in this case , there are grounds for a minority opinion , and this is contained in the explanatory statement of the report .
The grounds for this minority opinion are justified but they must not lead us to solutions other than those proposed by the rapporteur , Mr Kellett-Bowman .
However , we must recognize this issue and it should be of concern to us .
The fact that an independent organization can have self-generated resources does not mean it should be unaccountable in terms of its expenditure when , at the same time , it receives a part of its funds from the Commission and , most importantly , it intends to serve a Community purpose which is one of the aims of the European Union .
I will finish with a request and a reminder , which I am constantly repeating : the European Parliament , the Presidency and the political groups must consider and must face the problem of the reorganization of the Committee on Budgetary Control .
This committee has developed into a major organ of Parliament and it cannot function with its present constitution .
Mr President , I would like to congratulate the rapporteur on his excellent report .
In bringing all the strands together he has responded to the Commission proposal , which I also warmly welcome .
I was in the House when the Commissioner gave his promise some two years ago - if I remember correctly - that he would come forward with this because it was an element which had been forgotten in the shaping of the operation of these agencies in the first stage .
Our rapporteur is absolutely right that there is a need for financial safeguards for the second-generation agencies , but I am not convinced , myself , that we would have actually got to this particular point in dealing with these agencies if we , as a parliament , had not used our powers for putting money in the reserve to actually compel the agencies to do what we had wanted to do in terms of parliamentary accountability .
So , looking at the substance , the rapporteur is right in terms of the proposals on discharge .
It is not just desirable ; I think it should be a prerequisite , as he suggests .
Secondly , in terms of financial control , we should make sure that we avoid , if possible , the need to put a financial controller in every agency .
Let us hope , therefore , that the proposals of the Commission will be sufficient to make sure this job will be done effectively .
The last point I would address is the question of the odd man out - of the agency in Alicante , where it pretends that it would like to be dealt with in a different fashion because it is not quite the same as all the other agencies .
Once you have an element of an agency being controlled by European law , when you have the staff which are part of the European institutions , you cannot claim that there is an exception .
You have to be treated in the same way as others .
I conclude that our rapporteur has shown us the way to go , but that we , as a parliament , need to rest vigilant in the way in which these agencies will be operating .
It is an entirely new area of activity .
So we will keep our eyes open as the future comes along .
The debate is closed .
The vote will be taken at 12 noon tomorrow .
Closing of the session
I declare closed the 1997-1998 session of the European Parliament and announce that , in accordance with the provisions of the Treaty , Parliament will meet at 9.00 a.m. tomorrow , Tuesday , 10 March 1998 .
( The sitting was closed at 8.10 p.m. )
Opening of annual session
I declare the 1998-1999 session of the European Parliament open .
Approval of the Minutes
The Minutes of Monday , 9 March 1998 have been distributed .
Are there any comments ?
Mr President , I would like to refer to Item 2 of the Minutes of yesterday 's sitting , and return to the subject of crime in Brussels .
It states here that the President said this item should not actually have been in the Minutes , although it was certainly in the Minutes for the Friday of the last part-session .
The President also mentioned that he would inform the two signatories of the request for a topical and urgent debate in writing .
Could the Bureau please consider whether this could not be debated here in plenary ?
We know that over a third of Members have been victims of criminal acts in Brussels , so that this really affects everyone and not just one or two people in this House .
I really think it is high time something was done about this in Parliament .
As you know , this matter is not on the agenda .
Moreover , I have nothing to add to what Mr Gil-Robles GilDelgado said yesterday .
The Presidency is very concerned about the problem and has taken all the necessary steps with regard to the Belgian authorities .
We will report any concrete news immediately .
Are there any further comments ?
Mr President , my point concerns page 15 of the Minutes .
There is a list there of the questions for Question Time to the Commission .
My question , which is on structural funds and eligibility for structural funds , has been put down under ' Any Other Questions ' , and yet earlier in the afternoon Mrs Wulf-Mathies , the Regional Affairs Commissioner , is answering questions .
I would ask your services to look at that and see if this question about the structural funds could be transferred so that it gets an answer from the Commissioner concerned .
Thank you .
Mr McMahon , we will see if this correction can be made but , as you know , this is a task that normally falls to the Commission .
( The Minutes were approved )
The euro : public administrations , tourism and legal convergence
The next item is the joint debate on the following reports :
A4-0061 / 98 by Mr Arroni , on behalf of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and Industrial Policy , on the Commission communication ' Practical aspects of the introduction of the euro ' ( COM ( 97 ) 0491 - C4-0524 / 97 ) and the Commission working paper entitled ' Preparations for the changeover of public administrations to the euro ' ( SEC ( 97 ) 2384 - C4-0025 / 98 ) ; -A4-0078 / 98 by Mrs Torres Marques , on behalf of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and Industrial Policy , on the euro and tourism ; -A4-0070 / 98 by Mr Wolf , on behalf of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and Industrial Policy , on the report of the European Monetary Institute on legal convergence in the Member States of the European Union ( as at August 1997 ) ( C4-0560 / 97 ) .
Mr President , 11 Member States have already presented transition plans .
The euro is now a reality that is becoming more and more concrete every day , but that does not mean we can regard it without particular apprehension and attention .
Consumers , small traders and small businesses require a lot of attention , and we have taken them into consideration in drawing up the report and presenting the amendments . However , we must not forget the other operators who will also be involved in this important transition : the large financial institutions and large businesses which provide work for millions of European citizens , and which will manage to absorb the economic repercussions of the entry into force of the euro with greater ease .
They are all involved , and public administrations will be the first to set the example : dual pricing will create a snowball effect which will then be imitated by the world of private business . Together they will meet the concerns of our citizens , who will not have to bear the cost of the transition .
I congratulate the Commission for setting the objective of reaching final decisions on the practical aspects of the euro on 2 May .
Then everything will be clear and transparent , not only for the large operators but for the small traders as well .
The administrations , trade unions and consumer associations of the Member States will be responsible for making these decisions known and making these choices understood , so that the transition to the euro takes place under the best conditions . They must ensure that the banking system observes its commitments and that businesses respect dual pricing , which will be essential in enabling the citizen to understand the transition .
To do this , I believe it is very important not to forget the aspect of communication in these decisions , because these decisions have to be understood and accepted by the citizen .
And for that to happen , the Parliament and the Commission need to reflect together to find the best means of making the euro popular .
For this purpose , I have proposed a round table for all major European professional communicators to contribute towards explaining all the innovative aspects , not only to the large industries and banks , but above all to us , the consumers , and to our small traders , the local trade we need to protect and save .
On 26 February , the Commission also organized a round table that developed well and broadly answered the concerns set out in my report .
Once again , however , I wish to recall a few brief points .
Particular attention should be paid to the disadvantaged social groups among the population , including the elderly , those on low incomes and people with disabilities .
We should ensure that small and medium-sized businesses do not risk becoming less competitive compared with the larger businesses that can access information more easily .
Dual pricing will have to be optional to give the markets greater flexibility .
The period of dual circulation of bank notes - of national currencies and the euro - should be as short as possible to avoid complications for consumers and to limit additional costs to the financial system .
The banking and financial sectors should adopt a code of good practice on conversion charges , observing the principle of free compulsory conversions between national currencies and the euro .
The information sector will play an extremely important role as it will constitute an important vehicle for increasing public awareness about the euro .
The transition to the euro is the most important challenge Europe has faced this century , and the wellbeing of we Europeans in the first century of the new millennium will depend on correctly and carefully meeting this challenge .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , legal convergence of national central banks is not just a technical detail .
It is essential , institutionally speaking , for the introduction of the euro .
This is not the right time to be discussing problems about the overall concept of the euro project .
We will have a chance to do that when we discuss Mrs Randzio-Plath 's report and when we debate the outcome of the Cardiff Summit , which will once again be considering how to match the single currency with an effective and coordinated European employment policy .
But now to specifics .
As members of the left , we have had to learn the hard way that institutions are not like Lego bricks that you can put together and pull apart however you like . They have their own history and must enjoy the confidence of the people they serve .
The European Monetary Institute 's report , which quite rightly takes as its theme the two key issues of the independence of the European Central Bank and of the European System of Central Banks , and the proper functioning of this system as a unified whole , goes somewhat beyond compatibility issues .
The report more or less envisages standardizing all the various forms of anchorage found in the national central banks . In Austria this takes the form of participation in managing boards , in Germany consultation rights , and in France very close links with government as regards consultation and objectives .
So there are wide variations in practice , and I think we need to approach all this very carefully .
We have to decide which of these practices are genuinely incompatible with using the ESCB to develop a single monetary policy for Europe , and which are incompatible with the proper functioning of the ESCB as a single system .
I have in mind various forms of consultation with governments and parliaments , and an inclusive approach towards civil society and social dialogue .
We also have to take national economic policy into account .
We should be advocating a basic strategy in all these areas , with a focus on eliminating incompatibility and providing a clear basis for single monetary policy .
This also applies to the relationship between the ESCB and the tasks that will still be performed by national central banks , notably banking supervision in some cases and collateral business in all cases .
Of course it is vital to guarantee compatibility here , but there is no call for standardization or harmonization .
We should not embark on this process lightly , as it genuinely represents a great challenge and involves many uncertainties . We should treat the various existing forms of anchorage as a chance to construct a kind of network of anchorages for national banks , so that the European System of Central Banks is firmly rooted in the individual Member States , in much the same way as happened with the Bank deutscher Länder .
Monetary policy is simply too important to be entrusted to a small group of bankers in a democratic nirvana .
That would be tantamount to making it subject to the whim of the financial markets and removing it from any kind of joint political decisionmaking arena .
The various forms of integration that have shaped our national banks over the years , and which still exist today , could help to avoid this sort of mistake .
So where existing systems work , we should allow them to remain , instead of trying to agglomerate and standardize everything .
If we can approach this matter in this spirit , I believe we will be doing the euro project a great favour .
If we take the opposite approach , we will be doing it a great disservice .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , like the Peres Rojo report , the Wolf , Torres Marques and Arroni reports demonstrate that the days of theoretical debates about monetary union are over : the problems before us now are highly practical ones .
I welcome the extent of progress on legal convergence , and the trend towards greater independence for national central banks in the European Union . At the same time , our discussions with the presidents of the central banks suggest that there is an increasing willingness on their part to enter into a dialogue on monetary matters with national parliaments .
All this progress on monetary union is to be supported .
The independence of central banks is certainly an important aspect of legal convergence .
However , the panoply of practical questions surrounding the introduction of the euro is also important .
Mrs Torres Marques has quite rightly pointed out that the first people to notice that something has changed , that they are living in ' Euro-Land ' , will be tourists . As the Subcommittee on Monetary Affairs ' hearing demonstrated , that it why it is so important for us to explain that the advent of the euro will cut costs , and this will in turn result in savings for people travelling in the European Union .
We know because of things like the International Tourism Fair that Europeans are especially fond of travel . Not only is travel a growth sector , it will also give a great many people their first experience of the euro and monetary union .
However , all the other practical things involved in introducing the euro are also important , and it is therefore our duty as a European Parliament to express our regret that neither our citizens nor our small and medium-sized businesses have been given adequate preparation or information .
The European Parliament must appeal not only to the European institutions to prepare people and SMEs for the euro - national governments and administrations also need to play their part .
This is fundamental , as we cannot prepare ourselves without information .
Consumer protection also has to play a greater part in the run-up to monetary union . I am therefore specifically requesting , and not for the first time , that there should be a period of dual pricing , that there should be no conversion costs , and that the transition period should be as short as possible , so as to minimize the burden on both companies and ordinary citizens .
SMEs particularly need help , because the euro will enable them to take full advantage of the internal market for the first time .
If this is to happen , the authorities absolutely must play a more positive and constructive role , and do what the European Parliament has specifically requested , and lead the way in introducing the euro , even if finance ministers have agreed to delay conversion in public administration until 1 January 2002 .
We need cooperation from public authorities at local , regional and national level , and I particularly want to see the tax authorities converting to the euro !
Mr President , in exactly 297 days the euro will be introduced in the countries taking part in monetary union .
It is still just a little too far away to tell children it will be another so many nights ' sleep before conversion .
But for grown-up administrators it is high time to decide on the practical aspects of the euro .
This , in any case , is what the man and the woman in the street expect of their government .
They want clear answers to their questions , also the questions on the tiniest detail as to how it will all work , and they want a workable method without burdens and costs which could be avoided .
The Arroni report has therefore arrived not a moment too soon , and it is this report I will be discussing on behalf of my Group .
The rapporteur has done an excellent job , and we would like to offer him our congratulations .
The report dwells not only on the obvious aspects , such as information programmes and costs , but it rightly draws attention to the weaker sections of society .
We believe that the introduction of the euro will only be successful if the disabled , the very old and the poor are able to change over to the euro without running into problems .
What must be avoided at all costs is that the introduction of the euro leads to a reinforcement of division within our society .
As far as the display of dual prices is concerned , Mr President , I am glad to note that the report is on the same wavelength as the Commission .
During the round table discussion to which the rapporteur referred , the Commission stated clearly that it is not a priori in favour of statutory regulations on dual pricing .
Our Group fully agrees with this .
Dual pricing can be useful for information purposes , but it is merely one of the many alternatives .
We must ensure the consumer does not drown in a sea of information , and we should avoid forcing the retailer and the service provider to make one-off investments which will only be of use for a limited period .
It would be much better to leave the price display options - which are by definition temporary - to the market and the creativity of the people involved .
If the information the retailer gives to his customers is not clear enough , he will be the first to feel the consequences .
As spokesperson for the Group of the European People 's Party on this matter , I also think we should have sufficient confidence in the market and the laws of competition , particularly during the first phase . Statutory regulations will only be useful if and on condition that it is determined that optional dual pricing does not lead to the hoped-for result .
We are therefore not able to support the amendments proposing that dual price display be laid down in a regulation .
Another practical aspect of the introduction of the euro is the effective changeover from the relevant national coins and notes to the euro .
There is a lot of disagreement on this issue , and a new debate is being held between those in favour of statutory regulation and those in favour of codes of conduct and voluntary arrangements .
Here the Commission has also nailed its colours to the mast and has shown itself in favour of codes of good conduct .
My group agrees , on condition that in these codes the guiding principle should be that there is no cost attached to compulsory conversion .
Mr President , I would like to draw your attention to one further aspect .
The banks are considering charging small shopkeepers for converting large quantities of coins .
This is not acceptable .
The small shopkeeper will be asked to play an important role in the changeover process .
The fact that this is expected of him should be enough .
We simply think it would be too much if the banks were to make him pay for the kind of work they provide for free to a private client .
In conclusion , may I perhaps suggest a short transitional period and , during this period , a sharing out of the cost benefit resulting from the fact that exchange rates will have disappeared during the changeover .
Obviously , these paragraphs meet with my Group 's approval .
Mr President , from our understanding of what the rapporteurs have said , the euro is a small , peaceful , end-of-century revolution , which in practice will obviously change our entire modus operandi , whether as businesses or as consumers .
But behind every revolution lie the specific psychological aspects .
The great problem we will have to face in the next few years , particularly in the six months of coexistence between national currency and single currency , will be that of making businesses and the public understand that the euro is a means of building Europe - and a strictly economic means .
We are hoping for an economic and social Europe , but at the moment the euro is the fundamental means of making people understand that Europe can be built with something that the citizens can actually touch , see and find in their pockets . Then , as the rapporteurs rightly said , there will be financial involvement on the part of the banks .
However , the banks have broad shoulders and are organized to send us , as from 1 January , a statement in national currency and in single currency at the same time . The banks are organized with a computer system they have been using for some time , while the real problem of the euro is that of calmly getting it to the citizens as consumers .
The commercial system , in particular , will perform this arduous task .
The citizen , as consumer , will go into a bar , a shop , a supermarket , a restaurant or a travel agency and pay in national currency . He will receive the change in euros and it will be there that he actually meets the single currency .
There he will find an operator , a small businessman , a cashier or an assistant who is familiar with the single currency system because , otherwise , the effect on us will be terrible psychologically .
A confused consumer , or a small businessman confused over the commercial system when purchases are being made , will cause purchases themselves to slow down - a fall in psychological consumption that , at the moment , is precisely what we do not want .
There is already a fall in physiological consumption in this continent , and if we add the psychological consequences of a fall in consumption owing to the uncertainty of purchases , we will create problems that are not easy to resolve .
We should therefore take measures with regard to both information and training .
Information should obviously be aimed at the public , training should be professional and aimed at different categories , particularly traders . By trade I mean commerce , tourism and services , in other words the tertiary market , the market that will physically meet the single currency .
French colleagues will recall that in their country , 30 years on , the elderly are still today thinking in terms of old francs and new francs .
Thirty years ago , two zeros were simply wiped off , and still today they talk in terms of old francs .
Just think of multiplying the euro by a different figure in each of the 15 Member States when it becomes real currency , on 1 January 2002 .
By that date , it will be essential to have carried out this information and training action jointly , and to ensure that the three market components work together - namely industry , commercial distribution and , above all , the sector forming the vertex of this triangle , the consumers .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , this debate is really very important , in the sense that it offers us various practical prospects for the application of the euro process .
We are no longer talking about its chances or viability , because the predictions are that in May a very broad and stable group of Member States will be members of monetary union . Instead , we are talking about specific matters , and the three reports ( by Mr Arroni , Mrs Torres Marques and Mr Wolf ) deal with specific aspects of its application .
I think we must stress the need for a major effort to inform the public and small and medium-sized enterprises , to promote awareness within consumers ' associations , and to structure the preparations as well as can possibly be done in the two key areas which have been mentioned here : the financial area and the commercial area .
Also , we must not forget that the European Commission needs to step up its support for small and medium-sized enterprises . That support has been developed over many years and will be strengthened by economic and monetary union .
It is perhaps in the area of tourism that monetary union will first be noticed , because of the facilities it will provide . Also , the fact that there will no longer be any differences in exchange or currency within the European Union will have positive effects on the sector .
There is also a more technical but equally important matter , which Mr Wolf spoke about : namely , accountability - in other words , the real transparency which should characterize this whole process , both at the level of Member States ' national central banks and at the level of the European System of Central Banks and the European Central Bank .
Mr President , I take this opportunity to extend a warm greeting to you .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , these reports are paving the way for the post-euro period .
The subjects they discuss are so important , and time so limited , that I must be all the more selective and succinct in my remarks .
The tourism sector accounts for a sizeable share of the economies of some Member States .
To the complexity of that sector , with intricate upstream and downstream links , is added the complexity of the different situations existing in individual Member States .
This complex complexity ( if I may put it like that ) is not reflected in Mrs Torres Marques ' report , which I consider to be excessively optimistic and , if I may be so bold , excessively monochrome - that is , rose-tinted - imbued as it is with the author 's unshakeable faith in European construction as it is currently proceeding .
Tourism , and some individual tourists , will no doubt receive debatable advantages from the introduction of the euro .
However , we cannot but doubt that there will be nothing but benefits and the benefited .
Some tourists and , more particularly , some types of tourism , will experience increased difficulties with the emergence of a single currency designed to be strong , losing the ability to use the instruments and mechanisms they have employed in the past .
It is true that such instruments have not always been applied to best effect .
But if we deprive people of those instruments they have won but used wrongly , we will all end up empty-handed - and without coins , banking systems and financial policies .
In the virtual reality of a single , strong currency , shared by countries with different tourism policies , whether complementary or competitive , we cannot ignore or underestimate the tendency for tourism flows to switch to destinations outside Europe , which make themselves more competitive through measures based on exchange-rate policy .
For our part , for these and other reasons , we thank Mrs Torres Marques for her work but have serious reservations regarding her optimism , her " tourism at the service of the euro ' position , and her appeal for the creation of a European policy for tourism or , more accurately , for the modes of tourism that coexist within the confines of the European Union .
Finally , I cannot end without briefly referring to Mr Wolf 's report , if only to express my satisfaction on reading his explanatory statement in which he lists real problems in a balanced , thoughtful manner which counters a climate of intransigent , blinkered thinking and direction .
Since I cannot at this time say what I think is necessary and right on this subject , I will reserve a number of comments on this report for an explanation of vote .
Mr President , this spring the European Parliament is to conduct a very important debate on the democratic monitoring of the European Central Bank .
It will certainly be a noteworthy occasion , as we will soon be going over Mrs Randzio-Plath 's report , which the Green Group in the European Parliament fervently supports .
Today we are discussing how national central banks and national political institutions can get involved in the democratic monitoring of a central bank and a central bank system .
This is a subject which has , up till now , been given scanty attention , but now Mr Wolf has produced a very interesting report on the subject .
He says that given the unfortunate absence of any common economic policy in the Union , the role of the central bank is a vital one as , in a way , it will have to use a certain kind of economic wisdom when taking decisions on funding .
The European Monetary Institute has completed a report on how compatible the various national laws on finance are with the Maastricht Treaty .
We are of the same opinion as the rapporteur that the EMI is too much concerned with emphasizing the independence of national central banks from national political institutions .
We believe it is essential that individual country 's parliaments and governments alike maintain links with a system which aims to create a stable currency and stable prices for Europe .
But , as the rapporteur remarked , price stability is not a neutral concept .
There has been no mention of what level of inflation would be harmful to the economy .
In this respect , the EMI should certainly not go it alone in debating this matter .
It is neither sensible nor proper that the European Monetary Institute should condemn certain national laws as incompatible with a central bank system .
I shall give an example of this , the same one that the rapporteur also remarked on .
The EMI is judgemental about Finland 's central bank law which states that the President of the country can fire the managing director or any other member of the management if these prove to be unsuitable .
It is our belief that this must be allowed to continue .
The European Union is not one homogenous economic area : there is a lot of variation contained within it and that is why , when it comes to a central bank system , the national voice must be heard .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , first of all I would like to say that our Group agrees with the reports by Mrs Torres Marques and Mr Arroni , and we fully support the direction they take .

However , Mr Wolf 's report calls for a number of comments .
The rapporteur in fact allows himself to give a criticism of the EMI report on different levels .
We would like to point out at the outset that we believe the EMI is perfectly within its remit when it attempts to identify the clauses in national legislation which appear to be incompatible with the requirements of the Treaty on European Union , and that , even if it does challenge this Treaty and all those which have gone before it , it would not be a question of leaving to the political bodies of the Union the task of interpreting and defining the demands and objectives of the Treaty .
Basically , as regards the functioning of the ESCB , Mr Wolf stresses the demands for transparency and information , which we think are in fact necessary to gain the confidence of the citizens of the Union in the way their currency is managed .
We share Mr Wolf 's concern to prevent the ESCB becoming an ivory tower cut off from its institutional environment and public opinion .
To ensure that the central banks have adequate information , they need in particular to be able to listen to the representatives of governments or national parliaments .
It is also essential that the ECB presents and explains to the democratic institutions of the Union , and to the public in general , the decisions taken in carrying out its duty .
But we believe these demands for transparency and information must not on any account compromise the independence of the ESCB , be it the independence of its members or that of the decisions it takes .
We believe in this necessary independence , not through any anti-Keynesian convictions , but as a result of our European conviction .
This conviction leads us to the opinion that it would be dangerous to relaunch the debate on the possible role of the monetary instrument in the implementation of national economic policies .
In the Treaty on European Union , the Member States renounced the use of this sort of tool . For some this was for economic reasons , and for everyone the fundamental reason was political .
Whatever the economic preferences of individual countries , it is clear that the choice of a single currency for Europe implies that it evades any national political pressure or manipulation , either directly or indirectly , even if this produces tension between the countries , which could be fatal for the European Union .
There can be no single currency unless it is an independent currency .
This is the true general consensus which Mr Wolf wishes for elsewhere .
From that point on , we cannot follow him ; for example , when he reproaches the EMI for considering incompatible with the treaty any legislative clause in which a central bank must take into account the economic policy of the government when implementing its own monetary policy .
Of course , the independence of the ESCB would not mean that the democratic institutions of Europe were impotent .
That is why we feel it is urgent to define , alongside the single currency , other means of joint economic action , and those other means would be in the hands of the democratic institutions of the Union , and called the European budget , European tax and European structural policy .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , in both the communication from the Commission and Mr Arroni 's report , the players in economic life have been called on not to moderate their efforts , but are we taking them into consideration other than to ask them to accept the euro , or in other words , to ensure the euro gets the best possible welcome ?
In reading these reports it is thus clear that the rapporteur and the Commission constantly vacillate between uncertainty and contradictions .
First and foremost physical persons are targeted , and at the forefront of these are those particularly exposed categories for whom the entry into force of the euro means the addition from now on of new problems to already considerable difficulties .
The report states that these categories require particular attention , but what specific solutions can be proposed to deal with their practical problems ?
In the light of the exponential increase since 1996 of the costs of media promotion of the euro , which are becoming extremely high , how much will this promotion finally cost for Europe , for the Member States and for each citizen ?
Despite the investment of considerable sums of money , the citizen as consumer risks being the victim of permanent confusion .
Mr Arroni recommends a transition period which is as short as possible , unlike the consumer associations which envisage that a short transitory period would mean total confusion for the most vulnerable clients .
So , which of the options should be chosen : a short transition period which would cost less but create errors and confusion ; or a long transition period - we should remember that it could be up to six months - which would allow better understanding thanks to a smooth adaptation , but where the high cost will lead to an increase in consumer prices .
In terms of the second category of economic players - companies and tradesmen - if two incomes can be difficult to manage for a housewife , what about traders and others who will have to maintain two accounts systems and two cash funds , who needed no increase in the burden of management ?
On the other hand , although Mr Arroni is proposing to take steps to help SMEs , at the same time he wants to make dual pricing obligatory , under the false pretext of bringing competitive advantage to traders .
And if it is a matter of wanting to help companies , it turns out that the first possible aid - tax aid in the form of deductiblity of VAT on expenses generated by the changeover to the euro - has already been denied them .
To sum up , I think the Commission , supported by the Arroni report is currently navigating visually .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the Arroni report does not present new ideas , but requires some comment .
How can we talk of confidence when the whole European monetary structure is built on lies , at least lies of omission ?
The name of the currency has been changed in violation of the treaties which clearly named it " ECU ' .
Our colleague , Mr Berthu , has rightly tabled an appeal with the Court of Justice against this untimely change .
No-one , neither the Council nor the Commission , much less the European Parliament , has risked the task of trying to evaluate the practical cost of changing over to the euro and to figure out the macro-economics of the move .
Of course , no-one can hide the fact that there will be a cost .
The report only mentions this once to say , in passing , that it should be minimal .
In reality it will be the citizens who pay the hundreds of millions of francs , marks or lira for dual accounting , dual pricing , and the constant conversion between the euro and the national currency which will be required for three years . They will pay through increases in retail prices and bank charges .
As an aside , everyone is very careful not to mention the consequences for individual savings , especially in France .
All administered savings , savings bank books and building society savings plans are set to disappear .
People content themselves with constantly trotting out the false old adages of the European structure : " without the single currency , the single market does not work ; without the single market , we will have a crisis and war ' and then the next logical argument : " without a single European state and integral unification of legislation , the single currency will not work ' .
The single currency is not an economic necessity but a political wish .
Everyone knows that but many people pretend not to realize it .
Our technocrats are not evaluating very well the psychological consequences of the monetary upheaval they are proposing .
We can inform the public as much as we want , but currency brings about scales of value which it is very hard to get rid of .
For example in France , almost forty years after the new franc was brought in , television journalists would still rather refer to billions of centimes than hundreds of millions of francs , to stress the enormity of the sum .
Old people , and some not so old , continue to convert everything into old francs , because in this form they can better understand relative values .
Mr President , I believe the euro will electrify Europe , and these three reports demonstrate why .
In the case of the Wolf report on the legal convergence of national central banks and their relation to the ECB , the essential point is to ensure the transparency and democratic accountability of the ECB and its relations with the national banks .
Such democratic exposure is not at odds with ensuring the functional independence of the ECB ; such ideas are complementary .
In this regard it is pertinent to mention Mr Wolf 's reference to the UK 's Bank of England where , under the new Labour Government , the bank 's independence and public accountability have both been strengthened .
In the case of the Arroni report on the practical aspects of the euro , there is common agreement on most items , including the need to encourage Member States to publish changeover plans and , more excitingly , to publish the euro designs of the national face of coins .
Where I part company with the rapporteur is in my belief that we will need European action to ensure that banks do not pass on to customers conversion costs in stage 3 of EMU .
A code of conduct might not suffice .
Finally , regarding tourism , I should like to congratulate all the rapporteurs , and especially Mrs Torres Marques for her report .
Tourism is Europe 's and the world 's biggest industry , yet here in Europe we have lost 10 % of market share since 1960 .
Tourism is classically an industry of the single market .
The advent of the euro will be a tremendous supply-side fillip to that market , and to tourism in particular .
I believe there will be three sets of winners as a result of introducing the euro .
First , all those who work within the industry .
Not only will the euro generate more jobs , it will bring transparency to wages and salaries , which in turn will be improved .
Secondly , tourists - the consumers .
Instead of giving away their hard-earned money to the money-changers at airports or ports , they will keep more of their holiday money to spend after window-shopping , made easier by the transparency of costs .
This will make comparison of retail goods in shops easier and consequently , increase competition .
Finally , entrepreneurs in the travel and tourism industry will make Europe 's top industry more competitive , as the transparency of the euro will drive down costs .
In addition , they will invest and expand in the industry because low inflation will breed lower costs of money .
Remember this : the European Tour Operators Association reckoned that 3 % more American tourists were liable to choose Europe as their holiday destination because of the euro .
To conclude , tourism and tourists will be the shock-troops of the euro , bringing the benefits of the euro immediately to the attention of all Europe 's citizens .
Mr President , after the Madrid Summit , at which the date for the introduction of the euro bank notes and coins was fixed , the Commission took a number of initiatives to speed up the necessary preparatory work for both the public and private sectors .
It is evident today - and I must add that this is to be welcomed - that most sectors of the economy have begun to prepare for the changeover to the single currency .
However , it must be pointed out - and this is the purpose of Mr Arroni 's excellent report - that more information needs to be made available on the practical arrangements put in place in the different sectors of the economy .
We need to identify the areas where decisions have not yet been taken and to know what level of harmonization is desirable .
Initially we need to know which areas should be dealt with at national level and which at European level .
Among the priorities for the Member States was the need to ensure that they presented their transition plans before the end of 1997 .
This included the requirement to make known their position on the statement of public accounting , reporting and tax declarations in euros .
Decisions on redemptions of existing debt were to have been taken before the end of 1997 .
The Commission should inform us whether or not the various deadlines set for the end of 1997 in its communication have been met and fully respected .
As regards the practical aspects of the introduction of the euro for those who are going to use the single currency on a daily basis , I want to underline the need for information on the changeover to be targeted on all users , just as it already is on small and medium-sized enterprises .
This is the biggest single economic event in European history , and it would be a disaster if it were allowed to fail because of an information deficit .
As regards dual pricing during the changeover period , we need to keep our options open .
The small and medium-sized businesses should be assisted in their efforts to provide dual pricing .
The proposals made by Mr Arroni in relation to fraud and adapting the information technology sector to the euro are a step in the right direction .
This also applies to the need for continual assessment of how small and medium-sized companies , including small shopkeepers , are coping with the introduction of the euro .
Finally , it is accepted by all that the euro must be consumer-friendly if it is to be successful .
As Mr Arroni says , the Member States must show particular concern for vulnerable social groups in our society , such as the elderly , the visually impaired , the disabled and the low-income groups , with a view to ensuring that the coins and particularly the notes are user-friendly for them .
I say this as an Irish Member because we in Ireland have practical knowledge and experience of this because of the changeover to decimalization , when prices in our country increased .
Schools should be closely involved in pilot projects regarding the introduction of the euro , particularly at the early stage .
Mr President , here we are facing what has been described as the biggest challenge , the biggest economic event , and here am I , a reluctant Member of a Member State called the UK , unable to be other than an onlooker instead of a participant .
I feel rather like the child in the Pied Piper story whose progress was so slow , who could not keep up with the other children and did not enter the promised land .
I wish that we had another report before us today to tell us what is going to be the relationship in practical terms between the Ins and the Outs .
My mind boggles when I think about it .
There is irony in the fact that the UK presidency will be in the hot seat when the decision is made as to who will be in and who will not , yet the UK is staying outside .
I say to the UK Government that it would be better to board the train at the beginning of the journey than to clamber on later .
The latter option might be very difficult .
I am disappointed that the Council is not represented here today for this big debate .
Perhaps it is too embarrassed .
The attitude of the Chancellor of the Exchequer , Gordon Brown , to this matter was described as if he were proposing marriage but putting off the event for five years and saying that there would be conditions but not saying what they would be .
That is a ludicrous position .
The other main British party 's position is no better .
Its leader has closed the door , despite the fact that many of the Conservative Members here are rather pro-Europe .
My party and my country are pro-Europe on the whole .
A Eurosceptic north of the Scottish border is quite a rare bird .
When I go around speaking about the euro - sadly , as an onlooker - I find enormous support from business , exporters , industry and potential tourists .
I welcome all that has been said about the vulnerability of small businesses and I wonder if the UK is going to introduce any measures to ameliorate their situation .
Tourism is still the sleeping giant industry of Europe .
Inter-state tourism could be much larger .
Recently I addressed a conference of the heads of youth hostel associations for the whole of Europe , outside as well as within the Union .
They are all in favour of the euro and see it making a tremendous improvement in the lot of their type of tourist , who is relatively poor .
Tourists will be the first to have this magnificent experience , an experience which I believe will weld us together - at least those fortunate enough to be in the system - and make us true Europeans , when the money in our pockets is the same as we cross the borders .
I applaud Ireland 's performance as a tiger economy and its determination to enter monetary union .
In conclusion , this is a magnificent piece of European history .
I am very sad that I belong to a Member State that is keeping me out .
Mr President , one section of the Commission communication on the practical aspects of the introduction of the euro is devoted to the preparation of coins , but nothing is said about notes .
So I would like to return to this question which the institutions are trying to pass off in silence , and where I have so far had no response to my many requests .
Basically , the Council has decided that future coins will have one European side and one national side - but nothing of the sort for notes .
An obscure decision by the European Monetary Institute , wrongly applied from article 109 F , states that the notes will not display any distinctive national sign .
So the Council seems to have chosen to discard this issue which is not at all technical , but which calls into question some very important principles , and leave it up to the officials at the EMI .
Ladies and gentlemen , this House has been very concerned in recent times about the lack of democratic control in monetary union and we are going to discuss this during our next part-session .
Well , here we have an excellent example of this lack of democracy .
We must act now , for if we do not our protests will not sound sincere .
The question of having a national symbol on one side of euro notes raises a number of points of principle .
It is a question of whether or not we want an undifferentiated monetary union , or a monetary union which recognizes national identities .
It is also a question of whether , at a later date , if there is a serious crisis , we will accept a country 's departure with equanimity , or if we will seek to keep it forever within monetary union , even against its will , and even despite the conflicts this would inevitably cause .
In this regard too , we must prepare ourselves for a serious problem of democracy .
That is why the Group of Independents for a Europe of Nations thinks the Council should accept its responsibilities , make use of the powers it holds pursuant to Article 109 L.4 , and decide that euro notes will have a national side .
Mr President , on behalf of the National Alliance , I would like to congratulate the three rapporteurs for their truly excellent work .
The achievement of monetary union and the introduction of the euro as a single currency is one of the most important steps forward along the road to Europe , and tourism is undoubtedly one of the sectors most concerned by the imminent change .
Tourists , including anyone travelling in European territory for any reason , will no longer have to change their currency and so will not bear the useless charges connected with it .
They will certainly have a more stable currency and a greater transparency of prices for goods and services purchased in their own countries from abroad .
Along with these individual advantages for the customer , there are advantages for tour operators , agencies , and everything produced by the tourist sector , certainly facilitated by the ordinary financial management of their business .
The point I wish to make is that , although these advantages may be obtained , we need to draw up and duly implement a preliminary strategy for this change , for the euro to have the desired effects right from the outset .
I therefore agree with Mrs Torres Marques when she insists in her report on the need for the national governments to begin a joint action to promote and spread the euro within their respective countries .
Some examples of early widespread measures to increase awareness are already present in Europe , but we need these operations to be intensified and real simulations of the use of the new currency to be made , both by consumers and by businesses operating in the tourist sector , with adequate information and training for staff and a due adaptation of the computer support to the new financial management .
These actions are all the more important in those less developed regions of Europe , where the tourist sector is often an economic lever of fundamental significance , where the lack of a timely and effective preliminary strategy for the euro could involve the loss of competitiveness on European markets , with undoubted negative repercussions on the respective local economies .
I am therefore concentrating not so much on the large tourist centres , which certainly have the necessary infrastructure to control the change , but on the small countries of Europe , rich in culture and tradition , in which the interest of the average tourist is tending to increase .
It is these countries that have to find adequate support , and to which particular attention should be paid , with appropriate structures to handle the change with a reduction in costs .
We should not hide the fact that we are proceeding in a random fashion .
There is no single strategy : if we proceed in a random fashion , the costs will increase and there is the risk that consumers will then bear the brunt of them .
Those who , like me , have experience of the reality of public administration management are well aware of the need for a preliminary and timely strategy for the transition to the euro . The new currency should provide the local authorities in particular , and the community in general , with an opportunity for growth and development .
For this purpose , we could perform a sample analysis of the European public authorities , taking care not to choose just the medium-sized to large municipalities , but also introducing into the survey the small municipalities whose requirements are different but no less important .
To conclude , conducting a pilot project involving several European municipalities could lead to the creation of a real network of cooperation , with the possibility of extending the results of the analysis to other municipalities which are not the specific subject of a study .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , today 's joint debate on the euro based on reports by Mrs Torres Marques , Mr Arroni and Mr Wolf is particularly important in that we are only a few weeks away from the famous weekend of 1 May .
Of course , I agree completely with the report and conclusions by Mrs Torres Marques .
Like her , I think the impact of the euro on the Union will be beneficial , not only for tourists coming from outside into Europe , but also for tourism within the Community .
I also agree that it seems urgent to put in place programmes which would allow the completion of information on the euro for companies and staff in the tourism sector .
The sooner they are ready , the sooner they will benefit from the effect of the euro .
As regards the Arroni report , I recall that following our profitable debate in January , we voted together for measures to facilitate the transition from national currency to the euro .
Today Mr Arroni has submitted a proposal concerning the optional nature of dual pricing , which I feel runs the risk of causing problems for the so-called vulnerable social groups .
On the subject of conversion charges , I cannot help noticing a certain amount of backing down compared with the text produced by our colleague Mr Pérez Royo .
Of course , in my capacity as rapporteur on industrial competitiveness , I can understand the concern of my colleague to preserve small and medium-sized enterprises .
So we must identify specific measures in this regard to minimize as far as possible the cost of their changeover to the euro , but it is not a question of abandoning consumers .
Finally , on the subject of Mr Wolf 's report on convergence , although I can relate to his views on the fact that achieving the euro implies economic convergence and compatibility between legislation , the central banks and the European Central Bank , I must again voice my opposition to certain ideas which smack of excessive liberalism .
The role of the Central European Bank and the central banks cannot be absolute , not more so than their powers .
Setting up a dialogue between these economic bodies and political powers is the least we could do before very quickly constructing that political Europe which is the only guarantee of democracy and the voice of the people .
To conclude , I would repeat that , for me , the euro is a great hope both in economic and employment terms , and above all , an excellent motor for European citizenship .
There are three conditions for this : it should not be another motor for unbridled liberalism ; the public should be informed better and more quickly ; and consumers should be the first to benefit .
Mr President , I will concern myself simply with the report by Mrs Torres Marques , which deals with the effects of the euro on the tourist industry .
I do not intend to talk about what was discussed so positively in this report .
I will mention however two points which were regarded as negative but which , in my view , were not sufficiently analysed and to which , ladies and gentlemen , no answers have been given .
The first concerns the need to create information programmes for those who work in tourism , and also convergence programmes for small and medium-sized tourist enterprises .
The question I would like to put , Mr Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , is : where will the money come from ?
I remind you that not long ago , in this Chamber , we voted on a budget in which expenditure on tourism was drastically reduced , despite the attempts of several of us on the Committee on Budgets .
So can you tell me where the money will come from to cover the necessary conversion costs ?
If not , we are simply indulging in wishful thinking without submitting any concrete proposals .
The second point concerns those small and medium-sized enterprises which are located in regions close to the euro zone but which will not be in the euro .
In a question I put to the European Commission , I estimated on the basis of what I had read in the newspapers that each such SME needed approximately ECU 100 000 in order to carry out its conversion procedure .
Could you please tell me if the Interreg programme is able to cover this expenditure ?
Because if there is no money in this case , I regret to say that I am not at all optimistic about whether the euro will have positive repercussions for the tourist industry , especially for the SMEs which make up 90 % of this industry .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , on behalf of my group I would like to speak mainly about Mr Wolf 's report . It is our firm belief that the Central Bank should be as independent as possible , and that means complete independence , both for the bank and its president .
That does not mean we are not strongly in favour of transparent decision-making processes , nor do we think the bank will exist in a kind of laboratory situation , determining its policy in some kind of ' clean ' mechanism .
We assume it will do this through dialogue with the entire social framework which is jointly responsible for such processes .
Mr President , some Members of this Parliament keep wanting to link issues relating to social disadvantage to the euro .
Our group believes that these are matters which should be dealt with separately .
All the same , both the Member States and the European Union have a responsibility to talk about policy competition after the introduction of the euro .
In our opinion , this means we will have to strive towards a certain degree of convergence both in the field of taxation , and in employment and social security . We will also have to determine which issues we leave as subsidiary and which ones we come to a unified joint approach on .
That is extremely important for the success of the euro in the long term , and for placing Europe on the world map .
Mr President , the advent of the single currency will certainly create many changes and , at times , not for the better .
I still believe we are going forward into the unknown with undue haste and without clear knowledge of the longterm effect .
I listen with concern to those who are driving relentlessly towards the creation of the single currency in their own Member States , regardless of the views of their electorate .
Some of the countries which are striving to join the first wave will be in for more than a mild shock .
I would be grateful if someone could answer me one question : if countries that meet the Maastricht criteria become members in the first wave , will some of these countries then turn around and demand Objective 1 status ?
Surely these two positions are totally incompatible ?
I wish to refer to one problem I can see looming on the horizon between Member States which enter in the first wave and those which remain outside .
My own part of the European Union , Northern Ireland , is the only part of the United Kingdom which has a land frontier with another Member State , and the fluctuation between the pound and the punt has caused extreme difficulties on both sides of the border on many occasions over a long period - sometimes one way and sometimes the other .
I would certainly ask that this should not be allowed to spell disaster for business and agriculture in both jurisdictions .
At present we can do nothing to improve the situation .
But can we be assured that unfair trading advantage will receive consideration and equality will be ensured within the European Union ?
Mr President , today we are discussing practical safeguards involved in introducing the euro , which means we also need to address the protection of consumers ' rights .
Dual pricing during the transition period is an absolute must , and should not be optional as envisaged in the report .
Businesses ' concern to have as much leeway as possible with labelling should not mean that consumer interests are pushed to one side .
By ensuring transparency , dual pricing can reassure consumers during a period of uncertainty .
Dual pricing can even give businesses a competitive advantage , if it means they can gain consumers ' confidence .
Even if the European Banking Association and the European Savings Banks Group recently agreed not to pass conversion costs on to their customers , we must watch that this promise is honoured .
If you read the text carefully , you will in fact see that the banking associations are only talking about ensuring a smooth and fair changeover for customers .
So the message is not really that the changeover will be cost-free for consumers .
I therefore welcome a code of behaviour for the banking and finance sector .
I was struck by the rapporteur 's statement that special tax treatment for investment in connection with the introduction of the euro could lead to distortions in competition within a given sector or in relation to other sectors . I say this because just a few days ago , I was reading in an Austrian newspaper about precisely that point being made by an Austrian bank .
I therefore think it is important to demand equal rights for all , to coin a phrase .
But it will also be up to Member States ' legislatures to safeguard this .
Mr President , can I start by congratulating the rapporteurs Arroni , Torres Marques and Wolf on three excellent reports dealing in great detail with the euro .
To date we have been very much concerned with technical questions such as budgets and convergence .
It is very important that we deal with the practical aspects of the introduction .
In particular the preparation for citizens and companies is essential .
If they wish to continue to trade in the single market , SMEs need to make the conversion very quickly so that their software can handle the euro .
That is even true for countries that have not indicated that they wish to go to stage 3 of economic and monetary union .
In the UK the previous Tory government cast a great deal of doubt on whether or not the euro would actually happen .
Many sceptics said that if the euro happens it may end in tears .
That has led to many small and medium-sized enterprises not having made the preparation required .
Many of those enterprises trade internationally and will have to deal with the euro as a foreign currency .
I agree to some extent with a code of conduct on the conversion costs .
I do not believe that the conversion costs , certainly as far as banks are concerned , should be passed on to the consumer directly because from 1 January 1999 the euro will only actually exist in electronic form .
This essentially means that there will be no physical costs of actually exchanging currencies , notes and coins , for other currencies .
All that will need to change is what happens anyway with banking institutions : an extra currency needs to be added to the list of currencies that the banking system deals with .
At the same time eleven currencies will be wiped out so I would guess that actually simplifies matters .
I therefore ask what cost ?
The costs will be significant after the notes and coins are introduced , not before .
SMEs will have costs but there is a level playing field across the European Union .
Therefore I do not see any competitive disadvantage as far as any companies are concerned because all companies will have to make the same changes .
For tourism it is extremely important that the euro is introduced .
I say that coming from a constituency which is very dependent on tourism .
My constituency stretches from the Blackpool coast through the Ribble Valley into the Pendle Hills .
With tourism now accounting for something like 20 % of economic activity across the European Union , either directly or indirectly , it is important that the euro is introduced and that those areas which rely on tourism for their prosperity take advantage of it .
, chairman of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and Industrial Policy . ( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , most Member States seem to have largely met the criteria for introducing the single currency on 1 January 1999 .
This applies above all to the inflation rate , where the EU average is now at a historically low level .
Two aspects continue to give cause for concern .
The first is government debt , where there is in fact every sign of a gradual improvement in the position . The other is something that I feel has scarcely been debated publicly , namely safeguarding the independence of the Member States ' central banks .
This is a really crucial issue .
The independence of the European Central Bank can only be guaranteed if the national central banks are an integral part of the European System of Central Banks , free from state intervention .
The European Central Bank Council will determine the Community 's monetary policy .
It comprises the members of the Executive Board of the European Central Bank and the presidents of the national central banks .
It is therefore vital that Member States should ensure that the presidents of the national central banks are genuinely independent .
I regret to say that Mr Wolf 's report , in its present form , does not adequately address this issue .
There are a number of outstanding concerns .
First the good news .
All the relevant national central banks are now independent as regards setting interest rates .
That is the first and most important step .
But there are also certain problems about the personal independence of central bank governors .
For example , we have been told that the President of Finland can still remove the President of its central bank from office , which would be contrary to the Maastricht Treaty .
Then there is the matter of freedom from state intervention .
For example , in one Member State that I know well , the central bank 's decisions could be deferred for 14 days .
That would also be contrary to the Maastricht Treaty .
Arrangements of this kind still exist , and they must be changed .
There is also the question of administrative independence , which is an important aspect of central banks ' independence .
There are a number of question marks hanging over that too .
Let me be clear : the European Monetary Institute will be presenting its report to us on 25 March , and that is sure to include a detailed analysis of the independence of the central banks .
To be precise , the Commission will give its assessment on 24 March and on 25 March Mr Duisenberg will present his report to the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and Industrial Policy .
We will be very closely examining this aspect of central banks ' independence in both reports , Commissioner .
Mr President , now that the introduction of the euro is approaching , we are getting more and more positive as well as negative views , not only within the Union , but also in the United States - witness the opening article in the Herald Tribune .
I quote : ' what is good for Europe is also good for America ' . There is also the view that the euro is a potential troublemaker .
According to American economists , there is even talk in the US of the euro leading to more conflicts and friction , and less stability .
I will leave this view for what it is .
It is more important to look at what the European citizen thinks .
The European citizen is by no means convinced yet of the benefits of the euro , nor of the practical aspects of the introduction , as argued for specifically in the Arroni report and by the Commission .
Information programmes are starting far too late , sadly mostly dictated by motives of political electioneering , in my country as well . This is in fact anti-democratic .
Not one single party , not one single political programme in my country leaves any room to be against the euro .
I must say this is very strange in a Europe which proclaims that it wants to be transparent .
It is beginning to look like a monetary dictatorship .
Many elderly people - a considerable part of the European population - are wondering whether , under pressure of the euro , their pensions will be able to retain their value .
We should treat these questions seriously .
If we do not , the euro will become a disaster , and there will be no public support for any of the subsequent steps within the Union - and I am thinking of enlargement and changes to the agricultural policy and structural funds .
We will achieve the exact opposite of what we set out to do with the euro .
The Commission proposal and the Arroni report cover the practical aspects of introduction , which is fine , but they devote insufficient attention to the issue of public support .
Mr President , I wish to begin by congratulating Winnie Ewing on her contribution , which I agree with absolutely .
Tourism is a key sector in Europe , and the euro will definitely provide a huge degree of additional transparency .
But it will also reveal the differences in indirect taxation , value added tax in particular .
That is why I have tabled an amendment on the report on the euro and tourism to highlight that to the Commission and the Council of Ministers .
For example , if we take visitor accommodation in Luxembourg , France and Portugal , VAT is as low as 3 to 5.5 % , whereas , ironically , in two of the nations which are opting out of the euro - the United Kingdom and Denmark - the rates are 17.5 % and 25 % .
This creates a double barrier for those countries and the tourist sectors within those Member States : first of all they lack the convenience of the euro zone and , secondly , they will become out-priced within the single market .
I was delighted to hear yesterday that finance ministers were setting up a committee to look at harmonization of indirect taxation .
They must give priority to the tourist sector .
Failure will result in the loss of jobs in this precious sector .
Mr President , declaration no 6 of the Treaty on European Union stipulates that the Community will commit itself to facilitating the renegotiation of the existing monetary arrangements between Member States of the European Union and third countries with small populations which adopt the currency of a neighbouring country as their national currency .
By a most discrete sleight of hand , the Commission considers that this clause should allow the Republic of Saint-Marin , the Vatican City and the Principality of Monaco to benefit automatically from the euro as official currency .
Although granting the euro to the Vatican and to San Marino does not pose any particular moral problem , the same cannot be said of the Principality of Monaco , which is ruled by an absolute monarchy which does not respect human rights and reigns over a tiny territory where tax evasion on an enormous scale takes place to the detriment of all Member States of the European Union , except France .
I would ask our Parliament to make its voice heard and oppose a decision by the Commission in favour of Monaco which would be iniquitous and immoral .
Mr President , Commissioner , I would like to look particularly at certain aspects of the euro which are becoming more and more important as the political problems are resolved and people become more interested in the euro .
The first question which concerns me is as follows . Since the manufacture of coins with a national symbol is due to commence at the latest on 1 May or 3 May this year , depending on the decision taken , it would be interesting to know whether the likely participants in the euro zone have already chosen the national symbols to appear on the coins .
I greatly appreciated the measure taken in Italy , which tried to use the choice of this national symbol to thresh out the whole question of the euro and to get the people involved .
I think all countries should do this ; it should not be a technocratic choice by a finance minister and some civil servants .
The people , the parliamentary members and the Community should be involved in this choice .
There is another issue which interests me greatly .
Everyone now seems to agree that the period in which notes and coins both of the national currency and in euros are circulating at the same time should be kept to a minimum .
It has been decided that this circulation is to start on 1 January 2002 .
Can the Commissioner tell me if any countries have announced their intention so far to limit this period to less than the stipulated six months ?
I think it should be possible to limit the period of dual circulation , for example in business , to as short a period as possible - two , three or maybe four weeks - although it may mean that in banks the exchange of national currencies into euros can continue for some time , for example until 30 June 2002 .
Some business people could make considerable savings in this way .
I would like to know if this approach would be possible .
Finally - and this is my last question , Commissioner - during the years 1999 to 2002 , professional associations , for example in the commercial sector , will need a great deal of money for their communication and training programmes .
Videos must be produced for the training of commercial employees , together with electronically-generated printed matter for communication .
We must work more closely with the commercial grass roots and with consumers .
Will the various planned programmes be unblocked soon by our partners in the Member States ?
Mr President , first of all I want to congratulate the three rapporteurs on the reports we are debating this morning , especially Helena Torres Marques , whose approach I agree with completely . There are now only a few weeks left before the first euro countries are selected , and less than 300 days until the start of monetary union .
In that respect , I want to underline some of the ideas which other speakers have already mentioned .
The first thing I want to emphasize is what an important step economic and monetary union is .
There is no doubt that it is the most important advance to take place in Europe since the birth of the Community , forty odd years ago .
Secondly , I want to stress that this fundamental change to our lives will be happening as early as 1 January 1999 , even though euro notes and coins will not enter circulation until three years later .
From 1 January 1999 , there will be a single monetary policy for those countries in the euro zone , stretching from Lapland in the far north-east of the continent to Lepe or Cape Saint Vincent in the extreme south-west .
Thirdly , I want to repeat something I think is fundamental : the genuine and definitive players in the euro adventure are the citizens , both as economic producers and as consumers - as users , in short , of the new currency .
The success of the euro will depend not just on it being used in the financial markets so that it can reach the famous critical mass , but also - I would even say , above all - on the public accepting it as a means of payment , right from the outset .
On that point , I want to draw attention to a question I think is important , which has already been mentioned , for example by Mr Hendrick : the question of transaction costs for exchange into euros or for exchange between participating currencies during that long transitional period of three years .
The people of Europe have repeatedly been told that from 1 January 1999 the mark , the franc , the lira , the peseta and so on will be united to form the euro , and will become non-decimal fractions of the euro . So they will not be able to understand how they can be charged a commission for changing one of those fractions ( say the mark ) into another ( for example , the escudo ) , or why they should be charged for having their bill in marks converted into euros .
If the citizens are treated like this they will conclude that they were misled when they were told there would be a single currency from 1 January 1999 .
They will see the euro not as a single currency , but as an extra currency in addition to the national ones .
So our view is that we need a more determined approach than is shown in the Commission 's announcement of a few days ago , saying that all compulsory measures will be free whereas optional ones will depend on the market .
I think we need a more determined approach , and in that respect I want to conclude by reminding people of the vote in this House on the occasion of the report on the euro and the consumer , which I had the honour of presenting to Parliament a few weeks ago . That report tackled this problem directly and proposed a ban on that sort of practice .
Mr President , I would like to congratulate Mrs Helena Torres Marques on her report on the euro and tourism , which is extremely timely and draws attention to the importance of the sector and to the way in which it will benefit from the single currency .
As the world 's third largest industry , after oil and automobiles , Europe 's 60 % share of the tourism market is very substantial .
Obviously , the relative decline that has occurred is a consequence of the emergence of new destinations on other continents , although European tourism has continued to grow in absolute terms with the anticipated creation of 1.85 million new jobs by the year 2007 .
Moreover , it is a sector with a reasonably balanced geographical distribution and many regions which have no alternatives in other spheres , including many rural regions , are attractive tourist destinations .
The introduction of the euro will remove transaction costs , uncertainty and calculation , which today constitute very significant limitations , as has already been emphasized by a number of Members . Consequently , a substantial number of European citizens may be expected to start travelling more frequently .
The benefits , moreover , will not be confined to European citizens , since the demand by citizens from other continents will naturally increase , since they can more readily move within a space where they can pay for everything in the same currency .
So tourism operators have no reason to fear the euro .
On the contrary , they will certainly benefit from it , although , as is emphasized in the report , they will be requested to refrain from taking advantage of its introduction to round prices up and introduce unjustified increases in the costs of the products and services they supply .
Mr President , Commissioner , the three reports we are debating today have a basic point in common , on which the success of the single currency will largely depend .
All three deal with questions which will determine how well the people of Europe take to the euro .
The European citizens are the protagonists in this approaching change . They are the ones who must steer this transition , which is unique in world history .
Tourism , which has become a mass phenomenon during this second half of the twentieth century , should serve to promote the euro - the currency of the twenty-first century .
At the same time , the euro should stimulate tourism in Europe , with regard to tourists from within Europe and from other parts of the world .
I want to congratulate Mrs Torres Marques on her excellent report .
The prospects for growth within the tourism sector represent a real hope for solving the unemployment problem .
The advantages which the single currency will bring for this sector are obvious .
The public will accept the euro if it helps resolve the problems they are worried about . Unemployment is their greatest concern .
Tourism will help to solve that problem . The euro will help tourism .
We should be able to transmit that message to the citizens if we want the project to be a success .
With respect to the Arroni report , I want to congratulate the rapporteur most sincerely on his excellent work .
We must make sure that the introduction of the euro results in as little inconvenience as possible . We must reduce costs , and concentrate on those sectors which are going to experience most problems : small businesses , pensioners , the public and the disabled .
We should provide ample resources for informing and training the public .
Finally , on the Wolf report , about the independence of the European Central Bank and the European System of Central Banks , I wanted to make a slight clarification , a small point .
The independence of the European Central Bank , and the way it is legally bound to the objective of price stability , constitute a guarantee for the citizens .
Economic history is littered with examples of monetary authorities deciding to stimulate inflation in order to lessen the burden of national debt .
That is no longer going to be possible .
It will not be possible to apply that hidden tax of inflation in Europe .
It has been the least well-off who have suffered most from that type of policy .
The future European System of Central Banks will prevent it happening .
When a government or a regional or municipal authority has to repay debts , it will have to do so in full view of its citizens .
I am glad about that , and I am sure the people of Europe are too .
Nevertheless , as we stand on the threshold of introducing the euro , it is essential that the central banks should adapt their legislation as soon as possible .
We cannot allow the future Central Bank and the European System of Central Banks to be deprived of all the possibilities for success which would be bound to result from the merging of so many central banks without having such varied rules .
As Mr Herman said , we need to speed up the time limits and say which regulations need altering urgently .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , it might seem that everything that there is to be said has already been said this morning .
Unfortunately , not everyone has been able to contribute , not least myself .
There are some important points I would like to highlight . The Arroni report deals with how arrangements for the changeover can be optimized , and it touches on some key issues .
Firstly , for example , it mentions the optimization of information strategies , and I believe that electronic media , via news broadcasts , can and should provide our citizens with precise answers to their questions , and this could be very helpful over the coming months and years .
Secondly , I think it could be very helpful - and I am making a special statement now - if the euro could be used as an electronic means of payment at major events such as the Hanover World Fair in 2000 , at which 60 million visitors are expected .
That would be a marvellous pilot project .
Thirdly , I would like to emphasize again that the public authorities have a special responsibility in the changeover to the euro , and I am thinking of dual pricing here .
I believe , and several people have already touched on this today , that dual pricing could and should be applied for three years by authorities ranging from municipalities , cities , districts and regions to major state institutions , in setting and assessing charges and also in paying salaries and so forth . In this way people will be able to familiarize themselves with the euro by 2002 and will be able to relate it to their national currency and convert as a matter of course .
It will also allow small and medium-sized businesses , which may not always be so well prepared , to get used to this process and to prepare more thoroughly for the changeover date in 2002 . And it will also encourage trade associations to play a more active part , which some are already doing or trying to do .
I also think it is important that national tax authorities in particular should be geared up to using the euro in tax assessments and suchlike as soon as possible .
Nine or ten Member States who will probably participate in monetary union are already doing this .
I hope that Germany in particular will be receptive to this system , which could be very helpful for the future .
The state should be in the vanguard here with a high level of state commitment and not trailing behind !
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I also wish to take part in this debate , referring in particular to Mr Arroni 's report and to Mrs Torres Marques ' report on the euro and tourism .
I am well aware that much has already been said and there is little room for further contributions .
I believe , however , that several concepts should be confirmed .
Firstly , we should start from the fact that tourism provides fundamental scope for a thorough reflection on the methods of introducing the euro .
The sector is characterized by economic activity that plays a unifying role within the Union , and promotes better reciprocal knowledge and a greater sense of common citizenship .
Besides being one of the main sources of creating wealth and employment , it will be one of the spheres ( together with the distribution and commercial system , as already mentioned ) in which the methods of introducing the euro will condition its success or confirm the difficulties , as these sectors are in direct contact with the citizens and consumers .
The euro will also have a considerable impact on the tourist sector as , on the one hand , there will be a reduction in transaction costs and , on the other , there will be a greater transparency of prices .
This will stimulate greater competition , with the ultimate result of improving competitiveness , even in markets outside the EU .
Consequently , not only is tourism fundamental to the success of the euro , but we are faced with a historic occasion for the revival of this fundamental sector although , as already stated , we should remember with regret that the budget has considerably reduced the funds available for the specific programmes planned .
The practical aspects of introducing the euro are therefore of crucial importance , with the basic objective of making the citizens as familiar as possible with the new currency and reducing related costs to a minimum .
From this point of view , I support the theory ( already advocated by other speakers and by Mrs Thyssen first of all ) that it is important to insist that the categories concerned should organize themselves with regard to information and the elimination or minimization of transaction costs .
This will stimulate a fruitful interaction in the market between supply and demand in establishing the best possible conditions for consumers .
Only if such self-discipline is absent will it be advisable to lay down compulsory rules from above - rules which should be limited to individual cases , so as not to make the transition process too rigid with excessively complex measures or rules .
Mr President , there is good news and there is bad news with regard to tourism .
The good news is that , soon , the tourist will not have to go through the miserable experience of constantly having to change money ever again .
A miserable experience which also costs a lot of money .
At the weekend I drove past a bureau de change at the border between the Netherlands and Belgium , and I noticed that the difference between the buying and selling exchange rates for the Portuguese escudo amounted to 15 % .
That is a serious figure .
With the introduction of the euro , the holiday-maker in Europe will gain one free day in every 14 holidays .
This is a welcome benefit , because Europe 's share in world tourism is steadily declining , and that is bad news for employment .
May I therefore ask the Commissioner what progress is being made with plans to allow Member States to conduct experiments in which labour-intensive sectors such as tourism would be subject to lower VAT rates ?
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , while listening to the debate , I remarked to myself what a change there is compared with the debate just eighteen months or two years ago ; there is unanimity and consensus on the changeover to the euro and the single currency . It is good to see that , and to get on with dealing with the real and practical problems which face us in this process .
Today 's joint debate on three reports shows the extent to which preparations have advanced for the introduction of the euro , and how they are indispensable for a smooth changeover to European currency and its acceptance by public opinion .
So first of all I would like to shed some light on the results of the last round table organized by the Commission on 26 February on the practical aspects of introducing the euro , which your rapporteur Mr Arroni has covered .
I will then look at the real applications of these clauses in a particular sector - tourism - at the suggestion of Mrs Torres Marques .
Finally , Mr Wolf 's report will allow me to mention the progress made in terms of what we call legal convergence .
So I will start with the practical aspects of the introduction of the euro .
The Commission communication of 11 February and the round table of 26 February bear witness to the fact that considerable progress has been made since May 1997 .
Whether referring to the preparation of public administration or other practicalities , the round table which was organized with the support of the European Parliament provided the opportunity to indicate several reasons for satisfaction which seem to me to respond to a large number of the questions which some of you put to me earlier .
Looking first at preparations in the public sector , today 11 Member States have presented a plan for moving over to the euro , in other words they have forecast possible relationships in euros between individuals , companies and their administration from 1999 .
All Member States are offering what is being called a broad " euro 1999 option ' for companies , and many of them are also offering it for individuals .
Moreover , legislative work at national level to translate decisions into facts is moving ahead properly .
In accordance with the wishes expressed by your rapporteur , the Commission is monitoring and encouraging these adaptations , particularly in national legislation , and will present an update of the state of preparation of public administrations in the spring .
Mr Fayot asked about the number of countries which had decided to have national sides to their coins .
According to my newly established counting method , seven countries in the European Union have already adopted the national sides : Belgium , Germany , Austria , France , Italy , Portugal and Ireland .
On the other practical questions , since May last year all the difficult points have been the subject of an in-depth examination by groups of experts , where consumers were represented together with the professionals involved and public authority representatives .
These studies , the quality of which has been praised by everyone , enabled the round table to produce tangible results on the four specific points which answer your questions .
My first point concerns dual pricing , on which a consensus has been reached .
Dual pricing is an essential instrument , Mrs Raschhofer , but the imposition of an obligation at Community level is not desirable .
Mrs Thyssen , you are right that we must not start by making impositions .
What we should do is ensure that certain rules of the game are respected , as rightly suggested by your rapporteur .
Secondly , a consensus has also been reached on the bank charges for conversion into euros .
Two principles emerged during round-table discussions : firstly , non-discrimination between prices for services provided in euros and in national currency ; and , secondly , the rule which says that all obligatory operations must be free of charge .
There is no equivocation on this point , and that is my response to Mr Hendrick and Mr Amadeo .
The Commission is pleased to state that the banking sector has already confirmed in writing its commitment to these two principles .
Otherwise , encouraging progress has also been noted in three areas .
The first concerns the specific situation of small and medium-sized enterprises , which has been raised frequently this morning .
In particular , it has been noted that there have been a number of advances in their relationship with the large groups , and advances in preparations for changeover to the euro .
I think - and time will tell - that this ought to answer the questions of Mrs Peijs and Mr Gallagher .
To Mr Fayot , I can say that SME communication campaigns are being put in place , and to Mrs Kestelijn-Sierens , that the 1998 information campaigns give priority to small and medium-sized enterprises .
As regards education , Mr Garosci , you are right ; there is not enough information or training .
I often say that to motivate staff you must train them , and to make loyal clients you must inform them .
In view of this , education is essential and I will soon be announcing a specific network derived from the network of existing public administrations within the different Member States .
And finally - it surprised me that nobody raised this point but I will mention it anyway - encouraging progress has also been noted regarding the setting up of local euro monitoring stations , which aim to prevent improper use .
That is a desire of this House and of Mr Hoppenstedt , if I correctly understood his words earlier .
The fourth specific point from the round table was the problem of the duration of the dual circulation of coins and notes , and this has been raised several times this morning .
The draft regulation on the legal status of the euro states that this maximum period of six months from 1 January 2002 can be reduced by each Member State .
It is a question of subsidiarity and is a national concern .
Nevertheless , during the round table we managed to reach a broad consensus on the fact that a period of six months is too long and it would be wise to shorten it , and secondly , that the period of dual circulation ought to be harmonized throughout all the euro countries .
It was noted that the Member States are currently reflecting on this since it poses a certain number of practical and technical problems , and it was therefore agreed - and the Commission offered to do this - to proceed to an informal exchange of opinions with the Member States .
But you are right , Mr Fayot , we must forge ahead with this .
However , for the time being we must wait for the result of the national studies and the contacts we will manage and follow up .
In any case , the Member States must clearly make known their intentions on this question between now and the end of 1998 .
Only yesterday I gained broad approval at the Ecofin Council which was being held in Brussels on all the points which I have presented to you .
So for the Commission , a new phase is now commencing in the same spirit of dialogue and transparency , and in a few weeks it will result in the adoption of detailed recommendations - and Mrs Peijs , I hope that these will answer your questions .
These recommendations will be forwarded to you , to the Council and to professional organizations , as it is our intention that you should be able to discuss them properly and in detail .
Secondly , I hope that on 2 May , when the European Council adopts the list of countries changing over to the euro , that it will also adopt these guidelines .
Finally , as these guidelines will also be forwarded to the professionals concerned , we hope they will convert them into a code of good management and good practice .
That will be the spirit of the recommendations , to avoid as far as possible the need to pass through a more regulatory and therefore more restrictive phase .
I would add that very particular attention should be paid to vulnerable social groups and , Mrs Thyssen , you rightly mentioned older people and people with disabilities in this regard .
That deals with the practical aspects .
I come now to the second report , on tourism .
You were quite right , Mrs Torres Marques , to draw our attention to the tourism sector .
This sector is an area of very diverse activities which creates jobs and which will profit greatly from the arrival of the euro as highlighted , I think , by Mr Harrisson and Mr Rübig .

The tourism sector has a particular importance to the European economy : 5.5 % of GDP , nine million direct jobs , 6 % of total employment .
Small and medium-sized enterprises make up 85 % of this sector , representing a third of service exports in the Union .
The development of this sector of activities has important knock-on effects on all the local and regional economies .
The introduction of the euro must therefore produce benefits for all the activities in this sector , and we must take care that this is the case .
Mr Ribeiro , it is not a question of limiting the advantages to a few enterprises ( the largest ones ) in the sector .
And the introduction of the euro must produce effects as rapidly as possible , in other words right from the beginning of the transition period .
What will the impact be ?
As your rapporteur stresses , I think tourism will be one of the economic sectors , one of the areas of activity , which will benefit most quickly from the positive effects of introducing the euro .
Why ?
Because reducing exchange risks will stimulate tourism within the Community .
The example quoted by Mr Rübig concerning his daughter is very interesting in this respect .
But the euro will also facilitate tourism from third countries .
I would refer you to a very significant study which the Commission published yesterday , 9 March , concerning ( I believe ) Europeans on holiday , and which my colleague Mr Papoutsis presented to the International Congress of Tourism in Berlin .
It shows that one person in two from the European Union went on holiday in 1997 : 91 % of Luxembourg citizens , 74 % of Belgians and 73 % of Germans go on holiday to countries other than their country of residence .
That shows how much interest the euro will have for them , given that a quarter of Europeans - which could be considered few , but which I feel is still a lot - travel within the European Union .
Even so , this is an ECU 75 billion market .
The introduction of the euro will enable tourists and travellers not only to stop losing money in exchange commission , but to save on travel , accommodation and restaurant costs .
Moreover , the creation of a stable currency will enable the euro to be used as an invoicing currency for international tourist contracts .
This will be a source of economy and gains in competitiveness for travel companies throughout Europe .
Having said that - and here I combine several questions which have been raised - some aspects must be looked into in more depth .
This year the Commission will organize a seminar on methods of changing over to the euro , with all the professionals concerned - and of course you will be involved .
I would make it clear that the fiscal aspects raised by your rapporteur will obviously be examined closely at this event .
I do not want to go into details here and now , but you should know that they cannot be isolated from the general approach which the Commission has specified for fiscal matters .
And to Mr Kaklamanis , I would repeat that I will postpone this to the next debate which you will probably have with my colleague Mr Papoutsis on tourism , because these questions go beyond the sector of the euro and concern tourism as an area of activity based on SMEs .
So , to conclude , I will deal briefly with the report from the European Monetary Institute on legal convergence .
I say " briefly ' because it is not up to me as a representative of the Commission to comment on the work of the EMI , but nonetheless , I would like to make it clear that , since its publication last August , legal convergence has evolved greatly in Europe and it is going in the right direction .
Mr Wolf , you are right to say that this is not a question of detail .
Mr Castagnède is also right to call for more transparency and more information .
And of course Mr von Wogau is right too , saying : yes , but all that with respect for the independence of the European Central Bank .
Mr Caudron says that the independence of the European Central Bank does not mean it is isolated , and this leads to the need for links as well as instruments of procedure , dialogue and discussion .
That is what the Commission presented last week in its proposal concerning the composition of the Economic and Financial Committee which will prepare the work of the Ecofin Council .
Numerous national legislation and central bank statute reforms have been completed or undertaken by the Member States since publication of the EMI report , in order to make them compatible with the requirements of the Treaty .
I can tell Mr Herman and Mr von Wogau that they will have the answer to their question in the convergence report which the Commission will present on 25 March .
Having worked on it fourteen hours a day , I can tell you I know what I am talking about when I say you will have your answers to this question , because the Commission must proceed to its own evaluation of the compatibility of national legislation with the Treaty and the statute of the ESCB .
Mr Chairman of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and Industrial Policy , I will see you on 25 March about this .
I apologize for having exceeded the time allotted to me by two minutes , and to sum up , I would simply stress that , like me , you are aware that the preparatory work for the introduction of the euro is coming to an end and that the key issue now is better to acquaint our fellow citizens with the euro and to encourage them to accept it .
The task of mobilization and persuasion before us is without precedent .
In view of this , Mr Arroni , the Commission notes with interest your suggestion to organize jointly , if Parliament so wishes , a round table with people from the world of communication to think about the psychological aspects of the arrival of the euro .
Ladies and gentlemen , we have not organized our efforts so as to meet the schedule or comply with the clauses in the Treaty for the introduction of the euro .
So let us not yet relax our efforts now , when it still remains to inform the European public about the advantages of introducing the European currency and to disperse the fears which may still exist amongst some of us .
Thank you , Mr Commissioner , and thank you to the three rapporteurs and all the speakers .
Mr President , I asked one question .
Would the Commissioner like to respond to it now or later ?
What is the situation on allowing Member States to carry out trial projects for lower VAT rates for labour-intensive sectors such as tourism ?
Mr President , the Commissioner mentioned those countries which have already decided on the euro 's national side .
I would like to point out here that Spain has also now adopted the national side - last week , in fact .
I have taken note of your question .
We will respond directly to it .
I do not have the details to enable me to respond to you today in detail , and I would prefer not to give you any wrong information .
Thank you for the information on Spain .
Sorry , I thought I was up to date , but the euro is progressing so fast that it is impossible to be totally up-to-date .
The joint debate is closed .
The vote will take place today at 12.00 noon .
Promoting road safety in the EU
The next item is the report ( A4-0065 / 98 ) by Mr Cornelissen , on behalf of the Committee on Transport and Tourism , on the communication from the Commission " Promoting road safety in the EU - the programme for 1997-2001 ' ( COM ( 97 ) 0131 - C4-0180 / 97 ) .
Mr President , on Friday night my wife and I were invited to dinner with some friends .
During the meal our host was called to the telephone , and he was asked to come to the hospital as quickly as possible because his eldest son had been involved in a road accident .
On Saturday morning we visited our hosts again .
Their son had died .
They looked ten years older .
Their life will never be the same again .
This was one of the 45 000 lives which are lost every year in the European Union as a result of road accidents - 45 000 a year !
That means 900 a week .
In other words , every week a traffic disaster takes place on the scale of the sinking of the Estonia .
More than 2 million Europeans are injured in road accidents every year , and many of them will remain permanently disabled .
The grief and human suffering behind these figures is immeasurable .
Furthermore , road accidents cause great economic and social harm .
Experts estimate this at more than ECU 150 billion a year .
This distress , and this waste of human life and financial resources , are not acceptable in a civilized society with all but unlimited technical capabilities .
Having looked closely at various studies I would even go so far as to conclude that , despite the expected growth in traffic , the number of road casualties could be halved over the next fifteen years .
That means reducing the number of road deaths to less than 25 000 in the year 2010 .
The Road Safety Programme presented by the Commission last year is an important first step .
I recognize Commissioner Kinnock 's great concern for road safety in this , and his determination to do what he can , bearing in mind the limited powers of the Commission .
Nonetheless , we would like to go a bit further .
We believe a numerical target which has the aim of halving the number of road casualties during the next fifteen years is essential and achievable .
It is clear that , in the light of subsidiarity , meeting this target is not just the responsibility of the Union .
I would like to point out , however , that those countries which have expressed their targets in concrete figures have achieved good results .
I would like to mention the United Kingdom , the Scandinavian countries and the Netherlands .
A numerical target will also act as a signal to the public , and will give all those involved an objective to aim for .
In order to fulfil the targets , priorities will have to be set for the 65 measures in the Commission programme .
Allow me to mention a few .
Firstly , legislation for safer motor vehicles - safer for passengers , but also with better protection at the front and rear to reduce injuries to cyclists and pedestrians in the event of a collision .
The road , too , should and can become safer .
We would like to see a safety impact assessment of all EU-funded roads .
The introduction of 30 km / h zones in residential areas and around schools saves many children 's lives .
Irresponsibly high speeds destroy road safety .
Drink-driving is not only anti-social , it is criminal .
Is the Commissioner prepared to bring up for discussion again the Council proposal for a Europewide maximum driver 's blood alcohol concentration of 50 milligrams , which has been on the table for years ?
Recent studies show very clearly that the use of drugs is also responsible for thousands of road deaths .
Many medicinal drugs , too , have negative effects on the ability to drive .
Can the Commissioner , in consultation with the relevant organizations , check how these problems can be best tackled ?
Could I also ask for particular attention to be paid to the opportunities offered by technological developments , such as systems which disable the start mechanism of the car when the driver has drunk too much ?
Driving with the lights on during the day , and wider use of seat belts , lead to significantly fewer accidents .
Improved first aid at accidents is also important .
Finally , safe behaviour on the road - more than 90 % of accidents are caused by human error .
Better training for drivers , road safety education in schools , information campaigns , enforcement of traffic regulations such as those relating to rest and driving times for professional drivers ( with a serious chance of getting caught ) are indispensable if this reduction is to be achieved .
We think the introduction of a penalty-point system is desirable .
Can I ask the Commissioner how he will proceed ?
Following this debate , will he present a further stage of his plans , and can he promise that in 1998 and during the following years there are , or will be , sufficient resources in the budget ?
Mr President , road safety is a joint responsibility shared by the Union , the Member States , car manufacturers , educators , road safety organizations , road users of course , and many others .
To achieve success , a joint approach is needed with sufficient popular support .
The subsidiarity principle must be respected .
The EU must concentrate on measures where action at EU level leads to added value .
Road accidents are not a natural disaster in the face of which we are powerless .
On the contrary , we make the traffic and we can make it as safe as we want to .
Mr Commissioner , you will be able to count on us in this fight , but we also count on you .
Mr President , I sincerely thank the rapporteur , Mr Cornelissen , for both his speech and report .
Mr Cornelissen speaks from both the head and from the heart in terms of his commitment to road safety .
I pay tribute to the way he has skilfully steered this report through Parliament , embracing as many opinions as possible and reaching a conclusion which will be endorsed overwhelmingly in Parliament tomorrow .
We should also pay tribute to Commissioner Kinnock .
He has rightly brought this issue to the top of the agenda in the Commission 's work programme .
Why has he done that ?
He is aware that 45 000 people - as Mr Cornelissen has already said - are killed every year and more than one million are injured .
The cost to society is probably at least ECU 100 billion .
He has set out in his communication the appalling figures .
One in 80 of us will die as a result of a road accident ; one in three of us will be hospitalized because of a road accident ; the main cause of death amongst the young is road accidents .
So I pay tribute to him for so graphically making the case for action in this area .
Let us not underestimate the scale of the task that we face .
It is very easy to do that because these incidents are often very individual , but collectively they represent the equivalent of two or three jumbo jet loads of passengers in Europe dying each and every week .
If that happened to one , two or three jumbo jets each and every week , those particular aircraft simply would not fly ; we would not tolerate it .
And yet for some reason , society tolerates a similar toll of people being killed and many , many more being injured on our roads .
Therefore we have a collective responsibility to ensure this issue receives the attention it deserves from Parliament , the Commission , the Council and society as a whole .
We support , therefore , the ambitious but realistic target set by Mr Cornelissen - namely , a 40 % reduction by the year 2010 .
Commissioner Kinnock 's proposals give us the tools to achieve that target .
People may say it is unrealistic but we cannot tolerate a situation where thousands of our fellow citizens die needlessly on our roads every year .
Something must be done on an ambitious scale .
That is why the socialists are very proud to be associated with Mr Cornelissen 's report and Mr Kinnock 's communication .

We would highlight six priorities for action .
Many of these priorities reflect the views of the rapporteur and the Commissioner , but they highlight very clearly where action can and must be taken .
Firstly , we must combat drink-driving .
There are some 9 000 alcohol-related deaths every year on our roads .
We have the means to address that problem by supporting the Commissioner 's proposal for a 50 milligramme limit - a proposal , I understand , that has been on the table now for 10 years .
Let us see some action .
We would applaud the Commissioner 's efforts to try and secure agreement in the Council as soon as possible .
Secondly , we want to see the associated issue of drugs being examined by an EU research programme to make sure people cannot take drugs , drive and contribute to accidents as they do , on an increasing scale .
Thirdly , we want to endorse the view of the rapporteur that a new vehicle design directive must be published to make sure vehicles are as friendly to pedestrians and cyclists as is humanly possible .
The technology is there .
What is lacking is the political will .
Fourthly , we want to curb speed and introduce more 20-miles-per-hour limits .
Fifthly , we want to see the mutual recognition of driving bans and finally , more research into driving behaviour .
All these measures will contribute to our common goal of tackling this unacceptable , appalling , disgraceful figure of 45 000 deaths every year .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , we are delighted to see that you have arrived safely , Commissioner .
Like the previous speaker , I would like to congratulate the rapporteur , Mr Cornelissen , on his excellent report .
He has put an enormous amount of work into it .
We appreciate his commitment to road safety , which has spanned several decades .
So it is perhaps no wonder that he was asked to be rapporteur and that he has produced such a first-rate report .
However , as it would be monotonous if we all agreed on everything , I shall highlight a problem : the Commission 's communication on promoting road safety in 1997-2001 contains 65 proposals , and many of the proposals have to be presented by 1998 / 99 .
So my first request to you , Commissioner , is to speed up all the individual proposals .
You know as well as I do that nothing will happen after spring next year .
We will go on the election trail and Commission will either retire or seek reselection .
This means that anything urgent must have a first reading in Parliament by autumn at the latest .
Otherwise the proposals will just gather dust for two years until the Parliament and the Commission are up and running again .
For that reason , Commissioner , I would urge you to encourage your people to present the individual proposals to Parliament and the Council as quickly as possible .
Secondly , I would like to know if you support the list of priorities set by the rapporteur , and probably by this House when we vote tomorrow .
Mr Cornelissen has quite rightly said that it is no good presenting 65 proposals if they are only implemented in a trickle .
We need to have a substantial body of priority projects adopted to improve road safety .
That is why we are so interested to know if you really support Mr Cornelissen 's list of priorities , which we will no doubt vote for tomorrow , and if you are ready to pledge your support to them .
I would also like to address a few points that my group considers urgent , as well as two or three points in the report that we will reject .
We think it is important , as Mr Watts has so rightly explained , to make the car a safer means of transport , because can kill and injure people .
Secondly , the majority of my group firmly supports European legislation reducing the legal alcohol limit to 0.5 mg / ml .
We absolutely must jump this hurdle .
In November 1993 we agreed in the Maastricht Treaty that measures can be adopted by the Parliament and Council .
I believe that measures to combat drink-driving are crucial and that we should act jointly in this area .
My third point is this : I think it is important to establish a European penalty point register or at least agree to this step .
In some countries drink-driving is viewed as a trifling offence that your friends in the pub will virtually congratulate you on . So we must not just set an alcohol limit but also ensure that by maintaining a Europe-wide penalty point register and by enforcing penalties , we can change people 's attitude and behaviour .
I want to mention two other points that we cannot vote for .
In my view , the requirement for daytime running lights for cars and not just motorbikes cannot be justified throughout the Community .
It may be appropriate in Scandinavia because the light is different there , but what is the point of having car lights on in Spain during the summer ?
We should respect the principle of subsidiarity and take account of varying weather conditions in the Community before we adopt such fundamental regulations .
My last point is a curious one .
I think it is unreasonable to call for a ban on selling alcohol at all service stations .
Yes , we need to target drivers themselves , but it would be excessive to punish bus passengers who want the odd beer at a service station by banning alcohol there , and we do not want that !
Mr President , Mr Commissioner , it is important for these problems to be discussed clearly , even if we have already found that words alone are not enough to reduce the number of victims .
We talked about it intensely last year at the Pan-European Conference in Helsinki ( I myself drew up a report on the safety and use of telematics ) but , unfortunately , we have not made any impact on the statistics .
Statistics , I agree , are very important for assessing problems : 45 000 deaths a year is certainly an impressive figure , as is 45 000 million lire spent by the community .
But statistics would be a mathematical exercise , an end in themselves , if they were not used to stimulate ideas and to help us draw conclusions .
Alongside the proposals to catalogue accidents and assess their effects in order to assist the injured parties , I consider more interesting and important the analyses of the means and initiatives to try to prevent them .
We have already seen that the simple accessories we all have in our cars are no longer enough : safety belts , airbags , helmets and intelligent speed control systems are just additional factors to accompany something else we still have to invent .
I think one good idea contained in Mr Cornelissen 's excellent report is to try and convince the car manufacturers to change the fronts of the vehicles , to make them safer for pedestrians and cyclists and , at the same time , more resistant to impact .
It would appear that this measure alone could mean 20 000 fewer deaths a year , and it would therefore be worth trying .
I still believe in means of assistance and behavioural measures , such as telematics as a means of control but also of assistance .
However , I particularly believe in educating school children .
It is useless to create different means if they are then used incorrectly .
So we need to start at the beginning and include in the school curriculum the genuinely educational subject of behaviour on roads , and civilized behaviour in general .
Mr President , road safety concerns us all , and this has been proved again this morning , not only by the Commissioner , but also by the rapporteur , whom we support in all aspects of this case and for the way he presented it .
We also sympathize with him : all of us can , because we all have to battle continually with the terrible consequences of these kinds of traffic accidents .
I would like to mention that in my family we are still suffering the consequences of an accident which took place in Belgium between a Dutch and a French driver .
When it turns out that it is often human error which is to blame , then surely better measures could be taken , instead of just saying that people should take better care and learn more .
When we see that in more or less exactly the same circumstances and at the same time , an accident similar to the one the year before happens on the A17 at Kortrijk , with at least as many people killed , then we might well ask when we are finally going to learn and do something about it .
I submitted an amendment on behalf of my group pointing out that when young people are learning to drive , they should know a few things about what to do in the event of injuries .
This amendment was suggested by the Red Cross , and I commend it to this House .
Mr President , on behalf of my group , I can also say that we are mostly very satisfied with Mr Cornelissen 's report .
It touches a sore spot , and repeats for the umpteenth time that the figure of 45 000 fatalities a year , and many times more casualties , is unacceptable , and measures will therefore have to be taken .
Two important issues are behind the huge number of casualties : namely speed and alcohol .
It is on these issues that I would like to see the report sharpened up .
As far as the 30 km / h zones in towns and cities are concerned , we do not need any more studies .
The existing 30 km / h zones have more than proved their effectiveness , so let us start taking action .
On the subject of alcohol levels , 50 milligrams seems a decent compromise , but I can tell you that large , heavy people still think they can drink more than others .
It would be much clearer simply to ban drinking .
It saves people having to think how much more they can have , how much they have already had , how much they can drink generally .
What gets into these drivers ' heads , that they insist on drinking before they get behind the wheel ?
Twenty milligrams strikes me as quite enough .
Mr President , we regularly express our sympathy with the victims of disasters .
On our European tarmac 45 000 people die each year , and more than 1.5 million are injured .
These figures have been mentioned many times today .
Yet this is not the inevitable price of progress , but the result of our choice of unsafe transport modes .
It is to the credit of the European Commission that it has placed road safety at the top of the agenda , and I can wholeheartedly support the action programme , whereby , to my mind , the emphasis should be on protecting vulnerable groups such as cyclists and pedestrians .
The Commission thinks that , in view of the cost of one road death , a measure which costs ECU 1 million and saves one life should be taken on economic grounds alone !
The use of such economic arguments shows once again what little value human lives are accorded on the road .
As a point of principle , I oppose valuing a human life at ECU 1 million .
As the crowning glory of God 's creation , every human being is unique and invaluable .
This criterion could even lead to unfortunate choices being made , such as protecting working people in preference to the elderly .
The rapporteur , Mr Cornelissen , rightly points out that the figure of ECU 1 million can lead to abuse , as the cheapest measures might be the ones to get priority .
Regrettably , the Commission only focuses on making traffic safer .
I think we must give some thought to the issue of reducing mobility .
Less mobility instantly saves human lives .
I also wish there were incentives for safer modes of transport , such as the train and the bicycle .
All this does not alter the fact that I think highly of the action programme .
I would like to thank Mr Cornelissen for his excellent report .
Mr President , Mr Commissioner , I think the figures are alarming . One person in eighty becomes the victim of a road accident and the resulting economic costs amount to 1 % of the GNP of the EU .
It is also said that these costs are underestimated and may even be twice that amount .
I do not think road education alone is enough , although it is important , nor do I think we need simply deal with the subject of the amount of alcohol consumed .
We should develop more community and public transport services , and we should give people the opportunity to use them , especially during holiday periods and week-ends .
Consideration should also be given to monitoring .
One proposal could be to harmonize the times at which alcoholic drinks are sold , which are currently not harmonized at all in Europe .
We have already talked about the possibility of using innovative technological methods .
Telematics applied to transport undoubtedly produces significantly positive effects , such as satellite navigation in the event of particular weather conditions .
We also need to weaken the resistance of the car manufacturers , particularly with regard to safety standards .
To that effect , there should be an assessment of the pilot projects already being implemented by DG XIII and DG VII , providing for direct measures to improve the safety of means of individual and collective mobility .
In this case , I believe telematics can play an important role with regard to both visual and oral communication .
From this point of view , I think pilot projects involving the cities also need to be developed . Above all , however , if we want to take everybody into consideration , I believe we need to think of safety measures as being connected with the quality of life .
Quality of life is measured with awareness , also taking into account a harmonic concept of people and objects . From this point of view , I think it is even more necessary to develop a real European concept of increased responsibility towards the citizens , which is fundamental if we want to provide a model and an advanced point of reference .
Mr President , I very much welcome the extension in the Maastricht Treaty to joint competence for safety between the Member States and the European Union .
I also give a warm welcome to the Commission communication and to Mr Cornelissen 's excellent report .
However , the real way forward to improve road safety is to ensure compliance with existing regulations .
Currently the situation is that some countries fail to apply the regulations in force , while other countries , like my own , gold-plate the regulations with additional conditions .
If you take the particular example of reducing the maximum amount of drivers ' blood concentration to 0.5 mg / ml , this is only tinkering at the margins of road safety .
We should instead take tougher action against persistent drunk drivers who are currently offending and causing road accident deaths and injuries where they are three or four times over the existing limit .
I hope the Commission will contrast that with the proposed action against insulin-dependent diabetic drivers in the United Kingdom , which is out of all proportion to any likely danger they would pose on the roads .
These drivers are now going to be banned in the United Kingdom and will lose their right to drive goods vehicles up to seven and a half tonnes .
They will , however , still be entitled to drive such vehicles in any other Member State but the United Kingdom .
I ask the Commissioner today , is this compatible with road safety in a single European market ?
I urge the Commissioner and this House to take action .
Mr President , this debate on the future of European road safety takes place at a time when mobile phone usage in Ireland and across Europe is rapidly increasing .
The use of mobile phones in cars must be legislated for at a European level in the interests of better road safety .
The European Union should ensure that car manufacturers construct all cars for the European market equipped fully with mobile phone kits .
The European car manufacturers must assume the costs of equipping all new manufactured cars with car phones in the interests of the medium to long-term future of road safety for car users and their passengers .
In Ireland car users utilizing mobile phones when driving can be prosecuted for careless driving under the Road Traffic Act of 1961 .
The European Union must complement Irish legislation on this matter , especially as there will be one million mobile phones in Ireland by the end of 1998 .
Finally , phone penetration in Ireland , which presently stands at 15 % of the population , is set to double by the end of the year .
With so many mobile phones in operation in Ireland and Europe , mobile phone car kits in the future will come to be viewed not as a luxury item but as a necessity in the interests of safer driving and road safety , and the European Union must act on this issue immediately .
I compliment Mr Cornelissen on his excellent report .
The debate is now adjourned and will be resumed at 3.00 p.m.
We shall now proceed to the vote .
Madam President , on a point of order , I would like to say that two anti-crime procedures are currently under way .
The first is the request for urgent debate before Parliament and the second is the referral to the Council . The request can be signed here in the Palais in Room 1155 , next to the Documentation Service .
Thirdly , I would like to ask if the Committee on the Rules of Procedure has already dealt with the refusal of the request for urgent debate at the last sitting .
Mr Rübig , I can inform you that the necessary steps have been taken and the President of the European Parliament will be in constant contact with the Belgian authorities about this serious problem . The College of Quaestors , which meets tomorrow afternoon , has added this matter to its agenda .
In other words , we have treated your request with all the seriousness it deserves .
Votes
Madam President , please note that my colleague Mr Smith is ill today .
Otherwise he would have been present in the Chamber .
In accordance with the Bureau 's instruction , please note my presence in the Chamber .
I have noted that you are here , Mr Falconer .
Before the roll-call vote on Amendment No 63
Madam President , could my presence in the Chamber be noted .
I will not be participating in this vote .
I would also advise those Members in the House who are interested in protecting their rights that these are appropriate votes in which to do as I am doing .
The majority is overwhelmingly against the Green motion and no political causes will be lost in any protest .
After the roll-call vote on Amendment No 67
Mr Falconer , I scrupulously respect the Bureau 's instructions .
When I said earlier that you were at the sitting , I meant you were free to vote or not to vote , and that I had noted your presence .
I think that is all entirely correct in accordance with what we decided .
- After the roll-call vote on Amendment No 58
Madam President , I wished to indicate that I was going to participate in that vote .
Would you please follow the Bureau 's instructions !
Mr Falconer , I fully respect your freedom .
As I said earlier , you may vote , or you may not vote .
The main thing is that we have taken note of your presence .
Madam President , in this Parliament we vote to adopt texts or amendments or not to adopt texts or amendments .
If you wish to adopt a text or an amendment , you vote in favour ; if you wish to reject a text or an amendment , you vote against ; if you want to do neither of those things but show that you are present here , you can always press the third button - the abstention button .
( Mixed reactions ) I know that some people claim there is a difference between abstaining and being present in the Chamber and not voting .
I personally fail to see the difference .
Ladies and gentlemen , you will appreciate that we are not going to start a debate on this .
Personally , I think there is an important nuance between abstaining and not participating in the vote .
It is quite clear .
I think Mr Falconer agrees .
Madam President , I would have hoped that Mr Corbett , with his long experience as a senior staff member on the Committee on Institutional Affairs , would also recognize that difference .
Before the roll-call vote on Amendment No 59
Madam President , the issue of the mandatory vote is much too serious to degenerate into a dispute between the Presidency and Mr Falconer .
Therefore I wish to announce that I am present and that I will not vote .
( Parliament adopted the legislative resolution )
I will not participate in the vote on this report , Madam President .
Very well , we will take note of that .
( During successive votes , Parliament adopted the 9 legislative resolutions )
Madam President , before we proceed to the vote , I would like to point out that in the voting list two amendments have not been allocated to the correct paragraphs , and that Amendment No 19 tabled by the Group of the European People 's Party would not relate to paragraph 18 but to paragraph 19 .
In that case , I shall vote against , as it would replace paragraph 19 .
The vote on Amendment No 28 tabled by the Group of the European Liberal , Democrat and Reform Party should not be taken after paragraph 36 , but as an addition to paragraph 45 , because the issue is dealt with in that paragraph and it fits very well there .
Please keep an eye on this during the vote .
( Parliament adopted the resolution )
Madam President , I do not wish to delay the vote .
May I ask you to have a general correction made to the text , of which the original is in Portuguese , because in the languages I can understand I have detected unacceptable errors .
I have received many requests for this report which must be sent out in languages that I cannot read .
I would also like to request the floor regarding Amendments Nos 11 and 5 .
On Amendment No 11
Madam President , this is not a linguistic problem .
This is the same text that was submitted by Mr Paul Rübig of the Group of the European People 's Party .
This text was rejected in committee , and I have used it because I consider that it best expresses what we want to say .
Therefore , this is indeed the text that Mr Paul Rübig submitted previously .
On Amendment No 5
Madam President , I cannot accept this amendment because it has nothing to do with the euro .
( Parliament adopted the resolution )
Madam President , I tried to catch your eye before this last roll-call vote .
I would like my presence in the Chamber recorded .
I did not vote .
( Parliament adopted the legislative resolution )
Madam President , I did not wish to delay proceedings earlier but your answer to me was that an abstention was not the same as not participating in the vote .
I would like this to be referred to the Committee on the Rules of Procedure , the Verification of Credentials and Immunities .
That ruling is tantamount to creating two different forms of abstention .
You will have Members who wish neither to vote in favour of a text or against a text , but who wish to indicate their presence in the Chamber by pressing the button of abstention .
You will also have Members who wish neither to vote in favour of a text nor against a text by not pressing such a button and indicating to you orally which , as we have seen today , causes a number of problems .
I would ask this to be referred to the Rules Committee .
Mr Corbett , as there are not many of us , I will tell you my opinion .
It has often been the case that I have abstained from a vote because I did not wish to take a stance in favour of or against it but I accepted that it had been put to the vote .
However , it sometimes ( but more rarely ) occurs that I do not participate in a vote in order to show a firm intention , which is very different from that of abstention .
We will not debate this just now , but the question is very interesting at a constitutional and institutional level .
We could submit it to the Committee on the Rules of Procedure , the Verification of Credentials and Immunities and open up a very interesting debate on the subject .
Madam President , this particular matter has been debated long and hard in this Chamber over the last session and this session .
It has also been debated within the Socialist Group .
The line is quite clear within the group .
If Mr Corbett wishes to change that , he should take it back to the Socialist Group .
The line is quite clear that when Members do not wish to vote , then they do not have to vote .
They do not have to press any buttons to abstain or anything else .
They just express the view that they do not wish to vote .
This relates to a decision handed down by the Bureau .
It was never brought to this Chamber .
If Mr Corbett wants to push anything , perhaps he might support my call - which I made in previous Parliaments - for the Members of this Parliament to have a vote on this issue to clear up the matter once and for all .
I would be quite happy to participate in that vote .
Once we have got rid of the anomaly which the Bureau has created , we can then get back to the business of this Parliament .
Until that time it would be far better for Mr Corbett to leave aside his institutional matters and put his political hat on .
Perhaps then we can have politics entering the discussion .
Ladies and gentlemen , although there are not many of us , but since we still have some time left - even though we have to count the interpreters ' time and the explanations of vote still pending - we could prolong this debate .
However , since it is not on the agenda , that is not possible .
Mr Falconer , I am sorry but other Members are waiting and are hungry and have meetings and I must proceed to the explanations of vote .
I think I really have properly respected your right to vote or not to vote , Mr Falconer .
It has all been noted very carefully .
I really could do no more .
( Several Members requested to speak on a point of order ) Since you insist , we will first have the explanations of vote , since we are concerned to behave properly towards our colleagues .
We will then stay here to sort this issue out .
It is really very interesting .
Despite some reservations , we have chosen to vote for Mendiluce 's motion for a resolution on the Western Sahara .
We give our full support to the content of the resolution , particularly because the peace plan in question has been presented to and adopted by the UN Security Council . We also give our support to holding a fair referendum on self-determination .
However , we are concerned about how the resolution is to be put into practice , since it forms part of the Common Foreign and Security Policy , which we oppose in principle .
The CFSP is only one of the tools used by the EU in the construction of a new state .
Kuhn report ( A4-0029 / 98 )
The primary objective of all legislation should be to draw up fair , clear texts which are easy to implement and which guarantee considerable legal security for the public .
However , neither the original Commission text on the sale of consumer goods and associated guarantees , nor the amendments proposed by the Kuhn report meet these criteria .
On the one hand , they are unbalanced and place too great a burden on the vendor , and possibly the producer .
On the other hand , they bring about legal insecurity in which litigation procedures flourish , which if not favourable to consumers , will certainly benefit lawyers and legal experts .
Three examples clearly illustrate the unbalanced nature of the texts proposed .
Firstly , the length of the guarantee , which varies from two years - in the original text - to five years - in the amendment by the Green group - , when a legal duration of one year would seem sufficient , especially since the range of goods guaranteed is very large - from hairdryers to cars .
We should remember that we are talking about a legal minimum here and that contractual guarantees , which are a factor in competition and promotion , can go well beyond this .
A second problem is the inclusion of secondhand goods within the scope of this directive , when some of the clauses are ill-suited to these goods , for which the idea of flaws is difficult to define since they have already been used .
Thirdly , there is the reversal of the burden of proof to the detriment of the vendor , when it is a general principle of law that it is up to the person with the allegation to produce proof of it .
Roman lawyers had already given this type of reversed proof the name " diabolical proof ' , since it is so difficult to establish .
The legal insecurity which is a source of endless legal disputes is a result of the inaccuracy of too many definitions , which are nevertheless essential .
During the Parliamentary sitting , certain amendments from the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Protection were adopted as additions to the notion of consumer expectations and the buyer 's right to an alternative option , thus making the text extremely vague and favouring the development of litigation .
For these basic reasons and reasons of legal practice , it was not possible for the French members of the Group of Independents for a Europe of Nations to vote in favour of this text .
Furthermore , it deals with basic principles of civil law , which is not one of the areas of Community competence .
Any political action or legislative initiative in favour of consumer protection is a good thing and should be welcomed .
However , that does not mean that such protection should be seen as an objective for its own sake , in isolation from the general context in which it should apply .
It is well known that all rights have their limit , at the point where they come into conflict with the liberties and rights of other people .
The Kuhn report , on the proposal for a directive on the sale of consumer goods and associated guarantees , aims to safeguard consumer protection but because of the nature of some of the amendments which have been approved , that consumer protection in many cases conflicts gratuitously with the rights of the other agents affected by such a proposal . This could potentially result in unnecessary legal in defensiveness on the part of sellers and producers , and could also constitute a particularly significant burden for small traders and small companies , at a time when SMEs need all the help they can get to become competitive , so that competitiveness can allow new jobs to be created .
Therefore I have voted against the Kuhn report , in the hope that for the second reading it may be possible to reach a balance - which does not exist at the moment - so that consumer protection can be made compatible with protecting the interests of producers , which are also legitimate .
The idea that consumers should have a clear conception of their rights as regards guarantees when they buy goods in countries other than their own is an important one .
If the common market is to have real meaning , then one aspect of its benefits is that people should feel confident about such things as guarantees when they buy goods in other European countries .
The question is to what extent the European Union should not only seek to ensure that consumers have a clear idea of their rights , but should also harmonize the law so that the same rights obtain everywhere .
To my mind , an approach which involves this degree of harmonization is the wrong one .
It ignores the principle of subsidiarity .
It interferes to an unacceptable extent in national laws regarding the sale of goods .
These are laws which , in the case of my own country , the United Kingdom , have been established and built up on case law over a long period .
The directive proposed is a very blunt instrument indeed to try to incorporate the detailed provisions of the 1979 Sale of Goods Act .
The directive itself has caused great alarm among the people who will be most involved in dealing with its consequences .
This is because the Commission text would allow the consumer to ask the seller either to repair goods free of charge or to replace the goods , or to demand a price reduction or rescission of the contract .
The right to repair would operate for two years from the date of purchase ; the right to replacement would operate for one year following purchase .
No wonder sellers of goods affected by the directive are worried .
Mrs Kuhn 's amendments further complicate this situation .
They certainly do nothing to resolve it .
In drawing up the directive the Commission has loaded the dice in favour of the consumer .
It is surely unlikely that a consumer who complains about what is described as a ' lack of conformity ' existing in the goods he has bought will accept repair if replacement is on offer ?
As one of my Swindon constituents asks : ' The scope for argument about what is a ' minor lack of conformity ' is limitless and unscrupulous consumers might be encouraged to exploit the uncertainty created by these proposals , resulting in the courts having to cope with an influx of cases .
Who will foot the bill for these legal costs ? '
The answer to that question is , ultimately , other consumers .
That is the foolishness of this proposal , a folly we see repeated again and again in the half-baked proposals produced by the consumer directorate in the Commission .
Consumers will pay in two ways : firstly , because the price of goods will rise to take account of such extra costs .
Secondly , because this kind of legislation acts as a disincentive to smaller retailers to stock products which might give rise to expensive legislation - or it adds that last straw which breaks the camel 's back and brings the shutters down on the business once and for all .
So what kind of legislation would help in this situation ?
I believe it is probably the kind of legislation which the European Commission is least likely to provide .
The Commission believes in big legislation - major directives and regulations which entail big changes across the commercial community .
What is needed here is light-touch legislation .
What is needed is an arrangement which ensures that when a consumer , coming from one Member State , buys goods in another , he or she is then informed about the consumer 's rights under guarantee pertaining in that country where the purchase is carried out .
It might also be desirable , if it is relevant , to inform the consumer of the agent of the company producing the goods in the country of the consumer 's residence so that there is an information channel about the consumer 's rights under guarantee in the country of purchase .
That is a far cry from trying to draw up completely new EU-level laws regarding consumer guarantees and imposing these on the very different legal structures of the Member States .
It would be a real help to consumers and it would be legislation that shows that the Commission is living in the real world .
The Commissioner 's feeble reply to the Parliament debate on Monday night shows that this is , in fact , very far from the case .
I and my fellow British Conservatives oppose this directive and the Kuhn report .
I am delighted that a European directive is devoted to improving consumer protection in Europe regarding the sale of consumer goods and associated guarantees .
The draft directive , amended by Parliament , is devoted to finding the best balance between the interest of the consumer and the responsibilities of the vendors and producers , without going as far as the wastage which could arise from a systematic exchange of all goods which have a fault , however minor , and which could in any case be repaired under the conditions of product quality maintenance .
If it is worth having more guarantees for the buyer and more transparency for the secondhand market , we should question the basis of enacting rules which belong to the " first hand ' market in this case .
I fear that this assimilation would in fact be difficult to implement .
Furthermore , I would prefer a specific directive for secondhand goods to take account of the complexity of this area , whilst offering effective consumer protection .
I have abstained on Amendment No 24 , because in view of Austrian national law , which provides for a guarantee period of just six months , I am opposed to a quadrupling of the period to two years .
Extending the period in this way would not only hit business , but also , above all , consumers themselves .
They would be faced with price increases because of the higher risk factor that businesses would have to build in .
Furthermore , legal proceedings become more onerous and costly the longer the time since the product was purchased .
Lastly , it is totally contrary to the principle of good faith if the vendor has to assume liability for lack of conformity although the purchaser may have recognized the defect in both abstract and specific terms .
It would be difficult not to agree with the aims of the draft directive on the sale of consumer goods and associated guarantees : to strengthen consumer protection and promote the quality of products .
Unfortunately most of the means proposed by the text under examination , far from responding in an appropriate way to the declared objectives , on the contrary seem excessive , inappropriate and dangerous .
By inciting the consumer to get involved in dangerous procedures in a whole range of areas , we may contribute to the fortunes of lawyers , but we will not protect consumers any better . Above all , we will overwhelm with even more obligations those small industries in the production and distribution sectors for whom the constraints of exploitation are already very great .
This will increase the legal insecurity of manufacturers and business people , so the initial good intentions will actually have a negative effect on the economy and employment in the end .
So we will vote against a whole series of dangerous clauses which risk opening up endless disputes and creating a general climate of legal insecurity which would be negative for everybody .
We are opposed to the inclusion of secondhand goods within the scope of this directive .
The concept of a legal guarantee does not seem to us to apply to a secondhand product such as a vehicle , whose characteristics vary depending on its usage , its age , its maintenance and so on .
Under these conditions , how could a secondhand product be replaced by a comparable product ?
Quite simply this does not make any sense .
We are also against extending the guarantee period to two years .
This is excessive , particularly given the increased level of consumer protection which the directive is targeting .
A period of one year would seem reasonable and balanced , and therefore completely sufficient .
The transfer to the producer and vendor of the burden of proof for lack of conformity also seems unacceptable to us , and contrary to the general principles of law .
Article 3 , paragraph 3 , creates a presumption of imperfection at the time of delivery of the product if the fault is discovered within the six months following the actual delivery .
We will vote against this clause , which we think is exaggerated and dangerous .
The very notion of lack of conformity is defined in a very subjective way in the draft directive .
The amendment by the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Protection only aggravates things by introducing the term " of consumer expectation ' , which is even vaguer and therefore more likely to lead to many disputes .
As regards the possibility of offering the buyer a replacement of the product when there is a fault of conformity , this opens up dangerous leeway , especially in high technology sectors such as the car industry or sailing .
We think it is up to the vendor whether to offer repair or replacement , and failing that , the buyer can demand a reduction in price or termination of the contract .
The other area showing dangerous leeway is the one being opened up by the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Protection by proposing that the consumer can act directly against the manufacturer when the latter is not party to the sale contract .
We would reject this proposal absolutely .
Setting up a " service to the client ' network in all European countries for cases of direct purchase of a product in another Member State also raises problems and must be reexamined .
If it is legitimate to seek to protect consumers adequately , this must not be at the expense of SMEs , by imposing unbearable constraints on them which would risk upsetting their permanently fragile financial balance .
In France these small companies , which number 800 000 , are currently the best job creators .
In the period 1988-1995 , they created 1.75 million jobs throughout the European Union .
So we should be particularly careful not to endanger their equilibrium by imposing unreasonable constraints on them : this should be a priority for us .
The proposal for a directive on the sale of consumer goods and associated guarantees has presented us with fundamental problems because there is not enough information about relevant law in the Member States .
I have requested the European Commission more than once that alongside its proposals , it should carry out a comparative study of the law as regards the specific situation in the various Member States .
Similarly , the Commission should provide Parliament with the key documents upon which its proposal is based .
Of course , this support documentation only needs to be placed in the library , or made available in the form of some technical medium that can be copied easily .
The second difficulty lies in the very varied interpretations which have been made of the proposal 's content .
The proposal fails to differentiate between two of the basic agents : the vendor and the producer .
This has led to a regrettable state of confusion .
Nor is any distinction made between perishable and non-perishable goods , which is an essential aspect when defining guarantees .
The different responsibilities of the manufacturer and the vendor are not made clear either .
The vendor can only take responsibility for those contract requirements which differ from the manufacturer 's responsibilities .
Furthermore , the fact that the proposal fails to describe the basic principles which regulate these matters in the national legislations has led to a veritable diaspora of amendments .
The proposed text and the amendments which have been presented are unlikely to provide a clear result in favour of the consumer without hindering commercial relations .
I am voting for this report on the condition that what is in the explanatory statement is correct .
This explanatory statement clearly states that it is a question of a mini-harmonization of the Member States ' national legislation .
It is clear that the mini-harmonization to be carried out shall be subject to the respective national parliaments . That means it is up to each national parliament to decide at what level it wishes to adopt .
So the mini-harmonization is a recommendation .
My condition is therefore that Swedish consumer protection is in no way weakened through this harmonization .
Directive on ornamental plants ( C4-0044 / 98 )
This matter is highly sensitive .
To just vote for a Council Directive without debate is wrong because the Members have so few opportunities to acquaint themselves with what the Directive is about .
Seed growers who sell vegetable varieties not registered by the EU are threatened with prosecution if they do not stop the sales .
Only plants which are included on the EU 's common varieties list are allowed to be sold .
For a variety to get onto the list it needs to have an owner .
Ownership costs SEK 20 000 per variety .
In view of the above , especially the limited opportunities to get acquainted with this directive , we are choosing to abstain from the vote .
Kellett-Bowman report ( A4-0035 / 98 )
Madam President , first of all I would like to thank you for humouring two of the passions of the honourable Member now speaking ; namely , the greed which makes us want to go for lunch , and the laziness which prevents him from writing his explanation of vote .
I would like to say one thing about the Kellett-Bowman report .
I did not vote for this report for one simple reason .
The report intelligently organizes the discharge and the conditions under which discharge is granted for a certain number of specialized agencies .
Insofar as it concerns agencies which do not have financial autonomy , the system set out in the proposal is satisfactory .
However , when it comes to agencies which have independent income , the system set out by Mr Kellett-Bowman , which was approved unanimously except for one vote by the Committee on Budgets and broadly by this Parliament , is highly unsatisfactory , because it actually ends up giving the power of discharge to the administrative council of the agencies concerned , which would be justified , but only gives firstly a simple power of opinion to this Parliament .
I think it is a serious matter if we are going down this road and turning this Parliament into a sort of consultative body , subject to the superior arbitration of a technical body created by laws and regulations which we vote on here in this House .
What we should have done was either to give up all participation by Parliament , or reverse the procedures and give Parliament the last word .
I just wanted that point to be made .
Graenitz report ( A4-0009 / 98 )
The Danish Social Democrats in the European Parliament have today voted for the report on general principles for the European Union 's food legislation .
It is very positive that the Commission 's Green Paper recognizes that an extension of the product safety directive could improve overall consumer protection .
The Danish Social Democrats are of the opinion that the acts in question should be revised in order to ensure they are based on the principle of caution and the principle of regard for consumer health and safety .
The premise of food legislation in Europe should be environmental protection , and the aim should be sustainable food production .
These proposals are all part of the same report , to which we give our support .
With the new Treaty of Amsterdam , the EU seeks to secure minimum requirements in consumer policy , including giving appropriate consideration to consumer health and safety when legislating in the area of food .
However , this will not affect the ability of Member States to retain or introduce regulations that provide better protection than the joint regulations .
The Danish Social Democrats regard the European Parliament 's report on food legislation as a step in that direction .
There is no doubt that the present Green Paper on the current food law situation is very timely , in view of the crisis in food safety and consumer protection caused by the BSE scandal .
Articles 129 and 129A of the Treaty of Amsterdam extend the legal base for more effective protection and precautions in policies directed at the consumer , which means that Community food law must be clarified and rationalized , together with its application and monitoring .
We must not forget that many chronic diseases have their origin in food , and food products are not just another commodity like any other .
So , as Mrs Graenitz rightly requests , the responsibility aspect has to be established with complete transparency , so that damaged consumer confidence can be strengthened .
Finally , product labelling is very important for the consumer because it is the main source of information - indeed , almost the only source . It is therefore essential that such labelling should be complete , clear and truthful .
In the aftermath of BSE , I believe information should also be provided ( depending on the product ) about the pesticides or animal feedstuffs used in its production and manufacture .
Food is an issue of vital importance for the health and safety of consumers and for the quality of life of our citizens .
However , it is a complex issue which requires the coordination of parallel policies and actions in order to safeguard and upgrade it .
BSE has once again opened up the debate on the safety of foodstuffs and the health of consumers , which are problems resulting from an inadequate legislative framework and a lack of control over its implementation by the relevant bodies . The latter serve specific interests and are indifferent to the criminal repercussions on the health of our citizens .
The events themselves , the fatal incidences of these serious " unprecedented ' diseases , should have forced us to confront the crucial questions about the quality of our foodstuffs and the enormous risks to consumer safety .
The elaboration of clear , lucid regulations and directives is of course necessary in order to determine quality standards and to ensure the monitoring of foodstuffs .
However , before any legislative intervention we must get to the root cause of the downgrading , distortion and alteration not only of our foodstuffs but of the whole of the food chain .
It is not just the absence of up-to-date guidelines which places the burden of responsibility for this lamentable state of affairs on the foodstuffs sector . Those that already exist are also contravened in the most blatant manner .
When the concept of food is commercialized and its administration handed over to the law of profit , and when the market determines the quality of foodstuffs on the basis of the cost-profit relationship , there will never be effective safeguards for the health of consumers .
It would be naive to claim that liability for the disturbance of the food chain rests exclusively with the farmer or the cattlebreeder . Nor would this allow the problem to be confronted at source .
On the contrary , liability must be sought in the intensification of production and in the pressures that producers face from traders , mass producers and large food multinationals to squeeze costs and increase the volume of production . This imposes on them the lavish use of fertilizers , pesticides and animal feeds , the composition and consequences of which they are for the most part unaware of , or have been misinformed about .
Even more important , however , are the liabilities of those industries which process and mass-produce primary products before they are put on the market , using substances which not only downgrade the quality of the foodstuffs but also damage the health of consumers , who are used as guinea pigs .
The policy relating to foodstuffs , and the safeguarding of their quality and of consumer health , require the reorientation of the policies implemented in the primary production sectors - agriculture , cattle breeding and fishing - and the effective monitoring of the manufacture and use of chemicals and other substances in food production , preservation and processing . They also require constant monitoring of the results of research carried out into the production of such substances , and the institution of measures and regulations , especially in the context of trade agreements formulated within the framework of the WTO and the Codex Alimentarius , which would prevent the unaccountable activity of multinational food companies .
It is good that the rapporteur has adopted a consumer-friendly position .
I would just like to stress three important areas which are urgent , and which the rapporteur has not emphasized sufficiently .
Firstly , there is the question of antibiotics .
It is important that we reduce the use of antibiotics in animal feed , especially since the derogation which Sweden has from the EU 's weaker legislation is almost certainly going to expire .
The EU must recognize the danger of using antibiotics .
I therefore support Amendment No 28 .
Secondly , the rules on food labelling must be improved substantially so that consumers know what they are eating .
In Sweden , the EU 's rules have led to big problems for people with allergies , amongst others , because now they cannot get information about what products contain .
The rules Sweden had before were better and clearer than the current EU rules .
Thirdly , I also have objections to the legal framework being proposed .
I would like the EU to lay down minimum rules rather than harmonizing rules .
Minimum rules are better because you then give individual Member States an opportunity to introduce tougher rules than those set out by the EU .
With the EU 's harmonizing rules the levels are fixed and the development of better , tougher rules is prevented .
This is bad , to say the least , and inhibits the development of environmentally-friendly rules .
Future food legislation must be based on producer liability - grower and supplier liability .
The main aim should be the protection of the health and safety of consumers .
Product labelling should be obligatory and apply to all the ingredients in a product .
Every country should have the right to allow considerations for the environment , health and safety to take precedence over the free movement of goods .
EU rules on food and other consumer protection should be minimum rules ; that is , a Member State should have the right to apply its own tougher rules .
In international organizations , Member States should have an unrestricted right to promote food and consumer requirements which go further than those of the EU .
With its Green Paper , the Commission has taken an important step towards much-needed rationalization of Community food legislation .
This implies that existing EU legislation in this area must be reviewed with an eye to simplification .
I give this my full support .
However , it is also clear that future food legislation must guarantee consumer protection , while the internal market must be able to function without barriers .
In its report , the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Protection has added to those important aims by requiring responsibility on the part of the producer and the authorities , to provide safe and healthy foods as well as thorough consumer information .
In my opinion , this is well-justified .
I therefore give this report my full support , and I look forward to the concrete initiatives that the Commission will be taking based on the Green Paper .
Our group has tabled six amendments which target three main objectives .
The first stipulates the need to label foodstuffs sold in bulk clearly and legibly , so that consumers have clear information on their denomination , price and , if necessary , their origin .
In fact the text proposed by the rapporteur discriminates severely between products sold in " consumer units ' and products sold in bulk .
Regardless of the type of packaging , it is essential that the consumer has clear information .
Our second group of amendments specifies the role of the Community scientific committees .
These committees exist and should therefore serve as a point of scientific reference for drawing up regulations , directives and recommendations .
Thirdly , our group rejects the principle that farmers and growers have the ultimate responsibility for the " scientific ' proof of the sanitary quality of their products .
In fact , it is the operators in the farm produce and supply network who must produce this scientific proof .
We must not forget that agricultural products can undergo intrinsic changes in their sanitary quality as a result of the technological processes used for their transformation , particularly with the use of biotechnology .
Furthermore , farmers cannot have an in-depth knowledge of the sanitary quality of all the elements used in the production of their goods .
I am thinking in particular of the cattle fodder they use and of the sanitary and environmental quality of slurry which they are likely to spread on their fields .
Our group calls for respect for the principle of a specific vertical regulation on labelling .
In fact , a number of agricultural products are subjected to specific transformation processes - I am referring particularly to the wine growing sector - or are sold directly in their original state to consumers ( the fruit and vegetable sector ) and should therefore come under a more restrictive vertical regulation than the horizontal directives which apply to the labelling of all food products .
As regards genetically modified organisms , our group recalls that it is necessary to inform the consumer clearly on the possible use of GMOs in the composition of food products .
The Commission has still not published the methods of application for this special labelling , and consumers are presently consuming food products with a GMO basis without being aware of it .
That is unacceptable .
The lesson of mad cow disease has been learned by the consumer .
A recent survey in France by Sofres shows that 69 % of French people are against transgenic cultivation .
So it is up to us to allow the European consumer to exercise clearly and easily his or her free choice between products with GMOs and products without GMOs at the same price .
Clearly in this case is important that the GMOs are traceable from the field to the table .
The principle of labelling has been retained .
It must be applied to all ingredients whose DNA has been manipulated , not just to some of them , including both imported products and products from within the Community .
I would remind the House of the scale of imports : for the farm produce industry in France alone , this amounts to 5 000 tonnes of soya and 8 000 tonnes of lecithin annually , mainly from the United States .
However , the conditions of harvesting , storage and transport result in mixtures such that we cannot identify the presence or absence of GMOs in these imports .
And it is this fundamental question we must tackle , because the European consumer who does not want to consume GMOs should not have to pay a surcharge for the privilege of exercising free choice because specifically non-GMO channels have to be set up for products which are difficult to find and identify , and which are therefore more expensive .
This surcharge should be payable by those who change the rules of the game and who would like to impose a new mode of consumption .
We should ensure that they can propose but not impose it .
The idea of a supplement payable by the end consumer in order to avoid the ingestion of genetically manipulated foodstuffs is absolutely unacceptable .
We consider this to be the food safety priority which the Community legislator must tackle if he wishes to do a useful job .
Turning now to SMEs and farmers , the Commission must evaluate their capacity to integrate all the Community standards .
We must remember that a regulation is only relevant if it can be applied by all operators .
Finally , our group is opposed to multiplying structures , and therefore to the creation of a European agency for food safety , because it would mirror the work of the Community scientific committees and the monitoring bodies in the Member States , which have a key role to play .
Some would like the Commission to be present as such in the Codex Alimentarius , a scientific body recognized by the WTO .
Our group considers this to be a bad move , because the 15 voices of the Member States will always be heard more loudly than a single European Community voice .
As we have seen during the international fishing conferences , when the Commission takes the place of the Member States , it weakens their positions instead of strengthening them .
Food safety is an extremely important issue .
I think there are some things missing in this otherwise excellent report .
For example , it is unacceptable that we currently find that consignments of meat imported into Sweden with certificates of health turn out to be contaminated with salmonella .
Similarly , measures should be taken to ensure that the routine addition of antibiotics to animal feeds ceases .
In paragraph 36 of the draft report the Commission is urged to bring an action against the Council because it has not observed the deadline set for 1 January 1995 for a decision on measures required to combat salmonella in laying hens .
It is , of course , a serious matter that the Council has not observed the deadline , but it is not appropriate to involve the European Court of Justice in this matter .
Arroni report ( A4-0061 / 98 )
On the whole , Mr Arroni 's report on the practical aspects of introducing the euro is satisfactory .
He correctly stresses the need to inform consumers and prepare them for the arrival of the single currency .
He does not omit to highlight the difficulty which this monetary revolution could represent for vulnerable population groups such as older or disabled people .
As the need for information on the euro has now been largely acknowledged , it would be wise for this to be implemented effectively and quickly as our rapporteur rightly stresses .
It would also be advisable to pay particular attention to SMEs , as they represent an important source of employment .
I am in favour of Mr Arroni 's idea of asking Member States to attach particular importance to the impact on companies of introducing a single currency , so that they will be able to benefit from all its advantages . This would mean that the impact on employment would be as favourable as possible .
However , I would like to make two points , the first concerning dual pricing .
If this is necessary , particularly in the phase when the euro and national currencies are circulating in parallel , it does not seem wise to me to make it mandatory , as the rapporteur proposes .
The imposition of dual pricing would entail costs and inflexibility which would no doubt damage the proper functioning of the single market .
However , it would be beneficial to install a code of good practice , at least for retail trade .
My second point concerns the handling of the conversion of national currencies into euros .
As the rapporteur says , it is desirable to call on the banking and financial sector to set up a code of good practice here too , to respect the principle that compulsory conversion should be free .
In this respect , the proposals by the Socialists and the Greens to make this mandatory by means of a regulation do not seem wise to me .
Healthy and honest competition between all those involved in exchange operations seems to me to be sufficient to deal with this .
The fate of these proposals will determine how I vote on the report .
Economic and monetary union is a centralist , high-risk project with a weak democratic basis .
It prioritizes price stability and low inflation .
There is a high risk that our already high unemployment will increase further .
The regional differences between growth regions and depopulated areas could be increased .
EMU leads to a strong centralization of monetary and currency policy which ultimately could also include fiscal and financial policy .
EMU is a political project which increases the federal aspect of the EU and strengthens the trend towards the formation of a common state .
To try to increase popular support for the EMU project , the Commission is now proposing information campaigns targeted at the general public and companies .
Among other things , an invented cartoon character - ' Captain Euro ' - is going to get people to change their views on EMU and the euro .
This is unacceptable and a provocative use of taxpayers ' money .
It only risks further increasing the gap between the EU and the general public .
Against the background of the above we have voted against the report .
The Commission 's report outlines the basis of a number of initiatives designed to facilitate preparations for the introduction of the euro both in the private sector and in public sector administration .
In ten months ' time , the euro will be an economic reality , and in three short years , the greatest monetary changeover in the history of the world will take place .
Even so , the nations of Europe do not as yet have anything resembling a full picture of the tremendous impact the introduction of the euro will have - even in countries not immediately participating in the common currency - on all aspects of finance .
It is therefore most gratifying that the committee 's Policy Document acknowledges the obvious need for users of the new currency to be well-prepared and well-informed .
Another crucial initiative , featuring prominently in the committee 's Policy Document , is a code of conduct between financial institutions to pave the way for the smooth introduction of the euro . To this I give my full support .
The introduction of the euro will undoubtedly give rise to very serious issues , only some of which seem to concern the Commission .
The central element which is absent , in my view , from the deliberations of the Commission and from whatever preparations are under way at the level of the European Union and its Member States , is who will bear the brunt directly or indirectly .
In other words , who will be called upon to pay the cost of conversion ? We think that under the conditions of a free market and deregulation , this will be the end user - that is , ordinary working people .
It is not by chance , as the Commission itself points out in its communication , that this threat is being brandished by large corporations in order to gain tax advantages and exemptions . Furthermore , they hope to gain new privileges in order to prevent the institution of what was initially widely supported as the essential element in the transitional period of conversion to the new currency : namely , mandatory dual pricing .
We regard mandatory dual pricing , at least in the retail and distribution sectors , as the basic and minimum means to limit the profit-making tendencies which are characteristic of any changeover from one currency to another .
With regard to the rapporteur 's reference to the need for flexibility in the market and to the optional nature of dual pricing , we stress that , left to their own devices , markets have never led to ' better solutions ' and there is no guarantee whatsoever that inflationary tendencies will be avoided .
In parallel , there must be a strengthening of efforts to wipe out cases of profiteering , by means of direct governmental and criminal sanctions . Provision must also be made for the institution of the right for consumer organizations to sue for the protection of collective statutory interests .
We are particularly concerned about the special problems faced by SMEs . Under the pressure of competition from large multinationals and also in the context of the conclusion of subcontracting agreements , they will be forced , from the very start of the transitional period , to undertake the necessary technical convergence ( public accounting , infrastructure , etc . ) which may prove fatal for many of them .
In such cases we could agree on certain special measures of positive discrimination in favour of SMEs , particularly for the smallest ones employing fewer than ten people , to enable them to cope with the increased costs of conversion to the euro .
These measures might relate to public accounting ( e.g. speedier redemption of existing debt ) or might take the form of special finance programmes or easier access to credit .
We are categorically opposed to any attempt to turn the technical preparations for the introduction of the euro into a pretext for large corporations to increase their profits through tax deductions on the costs of investments and of restructuring brought about by the establishment of the euro , ' as well as the profits which arise from the abolition of the dangers of exchange rate fluctuations ' ! However , these solutions are being examined .
We would like to take this opportunity to repeat our request that the Commission issue a report on the effects of the euro on countries which will not be taking part , and also on the removal of the uncertainty surrounding the relations and exchanges between the ' Ins ' and the ' Outs ' . More generally however , we request information on the Community costs of the euro , which the members of the Commission officially accept as a fact , but which they assiduously avoid specifying , as do the other defenders of EMU .
We wish to point out the disgraceful discrepancy between the policy of tough financial restrictions and sanctions in the event of infringement , and the waste of budget resources on " information ' campaigns and campaigns which manipulate working people into accepting a policy from which they have nothing to gain , as is shown by the tragic circumstances they are experiencing today and by their future prospects .
Torres Marques report ( A4-0078 / 98 )
It could be said of Mrs Torres Marques ' report on the euro and tourism that the proponents of the euro are scraping the bottom of the barrel .
I do not know precisely what significance should be given to this , but I am sure they would have done better to leave this text where it was .
It is based on a complete misinterpretation .
According to the rapporteur , tourists will be happy to have their lives simplified by economic and monetary union and at the same time save on exchange charges .
Throughout the report , it does not hesitate to make even more extravagant affirmations .
For example , it states that the euro would represent for tourists - and I quote - a huge advantage if one considers that currently up to two-thirds of the value of their currency must be lost in exchange transactions before they even spend anything .
Here we have evidence of old reading which has been badly digested , really very badly digested .
In any case , it is highly likely that a tourist regards changing his or her national currency to that of the country visited as part of the charm of travelling and does not regard it at all negatively .
Applying the same principle of unification , the rapporteur calls for complete abolition of border controls , doubtless so that tourists no longer even notice that they are going from one country to another .
And tomorrow are we not going to be asked to use Esperanto in order to make tourists ' lives easier ?
It is not far off .
Have we not already invented the virtual European monument which has no particular national characteristic and which will embellish future euro notes ?
All in all , the Torres Marques report completely bypasses the subject .
Tourists come to a country to appreciate its identity so if , by facilitating things for tourists we assassinate identity , it is really a very short-sighted policy .
Furthermore , since I see that Mr Corbett is still in the Chamber , I will take this opportunity to thank our British friends for refusing to subscribe to the euro because , as a tourist , I would be really disappointed if the Queen 's face no longer appeared on your bank notes .
Since Sweden will not take part in the introduction of the euro in 1999-2002 , we have chosen to abstain from the vote on this report .
This is a question for those Member States which will be included in the euro zone .
However , the report does contain some rather optimistic calculations with regard to growth in tourism thanks to a common currency area .
In this context , we should remember that a big tourist industry in Europe is founded on a high level of general prosperity and has very little to do with a common currency .
In spite of everything , conversion costs are marginal in this context .
This prosperity could well be jeopardized through the creation of a common currency area in a region which is not optimal .
Tourism is an important sector which is going to be greatly affected by the introduction of the euro .
However , I am sceptical about the wording of this report , in particular the wording of paragraphs 17 and 20 , which seek to interfere with issues of national importance where the EU does not have the right to act .
This concerns national taxation and , as paragraph 20 states , that measures should be taken to harmonize taxation , especially VAT .
This shows that the introduction of EMU is the first step in the building of a federal EU in which tax rules will also be harmonized and decided by the EU instead of being managed by the national parliaments .
I cannot go along with that and I am therefore going to vote against the report .
Nor do I think the Commission should introduce information campaigns before the introduction of the euro .
But if that should happen , which could be justified for certain groups within society , then I think the national consumer organizations should be responsible for them .
There would then be a significantly greater chance of the campaigns being informative rather than propaganda .
The Danish Social Democrats have today voted against the Torres Marques report on the euro and tourism .
In the report , the rapporteur proposes a number of measures to facilitate the tourism industry 's transition to the new currency . She urges action to harmonize taxes and duties applicable to the tourism sector , specifically value added tax .
The rapporteur focuses strongly on settling and harmonizing national levies .
It is not clear whether it is a question of harmonization within the euro zone or throughout the entire Union .
The Danish Social Democrats in the European Parliament oppose in principle any harmonization of duties and taxes , since this would undermine the financial basis of the Danish Welfare State .
The delegation has , therefore , chosen to vote against the report .
We agree with the rapporteur on the strategic nature of tourism in general : as a sector for the creation of thousands of jobs ; as the sector par excellence for the development of SMEs ; as a means of economic development and recovery ; and as a means of communication between different peoples .
However , we would like to express our concern about the significant reduction over the last few years in the share of the European tourist industry in the international market . We are also concerned by the fact that , from the viewpoint of industrial relations , we are witnessing redundancies in their thousands , the widespread use of part-time employment , and the misery of limited contracts of employment and social dumping .
More generally , and in contrast to the euphoria with which the rapporteur describes the situation in the sector , we are seeing the generalized use of flexible work patterns and the de facto promotion of ' elastic ' labour relations .
As for the hundreds of thousands of small SMEs , mainly family run , they are simply scraping along in an attempt to cope with increasing competition from large organized chains .
No consideration has been given to these facts . The report simply proposes the establishment of a common policy on tourism with the insertion of the relevant chapter into the Treaty on European Union .
It appears that the supporters of this proposal are inspired by those areas of Community responsibility such as the hundreds of thousands of devastated households in the agricultural sector , or by deregulation , redundancies and doubt as to the possibility of national intervention - for example in air transportation and telecommunications .
In such circumstances the anticipated introduction of the euro will lead to the widespread restructuring of the sector .
This is because the problem in the tourist sector is broader , given its international nature and its many complexities , compared with other sectors where participation or not in the common currency will initially concern a limited range of people in relation to transborder transactions ( chiefly relations between traders and a limited number of consumer agreements ) .
Even in relation to this sector the Commission provides not the slightest information as to how the countries outside the euro will evolve , nor what the inevitable repercussions will be .
Indeed , the existence of a unified currency could contribute to the simplification of certain procedures and to the saving of certain resources through the abolition of foreign currency transactions .
However , under no circumstances should we delude ourselves about the results . Neither increased competition nor reduced indirect costs will lead to a substantial reduction in prices , as is demonstrated by the experience of liberalization and the granting of tax and other , financial , advantages .
In parallel , increased competition leads to the consolidation of capital , to the reduction of employment , to the intensification of exploitation and to the failure of small businesses .
With regard to small businesses , many of them are certain not to be ready for the full introduction of the new currency .
Nor will they be able to cope with the cost of converting to the euro and with competition . This is even more true when they have very little access to information and to the capital market and when , as early as 1 January 1999 , the application of the principle of " no obligation , no prohibition ' is being pushed forward in relation to the circulation of the euro as electronic money .
Under these circumstances , we regard it as essential that special support be given to the smallest of the SMEs , either by making it easier for them to gain access to credit and to participate in finance programmes , or by means of preferential tax treatment .
We believe that the deciding factor for the development of tourism is the financial position and standard of living of working people , since tourism , as the ' elastic ' expenditure par excellence , is the first victim of political austerity .
Moreover , the ' gradual reduction in working time and the corresponding increase in leisure time ' will simply result in the search for additional employment , if it is accompanied by a reduction in already low incomes .
With the policies imposed by Maastricht and EMU and with the ever intensifying worries about the effects of the introduction of the euro , we find it impossible to understand the rapporteur 's vision of an ' expected improvement in the standard of living of consumers ' .
If the EU really does desire the expansion of tourism it must formulate its policies with working people and the amelioration of their standard of living in mind and abandon its tough monetaristic stances which , as has been demonstrated , can only lead to dead ends .
Wolf report ( A4-0070 / 98 )
Madam President , my group is very concerned about the impact of the introduction of the euro on small and medium-sized enterprises .
Up until now this issue has been treated very lightly , as if it were only a question of supply .
But that is not the case .
The equilibrium of SMEs could be seriously destabilized by the introduction of the euro , and clearly that is very worrying since this category of enterprises provides about two-thirds of the jobs in our countries .
The advantages and costs of monetary unification , if it finally takes place , will be very unequally spread between enterprises .
The advantages will be felt first by the big companies and larger SMEs which work at a European level .
But the costs will affect everyone , and they will be all the more difficult to bear because the enterprises will not have access to adequate computer and accounting services , they will not be very well organized , and they will not have reserves available to finance transition costs . In fact , these are all the properties which characterize SMEs .
Under these conditions , small and medium-sized enterprises risk suffering a serious loss of competitiveness compared with large enterprises .
And this effect will be all the more pronounced if the euro does not produce all the benefits expected .
If , as my group believes , the stimulating effects of suppressing both the costs of conversion and the internal uncertainties about change are cancelled out by the recessive effect of the new monetary inflexibility and transition costs , the fall-off in growth will strike the most fragile enterprises first , and again these are SMEs .
All in all , the new euro zone will be soft on large enterprises but hard on the small ones .
How can we redress the balance ?
Those responsible for the transition are still discussing increasing awareness and better information for the public .
That is very inadequate , but how can they do better ?
The Member States will obviously not be able to subsidize everyone .
That would be disastrous .
In reality , what we have here is a practical inconvenience which follows from the very concept of the system , that is , the universal and mandatory changeover to the euro .
If we had chosen the path of a common currency with a progressive and optional development , all these problems would not exist .
Since Sweden will not take part in the introduction of the euro in 1999-2002 , we have chosen to abstain from the vote on this report .
This is a question for those Member States which will be included in the euro zone .
We can only point out that we consider it a mistake in Sweden 's case that the Swedish Central Bank is now independent of political influence .
We do not think it should be .
The report by Mr Wolf on legal convergence in the Member States in terms of the euro indirectly poses the question of the role of the European Central Bank and its independence .
I regret that the report does not sufficiently demonstrate the need to form a European economic government which should act as a counterbalance to the ECB to prevent purely monetary logic dominating in certain arbitration , when support for growth and employment should be guaranteed .
Although the creation of a Eurocouncil allows an exchange on economic and monetary policies in a positive attempt at coordination , it does not have any powers .
I would have liked the proposals which aim to strengthen the role of the Eurocouncil to be included in the report .
While the report mentions the democratic duty of the ECB to report at Community level , it would have been a good idea to clarify and reinforce the role and power of the European Parliament in dialogue with the ECB .
If the explanatory statements - which are meant to be the basis of the draft resolutions - were put to the vote , then we would happily vote for the text of Part B of this report .
The explanatory statement compares three levels for convergence between the legal provisions of Member States .
The first level , which still exists , relates to Member States themselves and their legislations . The second relates to what is already enshrined in treaties entered into between countries which keep pace with , promote or facilitate ' European construction ' , while the third derives from the position of the European Monetary Institute , as discussed in the report covered by this explanatory statement and draft resolution of the European Parliament .
It is clear that the EMI could apparently resolve the thorny task of making compatible and articulating the different national and supranational levels without difficulty , engaging in tasks of drafting and enforcement which far exceed its powers in a democratic context .
It even goes so far as to acknowledge that specific national features may continue to exist , provided that , as stipulated in the Treaty , each Member States must ensures that , at the latest , by the date of the establishment of the ESCB , its national legislation including the statutes of its national central bank is compatible with this Treaty and the statute of the ESCB .
Indeed , Portugal has already done this ahead of time with its constitutional review , which transfers responsibility for defining the competences of its central bank to commitments entered into in international organizations .
In his report , particularly in the explanatory statement , Mr Wolf draws attention to this difficulty and denounces the expeditious manner in which the EMI resolves it .
In doing so , he raises a number of issues which are fundamental in a democratic process .
We could quote many of his views , but we will concentrate on the question : " What exactly is meant therefore by the requirement of central bank independence ? ' His reply is : ' The definitions given by the EMI in this report and , in particular , in the 1996 report ( ... ) emphasize too one-sidedly ' independence ' at the expense of ' openness ' and democratic transparency . '
Inevitably , the draft resolution is less specific .
It was the only way in which it could escape the steamroller process which countenances no doubts , questions or alternatives .
Although it is drafted less clearly , and despite a significant number of votes against , it was nonetheless passed at the committee stage .
And it has our vote in the House , although our support is really for the explanatory statement .
Arroni , Torres Marques and Wolf reports
The three reports on different aspects of the impending monetary union did not get my approval .
The resolution on the practical aspects of the introduction of the euro is the one I object to least .
However , it is extremely undesirable to let public information programmes about the euro deteriorate into advertising for the euro , as suggested in paragraphs 10 and 17 .
Nor can I agree with the position obliging retailers to use dual pricing during the transition to the euro .
The Torres Marques report looks very much like a blown-up balloon .
The enormous advantages for tourists are highlighted with a great deal of verve .
But these apply primarily to the tourist who travels through various countries in the European Union , and not so much to holiday-makers visiting a single country .
And those who use electronic methods of payment will hardly notice the euro .
Furthermore , various costs relating to the changeover will lead to higher prices .
The ' enormous ' advantage will thus be largely undone .
I am therefore unable to see the usefulness of this report , all the more so because tourism policy is a national affair .
Mr Wolf 's report - which is supposed to deal with legal convergence in the Member States - shows that the European Parliament lacks the right perception of monetary policy .
The target of price stability is judged one-sidedly in this report , as well as elsewhere .
Conversely , the European Parliament appears to be so preoccupied with welfare growth and job creation that it believes this can be realized through monetary policy .
My first objection is that establishing price stability as the only target will have a negative effect on economic development .
My second objection concerns short-sightedness : the economic development pursued will have to be sustainable in an ecological sense if it is to be of use to the next generation .
If these objections are not taken into consideration , a democratic responsibility owed by the ECB to the European Parliament will not do much for the European citizen .
Madam President , Mr Falconer is absolutely right that there is no obligation for a Member to take part in a vote .
There is no obligation to vote for or against a particular text , nor even to express a view on a text .
However , if a Member wishes to indicate that they are present in the room , despite not wishing to take a view , then they have the option - not the obligation - to press their abstention button which shows that they were there , even though they did not wish to take a position on that particular text or amendment .
You say that there are different types of abstention .
Maybe an abstention can mean a different thing .
That is precisely the objective of explanations of vote , that we have just sat through now .
If you want to indicate that you voted for or against , or abstained for a particular reason , this is the opportunity afforded by the Rules of Procedure to explain that nuance .
But what we do not need is two separate and different ways of not expressing a position for or against a particular text .
I would submit to you , and through you , to the Committee on the Rules of Procedure , the Verification of Credentials and Immunities , that only one way is necessary .
That would simplify our votes greatly .
Indeed there might be further ways of simplifying them when we are not having an electronic or roll-call vote .
It might be sufficient for the President to say who is in favour , who is against .
We do not , in those circumstances , need to know who is abstaining when a simple majority is required .
But that is another matter .
I would finish by returning to a remark by Mr Falconer who implied that this was an institutional question and not a political question , or something along those lines .
I wonder whether those who have been making repeated remarks in successive votes in successive plenary part-sessions on this issue do not have a political motive behind them .
Mr Corbett and Mr Falconer , you have asked to speak .
I would point out that it is 1.29 p.m.
We cannot impose on the interpreters .
I will permit you to speak for just one minute .
And if you wish you can then continue this conversation over a glass of brandy or a glass of water , whichever you prefer .
Madam President , I agree with you .
I do not wish to take up the interpreters ' time .
The interpreters should have left long ago .
It is Mr Corbett who is taking up the interpreters ' time .
As he is challenging something I have done , I have the right to reply .
I will reserve and protect that right .
Any Member who sits in this House and represents the Presidency should also protect that right to reply .
Mr Corbett says you have the option to abstain , which is a form of participation .
The question of not participating in the vote means that you do not wish to participate in the vote , so that is not an option .
This House decided to deal with explanations of vote a long time ago .
That is the way the matter would be best served at the present time .
I would like to see them returned to the way they were previously , but we dealt with them a long time ago and this House voted on them .
Lastly , I say to Mr Corbett : yes , I have got a political point of interest in this matter .
I refuse to be treated as a child .
I refuse to be treated in the same way as people who do not come here Mondays and Fridays .
I normally come here Monday through to Friday and am a diligent person , as are 99 % of this House .
I refuse to be treated as a child for the minority 's sake .
Therefore the quicker the Bureau reviews these rules - as I understand they are doing - the better .
I would urge you to disregard Mr Corbett 's request to refer this to the Committee on the Rules of Procedure , the Verification of Credentials and Immunities .
The Bureau has already handled this matter .
That is where the matter should rest until the Bureau reviews the silliness that it has put us in at the present time .
Your words will be recorded carefully in the Minutes .
I would thank the interpreters for their patience .
( The sitting was suspended at 1.35 p.m. and resumed at 3.00 p.m. ) .

Promoting road safety in the EU ( continuation )
The next item is the report ( A4-0065 / 98 ) by Mr Cornelissen , on behalf of the Committee on Transport and Tourism , on the communication from the Commission " Promoting road safety in the EU - the programme for 1997-2001 ' ( COM ( 97 ) 0131 - C4-0180 / 97 ) .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , any discussion of safety on Europe 's roads inevitably involves talking about ignorance , repression , dangerous negligence and criminal complacency .
And that goes for politicians just as much as drivers !
Any debate about improving safety is bound to turn around the facts that we have already heard several times today : 45 000 dead and 1.6 million injured every year , or 123 deaths every day on Europe 's roads .
The deaths alone are equivalent to virtually wiping out a medium-sized European town every single year .
So it is good that the Commissioner and the Commission have brought forward a programme to promote road safety .
Pam Cornelissen deserves enormous respect for his very comprehensive report and the details it includes on the causes of accidents .
Indeed , I would not have expected anything else from him .
Improving road safety implies a whole range of measures - life-long road safety training for young and old , all kinds of technical measures both on the roads and in vehicle safety - airbags , safety belts and lights are just the headline issues - and special protection is needed for the most vulnerable road users : children , the elderly , pedestrians and cyclists .
However , in my view there are two things that are absolutely central , two issues on which our fellow citizens need to be more aware and politicians need to have more courage . Alcohol and speed .
The following rule of thumb seems to apply : the more you have drunken and the faster you drive , the more people are killed and injured .
The opposite also applies of course .
That is why we need a radical approach to alcohol limits and pan-European speed restrictions .
However , I find the Commission 's call for speed limits too vague and too open to interpretation .
Back in 1990 Parliament voted clearly for the following speed limits for cars in EU Member States that at present have no limit : 120 kmph on motorways , 100 kmph on ordinary roads , and 30 or 50 kmph in residential or built-up areas respectively .
This Parliament has to stand by the decision it took in 1990 and fight for it to be implemented .
If individual Member States decide to introduce even lower speed limits , that is something we should applaud and support .
Anyone who says comprehensive limits will not work should look at the limits for lorries , that has been a success story for Europe .
If we can have a speed limit for heavy goods vehicles , why not have one for cars too ?
We should leave no stone unturned to achieve the Community target of reducing deaths on the roads to 25 000 by 2010 .
Every victim of a traffic accident on the roads is a victim too many , and I therefore urge you to support my amendment .
Mr President , firstly I want to congratulate the rapporteur , Mr Cornelissen , for his magnificent work in drafting this report .
I hope his work will serve to raise the awareness of all the players concerned : institutions , vehicle designers and manufacturers , users , safety experts , traffic agents , transport companies , insurance companies , vehicle maintenance and repair workshops , driving schools , and so on . They should all draw unbiased conclusions about the real cause of the accidents on our highways and city streets , so that they can take measures to prevent them , or at least reduce the number of accidents and victims to the absolute minimum .
We are very sensitive to disasters of all kinds - as we should be - but for some incomprehensible reason we find it exasperatingly easy to resign ourselves to accepting that enormous disaster which takes place week after week on the roads of the European Union , resulting each year in nearly 50 000 deaths and more than 1.65 million injuries . The report quotes the figure of half a million hospital admissions , of which 25 % end in disability .
So , Mr President , a greater effort needs to be made in this area , both by the Community and by each of the Member States , which are obliged to promote technological development in safety matters and to make imaginative efforts when it comes to producing road safety plans . The standard excuse of not having enough resources should not be accepted any longer .
The economic and social costs of these accidents are extremely high - not to mention the human cost , which is immeasurable . Indeed , the cost is possibly greater than the expense it would take to avoid such accidents , if the political will existed .
For all those reasons , Mr President , I welcome the Commission communication and Mr Cornelissen 's magnificent report .
Mr President , as 45 000 people die each year in traffic accidents in the EU area , we might be tempted to view traffic as one colossal catastrophe .
We do not take this view , however , seeing that contemporary society could not survive without it , and given that accidents do not all happen at the same time and in the same place .
In a way , traffic safety is comparable to the protection of the environment .
Everyone says they think it is important , but only a few want to do anything about it in practical terms .
Because it is undeniable that the cause of a very large number of accidents is speeding , apart from tightening up the law we should look at the reasons why motorists drive too fast .
One certain factor in this is car and motorcycle advertising that focuses on high speeds and other features which are just not viable for the normal motorist .
The success of a given make of car in competitions , rallies or circuit racing , is very often used to advertise a vehicle intended for everyday use .
This must be one of the reasons why car manufacturers invest very large sums in competitions .
In this way , people are lured into a driving culture that only befits the race track , and not always that either .
We must support a system of specific and uniform speed limits for the whole of the EU area .
In that way dangerous drivers would no longer be so able to use ignorance of traffic regulations as an excuse , still less a justification .
Even today there is still opposition to speed limits , in the name of civil liberties .
But it is a question of people 's right to use the road network as safely as possible .
The right to endanger life cannot be a part of the civil liberties lobby .
On the same principle , we should have common European legislation to enforce the use of driving lights even during daylight hours .
The idea is that a driver can see oncoming vehicles and vehicles behind in sufficient time .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , Commissioner , road safety is a complex , interdisciplinary business , encompassing a wide variety of technical and above all human factors .
My main reaction to Mr Cornelissen 's excellent report is a very positive one , but I do have some concerns .
I am pleased at the number of important and fundamental suggestions and practical proposals for improving road safety .
I personally feel that an improvement is urgently needed not just because it can be shown that the annual economic cost of road accidents is over 100 billion ECU , not to mention the unquantifiable and immeasurable human suffering involved , but because like anyone else I would like to feel safe on the roads of neighbouring countries .
This also applies when help is needed after an accident .
I have had very good first-hand experience , in a state that fortunately no longer exists , of doing a first aid course as part of learning to drive .
I am concerned to see signs that the proposed action programme may lead to powers not provided for under the EC Treaty , with legally binding decisions being taken at European level .
Surely voluntary agreements would do the job just as well without a flood of red tape and regulations .
I would only recommend voting for the report if six of the seven amendments to be voted on tomorrow are rejected , and only if I am sure that Paragraphs 7b and 7e , which can be summed up as ' rigid maximum speed limits ' and ' introduction of a panEuropean penalty system ' , do not get through .
Mr President , I wish to begin by welcoming the report and certainly the intention behind the Commission 's concern to see action in this matter .
I cannot add much to what has been said already , except to highlight perhaps two areas of concern .
One is the relationship between alcohol and accidents .
Fewer than 5 % of motorists drive over the legal limit but they alone cause 20 % of the fatal accidents .
I strongly agree with the proposal to limit the level of alcohol to 0.5 mg / ml , along with proposals to ban the sale of alcohol in service stations and the standardization of the apparatus of breathalysers .
My other point is this : now is the time to consider the harmonization of penalties and their application throughout the whole Community , so that drivers penalized , say , in England , Wales or France are not still able to drive in Germany or Belgium .
I would hope to see such legislation coming forward from the Commission .
I wish the Commission every success in its endeavours to make our roads safer .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I very much welcome the Commission 's initiative to launch an action programme to promote road safety in the EU .
The high death toll on Europe 's roads is appalling , and something must be done about it .
We should all be interested in cutting the number of accidents .
Drunken driving is one of the most common causes of accidents .
That is why there should be a maximum blood alcohol limit of 0.5 mg / ml for drivers .
Austria has already introduced such a limit .
However , it is not just alcohol that impairs people 's fitness to drive , medicines and drugs can also affect it .
This should be reflected in legislation and we must adopt measures to tackle this problem .
Strict and consistent controls on road-users are essential .
Monitoring of speed restrictions is a priority here .
With regard to the disqualification of drivers and Europe-wide recognition of this disqualification , we need to remember that there has been no pan-European harmonization of legal systems , which is an essential requirement for this .
Unless administrative and legal provisions are harmonized across Europe , there can be no question of reciprocal recognition of disqualification , as the conditions for disqualification vary so widely from one Member State to another .
Mr President , there is no doubt that it is sensible for us to make an effort to handle this matter at the European level .
I want to express my thanks to Mr Cornelissen , to the Commissioner and to all who have contributed to making this a European issue .
The number of people being killed on the roads has been mentioned several times today .
A ferry disaster always creates a sensation .
May I point out that 45 000 people die on the roads each year , the equivalent of the Estonia disaster 45 times over .
What we must look at jointly is the construction of cars , crossborder traffic and the increasing amount of traffic on our roads , so there is plenty to be getting on with .
I agree with my colleagues , but I would just like to point out that there are different traffic cultures , so we would be doing ourselves a service to allow development from below and not so much from above , if we want to create joint regulations .
My recommendations are no different from those of my colleagues .
I would simply like to point out that when alcohol and medication are mentioned , then fatigue - that is , driving and rest periods - should also be mentioned .
So in order to achieve the objective , the action plan must come from the Member States and not just from the Commission , even though I support the Commission - and Parliament - in taking the lead .
Traffic safety is something that affects us all .
Let me say something about speed .
It is important for us to agree on frameworks for speed limits and not have speed limits that are too different .
Some accidents are caused simply by driving from a country with high speed limits into a different country with lower speed limits .
I would also like to mention an issue that the Red Cross is not alone in having raised .
Professional assistance is not the only thing needed on the roads when an accident happens .
We should also do something about providing first aid on the spot .
Whether it should be part of qualifying for a driving licence I am not sure , but in any case it is something worth considering .
In closing , I would like to underline the importance of having secure frameworks for traffic , the safety of citizens , and so on .
Finally , I would like to say that we are all very concerned about not being killed by a serving of British beef .
If we could be equally aware of what is going on in the area of traffic , we would come a long way in a Europe whose future is based on cohesion and mobility .
Mr President , I should first like to apologize to the House and in particular to Mr Cornelissen for the fact that I was slightly late getting here today .
As Mr Cornelissen will know , this was entirely due to the fact that I was held up by a horrific multiple car crash on the French motorway system .
This , tragically and graphically , underlined the great significance of the subject we have under consideration today , namely Mr Cornelissen 's report on the Commission communication on road safety in the Union in the coming years .
I congratulate Mr Cornelissen on the thoroughness of the report which he and his colleagues in the Committee on Transport and Tourism have produced .
I am pleased but not surprised that there is strong concurrence between the opinions of Parliament and the Commission on the matters under consideration , not only the desirability of enhanced standards of performance in terms of road safety but also the general strategy to be adopted at Union level in order to achieve that improvement .
I am glad to note in particular that there is agreement on some of the new elements we have introduced in the most recent communication , such as the development of an integrated European Union information system on road safety which will assist with the identification of particular problems and be available to Member States to encourage further efforts by them for road safety strategies .
There is agreement on the need to improve enforcement of road safety laws , no matter what other changes we make .
The need for stringent enforcement will be universal and will continue .
The need for strengthening road safety education has been commented on in the report and in this debate .
We would endorse that fully .
The need to achieve better and wider use of safety belts , not only in the front of vehicles but in the rear seats of cars where appalling casualties still take place , even in the countries with the highest level of conformity with the seat belt laws .
The need to moderate speed has been emphasized by several speakers in this debate .
There is no question but that speed is a killer in all road conditions and weather circumstances and that is worth emphasizing .
The need to combat drink-driving is evident and I welcome the support given by Parliament yet again to the Commission proposal , which is now nine years old , for the universal introduction of a lower tolerated level of blood alcohol content .
There is increasing awareness of the need to develop technical and legal means to combat more effectively driving while under the influence of drugs .
So far as the harmonization of penalties is concerned , as an individual I would most certainly endorse those sentiments expressed by Members that would favour the harmonization and universal enforcement of penalties across the European Union .
However , as Parliament will understand , this is a question that arises under the so-called third pillar and largely remains an intergovernmental issue .
Unfortunately the Commission is not yet in a position to take an initiative on this matter .
I am sure the day will arrive , through sheer practicality and out of common interest , when a change will be made .
There is broad agreement too on the efforts being made to develop safety rating systems in order to provide consumers with accurate information on the safety standards of their vehicles in any particular category of cars , and broad agreement on the need to take full account of the very high economic and financial cost of road accidents and to use a cost / benefit approach on road safety measures .
On this issue there will be a specific communication from the Commission in the very near future .
It is inevitable that a report which is as thorough and comprehensive as Mr Cornelissen 's will diverge in some respects from the approach taken by the Commission .
I should like briefly to respond to those points of often quite mild divergence .
Firstly there is the question of whether it is appropriate to establish at European Union level a numerical target for the reduction of the annual number of road deaths from the current awful level of 45 000 a year to a maximum of 25 000 by the year 2010 .
I do not agree with such a target for three reasons .
Firstly , Member States vary to a considerable degree in their practices and their views on the establishment of targets .
Some already set targets which they would be reluctant to review .
Others do not favour targets at all .
It is therefore not really credible for the Commission or Parliament to set targets when we have no legal means of compelling Member States to attain those targets .
Despite these considerations , we could set indicative targets with all the best intentions in the world of achieving them .
Then , when circumstances beyond our control prevent the targets from being met , all that would be recalled is our over-optimism .
The criticism that would come from that does not concern me at all .
The distraction from the serious efforts that had been made to reduce deaths and injuries would be a real matter of concern .
Given the predilection in some parts of the European press , including the British press , to trivialize even the issue of road deaths and appalling injuries , I prefer to avoid the problems that would attend target setting and concentrate instead on the main basic issues .
Taking all of these considerations into account , I do not think it would be realistic to set a precise target at European Union level .
I would , however , remind the House of the Commission 's conviction that if the measures proposed in our communication were followed and implemented , the Community could reasonably look forward to the number of deaths being reduced by 7 000 by the year 2000 and by around 27 000 by the year 2010 .
Those figures and the reasoning behind them will I hope spur greater efforts in Member States and among drivers to make changes in provision and behaviour , changes that can save many lives .
That approach does not carry with it the problems that might arise from target setting .
A second point of divergence from Mr Cornelissen relates to the budget allocated to road safety by this Parliament and operated by the Community .
Like Mr Cornelissen , I deplore the 50 % cut in the budget line B-2702 and I agree that serious consideration should be given to the utilization of money from the B-2704 line in 1998 .
However , line 2704 covers other important priorities for our transport policy which are shared by this House and following the suggestion made in the report would mean robbing Peter to pay Paul .
I am sure that on reflection no one in this House or in the Committee on Transport and Tourism would want that .
The budget reduction will inevitably cause delays for some of the measures we had hoped to support this year .
That is highly regrettable but realistic since our future actions will have to be based on the money available to us .
I hope those responsible for calculating and setting the budget will in future heed the fact that there are few issues more important to the general citizenry of the European Union than trying to advance safety on our roads .
The budget should reflect that priority .
Thirdly , and finally , I agree with Mr Cornelissen 's view about the need to establish a clear list of priorities and to rank measures according to their casualty reduction value .
However , in addition to that criterion , other important factors should be taken into account , such as the cost / benefit ratio of the measures , their added value arising from the European dimension or the state of progress already made at Community or Member State level .
As far as the remainder of the report is concerned , I can confirm that we stand foursquare with the views expressed .
We will continue to work as effectively as we can to make every possible reduction in those terrible figures of 45 000 fatalities and 1.6 million injuries each year , and , of course , the human misery and economic cost which those casualty figures generate .
In these efforts , we are clearly strengthened by the active support and interest of this House and by Members like Mr Cornelissen and his colleagues who have shown and continue to show consistent dedication to improving road safety as they have for many years .
Mr President , whereas this is an own-initiative report , could the Commissioner please comment on the fact that where we have a directive on the European driving licence , I made a proposal that we include some education on first aid in difficult circumstances like he was in this morning ; that is , to give first aid and include it in the driving licence education .
I can certainly see the virtues of such a system .
However , I offer a caution to Mr Wijsenbeek that while there are people who are very proficient in giving first aid and can contribute towards saving life and saving pain and further injury , that is not universal .
We have to be very careful , therefore , about putting any form of education or instruction in driving licences or other documents that might encourage people who , with the best intentions , would try to give first aid without the necessary expertise .
Appalling additional injuries can be caused by people who have goodwill but are inexpert .
So we would want to examine that very closely .
Mr President , we differ in opinion about whether a concrete political target should be set .
We will have to discuss it further .
I would merely like to point out that those countries which have had the courage to set numerical targets achieve better results than others , and I believe this to be an extremely important argument .
Secondly , Mr President , the budget .
The Commissioner knows that it is not unusual for the Commission to come up with an additional budget during the course of the year , and my concrete question on behalf of our committee is , if this happens this year , if it proves to be necessary - and we have indications that it will be necessary - will the Commissioner take the opportunity to obtain enough money for the necessary research ?
Mr President , it is not enough merely to say how important road safety is . It will have to be reflected in the budget .
Noblesse oblige .
Thirdly , Mr President , did I understand correctly that the Commissioner is coming up with further details on his package of measures .
We think it is very important to know which measures will be proposed by the Commission , so that we can keep a finger on the pulse .
I would be grateful for a specific answer from the Commissioner to these three points either now or later .
Mr President , there is a check list in our communication and we are happy to receive questions , demands , correspondence and contacts of various kinds in order to try to ensure , virtually on a week-byweek basis that we can provide reports on the progress being made in the implementation of the 65 or so different measures that are at the back of the communication .
Not only do we readily respond to those questions , we actually welcome them simply because they are a way of keeping up the pressure and drawing public and political attention to the need to make progress on that .
So far as the budget is concerned it is not so much a matter of noblesse oblige as of vitesse oblige .
We are capable any time of the year of finding really good use , highly productive use , without a penny being wasted for any supplementary budget resources .
I would simply urge those who are already arguing for additional resources for the safety budget line to keep up their work , knowing that if additional resources become available to the Commission - which has very limited influence and power over these matters - then anything directed to our safety programme will effectively be used .
The first part of the question related to targets and I certainly applaud those Member States that employ a target-setting system .
The difference between them and us working at Community level is , of course , that they have direct sovereignty and charge of enforcement systems and an assortment of other means of trying to ensure that their targets are actually fulfilled .
Those means are denied to us for all the obvious reasons and that is why there is a difference between trying to set a target at Community level covering some 350 million citizens affecting 45 000 road deaths and setting targets at the national or indeed the local level which are more capable of being attained simply because of the reinforcement action that can be taken .
The difference of dimension makes a difference in strategy and I hope that honourable Members will acknowledge that reality .
Mr President , I am most disappointed that the Commissioner simply ignored the very simple question that I put .
Does the Commissioner not share my concern that whereas people who persistently drive with two or three times over the legal limit and who cause death and injury are allowed to continue to drive after quite a short prison sentence , innocent diabetic , insulin-dependent drivers are being prevented from driving now in the UK ?
Would it not be better for the Commission to concentrate on enforcing existing rules before applying new ones ?
Mr President , I just wish to point out one or two things .
First of all , I did not ignore the point made by Miss McIntosh .
If the normal rules of order are applied , she was quite out of order in introducing the subject into a debate on a report on road safety .
Secondly , however , far from ignoring her , I already took over ten minutes when I had been allocated five , and I could not get every response in .
Thirdly , far from ignoring her , I know I have written her a very long letter explaining exactly the meaning and the letter of the law and what it implies in the United Kingdom .
Fourthly , she inadvertently misled the House in her original contribution this morning , because it is not true to say that the rules concerning insulin-dependent diabetic drivers are only being applied in the United Kingdom .
They are being stringently applied elsewhere .
We can each of us have our own opinion about the significance , the relevance , the effectiveness and the proportionality of that particular law .
As I pointed out in my letter to her and to many other honourable Members and others who have communicated with me on the subject of diabetic drivers , the basic power to interpret and apply the law rests with Member States , not with the Commission .
The Member States are acting on the basis of the most informed medical expert advice .
Their judgement is that the law should be applied in the way in which it is being applied .
It is not for the Commission to make an interpretation .
We do not have the power to undertake the enforcement of this law .
I would be obliged if honourable Members , before accusing me of ignoring their questions , were to take into account what I have provided them with at length on previous occasions , as well as the time I have available for answering questions .
Thank you , Commissioner .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 11.30 a.m.
Registration of ships ' passengers
The next item is the recommendation for second reading ( A4-0068 / 98 ) , on behalf of the Committee on Transport and Tourism , on the common position adopted by the Council with a view to the adoption of a Council Directive on the registration of persons sailing on board passenger ships operating to or from ports of the Member States of the Community ( Rapporteur : Mr Watts ) ( C4-0620 / 97-96 / 0281 ( SYN ) ) .
Mr President , I wish to congratulate my colleague on his very serious attempt to achieve the necessary convergence of opinion between Parliament and the Council on the institution of directives which aim in good faith to ensure ferry safety .
However , I would like to take this opportunity to put forward my own personal view of the way in which the Council is attempting to strengthen the conditions that are essential to ensure ferry safety .
After the tragic accidents at sea over the last few years , and especially following the shipwreck of the Estonia , the Council , and to a large extent the Commission , were reduced to a state of near panic and , with a succession of proposals , directives , or recommendations , set about restoring some feeling of safety in the minds of the citizens of the EU , who were justifiably anxious about the level of ferry safety .
But whatever and however many measures are taken under the pressure of such events , I am afraid that they are spasmodic , occasional , piecemeal and consequently ineffectual .
I would like to believe that neither the Council nor the Commission , nor indeed Parliament , wishes to take measures simply to satisfy public opinion while essentially having very little to offer to improve the level of ferry safety .
The proposed directive on passenger registration will , I feel , remain a measure purely on record . Beyond the total number of passengers , which is easy enough to ascertain and to announce before the ship sets sail , the detailed registration of the remaining particulars will simply establish an extremely bureaucratic procedure which , a few months after the measure comes into force , will either fall into disuse and be forgotten , or will be by-passed and become a sham .
Those obliged to enforce the directive , under pressure of time caused by disembarkation and embarkation of passengers , will end up giving inaccurate details . Measures should be taken , but they should be taken calmly and coolly and should tackle the problem as a whole .
We must , however , enforce the observance of already existing safety regulations and guidelines which , thank goodness , are extremely numerous but which are being systematically violated in more than 60 % of cases . That can be achieved through the setting up of a system of strict controls by registers and port authorities .
Mr President , let me begin by thanking the rapporteur , Mr Watts , for the ambitious work he has done throughout the discussion of this report , a piece of work which means that we will now have passenger lists for ferry traffic throughout the EU .
I also think it is appropriate to say thank you to Commissioner Kinnock for the commitment he always shows when it comes to proposing measures to increase safety .
Around Europe there have been several very big ferry disasters in recent decades .
After these disasters an attitude has emerged that people should do everything in their power to prevent this from ever happening again .
Parliament has made demands for extensive measures , and in various contexts the Commission has put forward proposals to improve safety .
With one voice , the EU is more clearly promoting the work on improving safety within the United Nations maritime body , the International Maritime Organization .
The decision we are going to take today is another step in this direction .
Just as it has always been a matter of course in the area of flying , it is now becoming so for ferry traffic .
Every single person who travels on an aircraft on a regular service receives a boarding pass and is put on a list of passengers on that plane , regardless of how long the flight is .
There have been international rules about this for a long time . Anything else would presumably be totally unacceptable .
Now we are getting the same rules for ferry traffic .
There should be a list which clearly shows who is on board and how many passengers there are .
There has been a debate between Parliament , the Council and the Commission about exactly where these lists should be submitted .
The Council 's common position says that the information should be collected before departure , but not necessarily communicated to the registrar until 30 minutes after the ferry has sailed .
The Committee on Transport and Tourism says that this information should be submitted before the ferry leaves port .
I believe that is a necessity .
Nor should there be any great problem getting it to work that way .
With the help of computer technology an immediate registration will go to the registrar .
That does not , as far as I am concerned , remove the need for this amendment .
I would be grateful for a comment from the Commissioner on this point .
With the proposal which has been put forward there is in fact only one limitation : the length of the journey .
It is limited to 20 nautical miles between two ports , below which passenger lists are not considered necessary .
In this regard too , the Committee on Transport and Tourism is making a minor addition .
I would like to stress that even though this is a minor change , it is still necessary .
I think it is very positive that a consistent framework for the EU 's policy with regard to safety at sea is now emerging .
The European Parliament has been demanding this for a long time .
It would be gratifying if we could continue this work to achieve a level of safety which is acceptable to passengers .
Madam President , the directive on the registration of persons sailing on board passenger ships will impose serious constraints on the Calais-Dover sea crossing , given that it does not apply to rail transport through the Channel tunnel .
The fact that these two different modes of transport are being treated differently is unfair from the point of view of security , equal competition conditions , economic and social cohesion and regional equilibrium .
That is why I support the amendments proposed by the Committee on Transport and Tourism and our British colleague , Mark Watts , in which he proposes to reestablish equal treatment for ferries and trains despite the initial refusal of the Commission to do so .
The Commission feels that to increase security , new embarkation procedures for passengers are required .
It considers there to be greater risks in navigating the Channel than in using the Channel tunnel .
However , this argument is contradicted by two factors .
The account of the intervention of fire-fighting teams during the fire in the Channel tunnel on 18 November 1996 indicates that rescue operations were hindered by the lack of precise information on the number of passengers travelling on the train .
So the tunnel has its risks too .
Moreover , studies on the average height of waves in the Channel which have been carried out by the French and British meteorological institutes have produced results which do not justify special treatment , even according to the Commission 's own criteria .
So the hypothesis which states that the waters of the Channel are difficult cannot be accepted as a means to justify more stringent controls .
There are three possible solutions which would guarantee the safety of these two modes of transport and reestablish balanced conditions for competition in those areas where the opening of the Tunnel seriously weakened the position of the ferries .
Firstly , the Commission and the Council should accept the amendments which , I hope , Parliament will adopt and which impose the same obligation on both modes of transport .
Secondly , if stipulated by legal requirements , the Commission should propose a new directive specifically devoted to hazardous rail transport .
Pending this new text , the application of the text on cross-Channel sea links currently under discussion ought to be postponed until the second directive is adopted .
The third and most pragmatic solution would be to exempt cross-Channel sea links from the arrangements set out in this document .
Bearing in mind the fact that 57 % of passengers on the Calais-Dover ferry complete their return journey within one day , it is easy to understand how the introduction of new arrangements , such as those we have seen today , would mean that this mode of transport would be penalized , thus upsetting the equilibrium of entire regions .
Mr President , the background to this report is clearly the two devastating accidents involving first the Herald of Free Enterprise and more recently the Estonia and the international obligations which Member States undertook in the SOLAS regulation agreed in 1995 .
Ferry companies in the UK already register the number of passengers .
The main problem with the proposal in its present form is that it will pose practical problems for ferry operations , particularly crossChannel operations , to process the details of names , addresses and special needs in the event of accident , in what is already a very competitive market .
The Commission has made a very strong case that the background to this proposal is to increase safety .
Mr Watts has highlighted the fact that if this is to increase safety , this precaution must also be extended to passengers travelling by Eurotunnel .
In the event of fire it is just as important to record the details of passengers travelling by Eurotunnel to ensure their safe evacuation in the event of a fire .
I remind the House that there has already been one serious fire that could have led , sadly , to an even bigger disaster .
Even more necessary is the requirement of names , addresses and passenger details in the event of death so that the next of kin can be informed in the event of such a Eurotunnel disaster .
My message to the Commission is very simple : the minimum must be a level , competitive playing field ensuring maximum safety for passengers , regardless of whether they are travelling by ferry or by Eurotunnel .
A situation in which passengers travelling by Eurotunnel were placed at a disadvantage would be totally unacceptable .
Mr President , there is always one person who is on the other side of the argument and today it seems as if it is going to be me .
I personally always have difficulty when it comes to restricting the rights of the individual .
The measure that is being proposed today - the recording of names , sex , age , children , and so on - is in fact a stab in the back for the free movement of people within the European Community .
I recognize the need for safety .
Safety is of course a high requirement .
Everybody wants it .
But I believe that any legislation that is brought forward for safety should be simple , practical and easily implemented .
This measure is going to add - as far as the UK is concerned - a cost of 2.5 million a year .
For checking-in , whether it be at the Tunnel or at a ferry , it is going to add , perhaps , at least another hour to that journey and it is going to make any surface or undersea travel less competitive as against air travel .
So what are we trying to do in what we are proposing ?
I am concerned about the sheer bureaucracy ; I am concerned to see that because we need greater safety at sea we are actually including other forms of transport as well .
That is not good legislation .
I believe it is bad legislation .
The Road Transport Association has said in a statement that registration of passengers on ferries on the Dover-Calais route in particular will cause considerable inconvenience .
It could harm our trade when people are trying to meet deadlines .
This , lumped on top of the loss of duty-free , will put the ferries out of business and will have a seriously damaging effect on freight to and from Britain .
This is not necessary .
A head count is all that is required so that people know the numbers that are on the ferry and not necessarily who is on the ferry .
Mr President , I wish to begin by saying that I am very grateful to Mr Watts for his characteristically thorough work and for his recommendation to approve the common position on this measure .
I am also naturally pleased that the House continues to support the harmonization of passenger registration throughout the Community , both for the sake of safety and in order to deal effectively with the aftermath of any accident .
I also wish to say that , whilst I agree entirely with Mr Klironomos on his view that proper enforcement of all rules is essential , I fundamentally disagree with his description of the way in which this issue has been approached .
The Council and the Commission were accused , in his word , of ' panic ' .
It is ten years last week since the appalling disaster of the sinking of the Herald of Free Enterprise at Zeebrugge , and it is three-and-a-half years since the Estonia went down with a loss of over 950 lives .
Nothing we have done could be described as being panic-stricken or panic-driven .
What we have is a comprehensive set of rules which we are adding to , in order to ensure that the security of passengers and crew travelling on ferries is as high as the sea will ever allow it to be , and we will persist with that .
Since most of the amendments reiterate suggestions made in the first reading debate , I feel obliged to clarify the reasons for the Commission 's support for the Council 's common position and also to reassure the House that the specific concerns addressed in the original report were properly taken into account .
Amendments Nos 1 to 3 in Mr Watts 's report refer to limited progress in advancing the safety of maritime transport .
I totally understand the feelings which underlie that view : they are the feelings of a zealous and committed Member of the European Parliament , and we are all impatient for further improvement .
But , in fairness , we should not lose sight of the achievements at International Maritime Organization level and at Community level , which are now in their implementation phase , and which will , I hope - indeed , I am sure - produce progress .
Meanwhile , I agree that it is essential that internationally agreed principles should apply to all roll-on / roll-off ferries sailing to European ports .
I agree that should include the necessary stability rules , where appropriate , and I agree that all of this should be properly checked .
To achieve this and to reassure the public that roll-on / roll-off ferry services in Europe are provided with the best possible safety standards and to sustain public confidence in ferry services , I am glad to report that last month the Commission adopted a new proposal relating to the operation of regular roll-on / roll-off ferry and high-speed passenger craft services in the Community .
I sincerely hope that this proposal will encourage the House and , more important , further reinforce maritime safety .
I have to say to Mr Provan that I totally understand his resistance to any unnecessary bureaucracy or unrealistic limitations on the freedom of movement .
In this case , none of those problems arise and neither of his concerns will be justified when the system is in operation .
Naturally , the concerns he expressed , which have been expressed by others , will continue to be borne in mind .
Articles 8 and 9 of the common position will ensure that information on passengers will always be available when needed , while allowing for the proper handling of journeys of less than two hours and , at the same time , providing the necessary flexibility for those who have to set up registration systems .
Consequently , I cannot support Amendments Nos 6 and 8 .
Amendments Nos 4 , 5 and 7 address the issue of the shuttle and safety in the Channel Tunnel .
As I promised in May of last year , I asked my services to examine the merits of a Community measure to apply passenger registration principles to vehicles using undersea railway tunnels . Our conclusions are as follows .
First , to introduce provisions that currently govern the operation of train services in the proposed legislation on ferries would risk delaying its implementation because it would involve trying to achieve a mixture of two distinctly different sets of provisions .
Secondly , there are no convincing arguments for introducing rules for rail tunnels which differ according to whether they go under the sea or under the land .
Thirdly , there are serious doubts as to whether a passenger-registration scheme of the type proposed for ferry operations would add sufficient value to the detailed safety regime developed specifically for the Channel Tunnel by French and British authorities and currently in operation .
On these grounds , I cannot accept the amendments relating to the Channel Tunnel .
I would say to Mr Watts and to Mrs Berès that safety in the Channel Tunnel is an issue which is specific to that location and , quite properly , a matter for France and for Britain to consider on a bilateral basis .
I really believe that the issue is best pursued with the two Member State governments that are directly and uniquely involved , and Community action on this would not be appropriate .
Some Members , Miss McIntosh among them , have raised the question of a possible distortion of competition between transport modes arising out of the implementation of this directive .
Naturally , the Commission seeks to achieve equitable conditions of competition between transport modes by a variety of means , but for very practical reasons , that cannot mean legislating for one sector simply because another mode has become subject to a law which imposes new obligations .
As the House will recall , the need for passenger registration on ships arises from the tragic experience of ferry disasters , such as the sinking of the Estonia and the Herald of Free Enterprise and from obligations under the IMO Safety of Life at Sea Convention .
Neither these experiences , nor such international rules , apply to Channel Tunnel operations .
One final element I wish to add relates to the capacity of ferry operators to cope with this legislation .
The European dataprocessing industry has the technical means to implement these requirements and the proposed date for implementation deliberately gives adequate time for preparation .
The Commission is convinced , therefore , that Channel operators , who are committed to high levels of safety and service , will be able to apply workable solutions based on these technologies while , at the same time , safeguarding their competitive position .
While the Commission is not able to support the amendments proposed in Mr Watts 's recommendations today , I know that he and the Committee on Transport and Tourism continue to give their full support to the specific measure relating to passenger lists for ferries .
I welcome that , of course .
I am also confident that the true commitment of Mr Watts and other honourable Members to advances in safety legislation will ensure that support will continue when we debate the new proposal on ferry and fast-passenger-craft licensing , which I mentioned a few moments ago .
Mr President , I would like to thank Commissioner Kinnock for his statement .
The differences between us should not obscure the general agreement that exists on the principle of this measure applying throughout European Union waters .
I want to emphasize that .
I welcome his measure on licensing , which I am sure we all look forward to debating .
However , I have to warn him that , unfortunately , I am sure we will be returning to the issue of Le Shuttle .
I am afraid we must agree to disagree on his analysis of that problem .
I am sure he respects us for that and that we will be hearing more from each other on that and other issues .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 11 : 30 a.m.
Multilateral agreement on investments ( MAI )
The next item is the report ( A4-0073 / 98 ) by Mr Kreissl-Dörfler , on behalf of the Committee on External Economic Relations , containing Parliament 's recommendations to the Commission on negotiations in the framework of the OECD on a multilateral agreement on investments ( MAI ) .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , it is a great honour for me to be reporting to you today on the views of the Committee on External Economic Relations concerning the negotiations on the multilateral agreement on investments , usually known as the MAI . It is a particular honour because this is the first time any parliament has officially considered , in depth , what is undoubtedly the most important multilateral agreement since the GATT round was completed .
We are doing this with the clear intention of providing a set of guiding principles for the Commission , as one of the most important parties to the remaining negotiations in Paris , which are expected to finish by the end of April .
The MAI has got an interesting history .
In March 1995 , UNICE , the Federation of EC employers ' organizations , issued a paper in which it proposed an MAI and mapped out its broad scope .
The various existing bilateral agreements on investments were to be replaced by a multilateral agreement based on the principles of most-favoured nation treatment and national treatment , which would significantly liberalize investment and provide broadly-based protection for it .
All the main measures called for by UNICE have been incorporated in the OECD draft now before us .
In May 1995 , the OECD ministerial meeting gave the go-ahead for negotiations on the MAI .
Since then , negotiations have been taking place behind closed doors in Paris , out of sight of both the public and parliaments , but with trade associations taking part .
What is envisaged is a ' free standing agreement ' also open to non-OECD member states , but without their having any input on the wording of the treaty .
That is why the REX Committee 's own-initiative report is exceptionally important .
We are exercising our right to be consulted on a continuing process .
We are also specifically working on the assumption that when the agreement in concluded , the MAI will be submitted to the European Court of Justice for an opinion , and that we will be consulted by the Commission and the Council under the assent procedure .
I would be delighted if you could unequivocally confirm this in your reply today , Commissioner .
We do not want the MAI to be the exclusive preserve of big industry , because we cannot surrender our responsibility for political regulation of economic policy to the captains of industry .
On the contrary , if we want an MAI at all , it should be one that halts the ' race to the bottom ' in competing for the lowest social and environmental standards .
Turning to the agreement itself , the ' first commandment ' of the agreement planned is a wide-ranging ban on discrimination against foreign investors .
However , we must not throw the baby out with the bath water in removing obstacles to investment !
It cannot be acceptable for multilateral environmental agreements such as the Kyoto Protocol to lose out .
This fear is even expressed in a working paper from such an authoritative source as the OECD itself .
Just paying lip service to preserving environmental and social standards in the preamble is not enough .
The OECD Code of Conduct for multinationals must be incorporated into the agreement in such a way that it is binding and enforceable .
The Committee has serious reservations about the provisions on expropriation and compensation .
An investor should not be able to sue for loss of profit just because environmental and social laws in Member States have progressed or because a socioecological tax reform has been introduced .
A region must retain the right to decide , on the basis of democratic control , whether it wishes to attract major projects or whether it would rather promote locally-oriented small and medium-sized companies based on local consumption .
The long list of requests for derogations now lodged with the OECD secretariat does not just give cause for concern about the legitimacy of the overarching principle of equal treatment .
The standstill and rollback provisions are also unacceptable to us as they stand at present .
The Committee also opposes the proposed arbitration procedure , which puts investors on an equal footing with Member States .
We consider that the national and international procedures that already exist are adequate .
So we should give ourselves time carefully to examine the goals and effects of the MAI , because the social aspects , long-term ecological feasibility and democratic accountability of the MAI should not be subordinated to onerous restrictions - our guiding principle should be just the opposite .
I would also like to express my heartfelt thanks to the other committees asked for an opinion , and to the committee secretariat for their commitment , and I ask you , ladies and gentlemen , to vote for this report .
Marking out the playing field on which our economic policy is to develop is a vital task for us .
Mr President , first I want to congratulate the Committee on External Economic Relations for having taken the initiative in concerning itself with this report .
I also congratulate the Committee on its choice of rapporteur . I totally agree with what he said .
I should also like , Mr President , to underline one of the ideas emphasized by the rapporteur : that this agreement is being negotiated in a secretive manner .
I do not want to go into what has been said by the representatives of national parliaments .
The Commission just needs to know that this Parliament is not happy with the level of information about and participation in these negotiations , towards an agreement which has been termed the economic constitution of the world , and the most important document we will be discussing in the near future .
The Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and Industrial Policy has drafted an opinion and come up with several observations , some of which are my own , while others were added in committee . I will defend them all with the same enthusiasm .
Firstly , we stress the need for this binding agreement to apply to " lower ' governments with competence in investment matters : in other words , subfederal or subcentral governments . Basically , I am thinking of the United States and Canada .
Secondly , non-OECD countries which may wish to accede to this agreement in the future must be kept informed of how the negotiations are progressing , and that their right to formulate reservations is being respected .
Our third point is obvious : for the sake of coherence , the multilateral agreement on investments should respect the Treaty on European Union and the decisions of the Uruguay Round and other international treaties .
Fourthly , and this may be the most important clause of all , this Parliament requests the inclusion of the so-called regional economic integration organization clause , to provide that countries who are members of such organizations - and I am specifically thinking of the countries of the European Union - will not be obliged to extend to non-member countries the favourable treatment reserved for members .
If a clause of this type were not included , the whole process of commercial integration which we Europeans have implemented would be cast to the winds .
Fifthly , we ask that the multilateral agreement should include a clause to forbid any of the signatories from applying measures which have extra-territorial effects .
It is no secret that I am thinking of the Helms-Burton Act .
Finally - and I am just finishing - we ask that labour and environmental standards should under no circumstances be lowered within the framework of this agreement .
Mr President , I also congratulate the REX Committee and the rapporteur on bringing this to the attention of the European Parliament .
The investment under the terms of the MAI is extremely extensive and far-reaching , indeed so far-reaching that the Committee on Legal Affairs and Citizens ' Rights could consider it as deconstructing the acquis communautaire .
We must be very wary of this .
It could force Member States to treat foreign investors as favourably as EU companies , and this could mean that environmental protection , employment protection and other Community laws could be considered illegal and therefore deconstructed .
The role of the European Parliament is very important in this .
It has an obligation to influence the contents of a treaty as important as the MAI , which runs the risk of being negotiated and concluded without any democratic participation .
Secondly , it has to safeguard its powers and those of the Union in general , which might be curtailed by the conclusion of such an international convention .
In its conclusions the Committee on Legal Affairs and Citizens ' Rights calls on the European Parliament to state that it cannot agree to endorse any agreement which would have the effect of rolling back EU legislation and insists , therefore , on the use of exception clauses and on the insertion of a regional economic integration organization clause .
It cannot agree to endorse any agreement which would have the effect of preventing further harmonization of EU legislation , and insists therefore on the insertion of a separate regional economic integration organization clause permitting new harmonized measures , such as environmental legislation adopted within the framework of such an organization and replacing measures previously applied by these states .
It demands that the proposals should be compatible with international conventions already ratified by the EU , and draws attention to the serious problems of consistency and legal security that may be engendered by including intellectual property within the scope of the multilateral agreement on investments , given the complexity of the subject which falls within the remit of the WIPO and , more recently , the World Trade Organization .
Finally , it would call on the Commission , the Council and the Member States to submit , pursuant to the procedure provided for in Article 228 , the whole of the definitive draft of the MAI to the Court of Justice for full examination before it is ratified .
Mr President , I would like to thank Mr Kreissl-Dörfler for his excellent report on this extremely complex subject .
It is not just security of employment and the environment that are at stake , it is our European identity .
While there may still be justified reservations about this draft agreement and assent cannot therefore be signalled for the time being , this does not mean that the need to establish transparency and legal certainty for international investment in all areas is being denied .
However , a number of other issues remain to be resolved : vital social , ecological and cultural issues .
As a member of the Committee on Culture , I would like to speak about the possible threat the agreement poses to EU culture and media policy .
A derogation for the audiovisual industry and for the protection of intellectual property is essential .
Cultural creativity is not a purely economic investment .
For example , if the national treatment principle was applied in the cultural world , US media companies would qualify for EU funds created specifically to support the European cultural industry .
The Television without Frontiers Directive and the Media II programme would then just be fit for the shredder .
If the EU does not protect its cultural policy by seeking derogations from the MAI , it will be defeating its own policy of safeguarding quality and the promoting diversity in European audiovisual production , which in turn maintain Europe 's identity .
I therefore urge the plenary to follow the recommendations of the Committee on External Economic Relations and the Committee on Culture when we vote , and exclude audiovisual policy and intellectual property from this agreement .
Mr President , one of the most alarming aspects of the MAI is the lack of public debate and this runs counter to the principles of democracy , transparency and public participation .
The MAI could have very profound consequences for the fisheries sector both from the social and environmental perspectives .
Although the Common Fisheries Policy has not been terribly successful , at least it has the merit that the EU bears responsibility for the policies and for the current mess .
The Fisheries Committee was concerned that the MAI could force the EU to alter its approach to fisheries management so as to conform to the wishes of some other countries or indeed even companies .
For instance , if , as a conservation measure , the Community decided to reduce fishing in order to allow the recovery of fish stocks , would other countries or indeed big business be able to claim that this was unfair and so overrule the Community ?
Would the EU lose control of its own resources ?
The Committee was adamant that the EU must maintain its ability to establish and implement policies for the conservation of fish stocks and the management of Community fisheries .
The Commission assured the Committee that these concerns were groundless , that the appropriate reservations would be lodged to ensure that the EU maintained its independence .
But how foolproof will these reservations be ?
The world is rapidly changing ; one wonders if it is possible to foresee all the implications of the MAI and to lodge reservations which will ensure that the management of EU fisheries will remain a European matter .
Let us not forget that the effects of this agreement will last a minimum of twenty years and that there will doubtless be much pressure to phase out reservations .
Although the opinion of the Fisheries Committee considers only fisheries it is easy to imagine that the situation would be similar in other resources : for example , in the extraction industry , forestry , agriculture , mining , and so on .
Similarly , the concerns of the EU are probably similar to the concerns shared around the world .
Finally , the opinion by the Fisheries Committee was adopted unanimously , it is very complex and it is important that the conclusions of this opinion be included entirely and not simply summarised in a short , almost meaningless amendment .
Mr President , firstly I would very much like to thank the rapporteur , both personally and on behalf of my group .
He has done excellent work , and the report was also his initiative . Had it not been for him , if we - by which I also mean the Committee - had not acted promptly , this report would probably not only have bypassed the European Parliament , it would also not have given the appropriate signals to national parliaments .
It will now !
My group has tabled an amendment , and I hope that all the groups have given it their attention .
We are calling on national governments and thus parliaments to withhold their consent to the completion of the negotiations and the conclusion of this agreement in May .
Sir Leon Brittan is with us today , and I hope that he will convey this signal to the Commission .
We think it is important to give a signal now so that governments , national parliaments and the public are alerted to this , and so that it is made crystal clear to them what the agreement is all about , and that it is vital to carry on negotiating to achieve a satisfactory package .
It is quite possible that it would then no longer be meaningful to continue these negotiations in an OECD framework , and that it would then be advisable to pursue the negotiations through the WTO instead .
I know , Sir Leon , that you will probably not be very happy about this , because you think is perfectly appropriate to have a package for OECD member states which provides certainty for investment , and above all for investors .
We do not have any quarrel with this , but would it not be wiser to pursue it via the WTO ?
We share a healthy scepticism about a number of points with most of the parties to the negotiations .
One point I would briefly like to mention is the definition of investment .
The investments protected include direct investment , portfolio investment , and everything which can be categorized as intangible investment , including intellectual property .
The third category in particular goes way beyond the results of WTO negotiations and I have grave doubts about that .
The second point is that in the context of continuing liberalization , an arbitration procedure would be introduced giving investors the right to take legal action against Member States . However , the reverse would not apply , so Member States would not have the right to take action against investors .
This is another crucial point .
I have a whole string of other points of criticism that I will unfortunately not get to now .
I would be very pleased if you could take these on board in your negotiations , and I know that the Commission is already aware of this . Once more , I urge you not to conclude the negotiations this May .
Mr President , I want to begin by congratulating the rapporteur , Mr Kreissl-Dörfler , on his excellent report .
There is no doubt that the conclusion and signing of the multilateral agreement on investments will provide the signatories with the first multilateral framework to broadly regulate the conditions and treatment of international investments . This broad concept covers direct investments , loans , intellectual property , licences , authorizations and the whole wide area of rights and obligations in the world of commerce .
Considering how important foreign investments are to today 's economy , and given the globalization which increasingly affects us , we can think of the framework agreement on investments as representing in the investment area what GATT meant in its day for trade . In other words , it creates a stable , global frame of reference , to replace more than 1 800 existing bilateral agreements .
In fact , to coin a phrase , the multilateral agreement on investments will change the world .
It will become one of the great achievements of the OECD and , in the future , of the WTO .
This agreement offers guarantees to companies and states , and its rules are expected to be applied globally .
We must bear in mind that in recent years world investments have risen to over $ 10 billion - all direct international investments - and we are in a period of growth , with an annual increase of about $ 500 000- $ 600 000 million . Furthermore , that growth is very uneven , since there is hardly any investment in so-called " black ' Africa .
I would like to make a plea that investments should not just be made in those places where we expect immediate returns .
We must think about the solidarity aspect of investing throughout the world .
Anyway , having experienced what an intense process it was to draft this report ( because of the many amendments presented - more than 80 amendments in the Committee on External Economic Relations ) , and despite the fact that it in no way reflects the view of the Group of the European People 's Party , we request a vote in favour of this report because we think it represents an unavoidable compromise .
We hope that a vote of confidence from this Parliament will mean that this report is taken seriously by the European Commission in view of the forthcoming negotiations and the signing of the Agreement in April . As the rapporteur said , we will see if anybody takes any notice of this Parliament .
We in Parliament often have the impression that we try to do our work , we try to produce agreements and reports , and in the end , the Commission ignores them . I think that is a view shared by a lot of people , in Parliament in general and , especially in this case , in the Committee on External Economic Relations .
I am pleased that Sir Leon Brittan is here , so we can ask him to listen to us , take note of what we say , and bear it in mind .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , we look favourably on the idea of a liberalization of investments stimulating competition and promoting the European economy .
Naturally , an agreement to this effect will necessarily have to observe the principles and foundations on which Europe is built .
The public should be informed of negotiations with clarity and transparency , particularly the national parliaments that play a decisive role when applying international agreements .
The multilateral agreement on investments should , however , take EU legislation into account without preventing any further harmonization , and cannot radically change existing agreements and policies on development .
The Council should be consulted on the conclusion of the MIA on behalf of the EU , according to Article 228 paragraph 3 section 2 of the Treaty , according to the assent procedure .
However , I consider it fundamentally important for the national governments and parliaments to be vigilant at the time of presenting the project .
This vigilance is absolutely vital to the cultural sector as a whole ; the cultural policy needs space for itself , special provisions which cannot be provided by purely economic mechanisms .
Such spicial provisions will be hard to guarantee within the multilateral agreement on investments , at least at the current stage of negotiations , and it would therefore be advisable for the cultural sector to be excluded from the MAI .
However , this should not be confused with a protectionist attitude : we should stop being afraid of the USA , for we will not save European culture by keeping it enclosed .
We should undertake to identify and support those initiatives that stimulate and reinforce European competitiveness and creativity , and this can also be achieved by some form of liberalization that will have to be developed ad hoc , made-to-measure to safeguard the principles of support for the diversity and peculiarity that strengthen and shape the wealth and identity of European culture .
Our group is therefore in favour of the report .
Madam President , ladies and gentleman , Mr Commissioner , the Group of the European Liberal , Democrat and Reform Party thinks it is extremely important the MAI should come to pass .
International investments represent thousands of billions of dollars a year .
World trade increases at a rate of 7 % to 8 % a year , but investments increase twice as fast .
International investments are becoming more important than international trade .
Trade is regulated by various WTO treaties .
However , there are no neat , uniform rules for direct investments .
At the moment there are more than 1 800 bilateral treaties .
The MAI is a successful initiative for multilateral agreements on investments , initially between the OECD countries , but with the ability to extend the treaty to include other countries .
Although in the course of the negotiation process many serious political dossiers were brought within the scope of the MAI , agreement has been reached on most points .
Yet the US is stepping on the brakes . They claim they need more time .
Is this out-and-out free-trade nation losing faith ?
My last point , ladies and gentlemen , concerns the powers of the European Union in entering into international treaties .
Article 113 offers the Commission no explicit authority to sign the MAI on behalf of the Member States .
Yet the European Communities do take part in the negotiations as partners on behalf of the Member States .
I request the honourable Members to support our group 's Amendment No 11 , so that unfair competition within the Union and unfair treatment with regard to investments will be ruled out .
This amendment aims at full EC membership of the MAI .
We are therefore asking the Member States not to approve the final text as long as the European Communities are not guaranteed full membership of the MAI .
I ask Sir Leon Brittan : did he check this with the Member States in the Council ?
What in fact is the exact procedure which must be followed ?
I would welcome Sir Leon 's response to this .
Madam President , the resolution the European Parliament is preparing to vote on , contained in Mr Kreissl-Dörfler 's excellent report , is of great importance , for reasons of method and substance .
It is , in fact , a question of providing guidelines on these negotiations of enormous consequence that have been taking place in a semi-clandestine manner for almost three years .
The agreement was to be concluded , in fact , without either public opinion or the parliaments being in a position to be fully aware of its implications .
It is quite true that , once it was concluded , the agreement would have been submitted for examination by the parliaments , but too late , only at the time of ratification , when it is only possible to say " yes ' or " no ' , when it is no longer possible to affect its direction .
I think one great merit of our Parliament is that of having realized for some time the scope of the current negotiations within the OECD and of having taken the initiative to vote , pursuant to Rule 90 ( 5 ) of the Rules of Procedure , on a resolution with the ability to affect negotiations while they are still open , to offer the thoughts of a representative democratic institution .
This Parliament was the first to do so , and so far the only one . This timing is all the more important in the case of the negotiations in question , given the enormous implications of this MAI .
It does not ask us for an opinion on the advisability or otherwise of foreign investments , but on the rights and powers of states to regulate direct foreign investments and , therefore , to direct them according to their own priorities , to subject their operations to specific procedures , and to regulate their ability and the use of any profits made .
The MAI could give rise to a substantial erosion of the sovereignty of states , which would be transferred to businesses able to challenge any choice of country in which they are investing , denouncing it as discriminatory , as a form of a priori expropriation of a potential future profit .
Any regulation aimed at protecting the health of its own citizens , at protecting the environment , at protecting the social standards guaranteed for workers by laws and collective agreements or ( a very important aspect of the problem ) at safeguarding its own identity and culture could be considered discriminatory .
Not to mention another dramatic consequence : the prohibition of establishing any incentive designed to reduce regional imbalances or direct resources towards certain aims . This is a particularly serious problem , especially for developing countries exposed to the risk of increased volatility and instability of their own financial markets , without any power to control their own balances of payments .
It is paradoxical that after decades of laborious Community construction and harmonization of regulations within the EU , and after our efforts to make the east European applicant countries assume the acquis communautaire , we are preparing to dilute everything . This calls into question the very notion of regional economic integration organizations , although they are respected within the framework of the WTO , under the " REIO ' clause , which , in the draft MAI , seems to be extremely lacking in efficacy .
Finally , another worrying question : why was the OECD chosen for these negotiations ? It would have been far more appropriate to examine the matter within the WTO , since the OECD has an entirely different function .
The suspicion that the choice was made because only the 29 richest countries belong to the OECD is sufficiently strong and widespread to seriously risk the very credibility of the institutions seeking legitimation as regulators of globalization , starting with the WTO itself .
The mobilization generated by the " discovery ' of the MAI in European civilian society , particularly in the world of culture , and in the USA , where the NGOs have begun a real campaign of denouncement , has already had the effect of postponing the conclusion of the agreement .
The unanimous vote , apart from one abstention , in the Committee on External Economic Relations and the committees called upon to give an opinion , whose amendments have been included in full , will I hope serve as advice for the European negotiators in their measures designed , if not to reject the agreement itself ( as not just our group but also many others in this Parliament would like ) at least to drastically review the wording of the draft under discussion .
Madam President , the exponential world increase in foreign investments surely justifies setting up a global regulatory framework , not to place the emphasis on liberalization , but to direct the initiatives of transnational associations towards socially and ecologically durable development .
The current draft does not tackle this issue at all for three reasons .
The draft under discussion , in which the Commission is actively involved , aims to provide maximum security for investors and only takes into account the interests of the populations concerned as a secondary issue .
Secondly , all the basic principles and conditions proposed result in political institutions being deprived of the normal prerogatives they would have in a democratic regime , and also result in legally subjecting democratic institutions and governments to the strategies and interests of transnational companies by the specific creation of arbitration bodies in which these very companies could have the countries condemned .
Thirdly , as Mrs Castellina has just said , the discussions currently underway in the OECD obviously belong to the wealthy club ; the most vulnerable countries - developing countries - are excluded , when in fact they are the ones most at the mercy of the multinationals ' strategies .
This is a draft which cannot be corrected superficially or content itself with exemptions , but whose very principles must be fundamentally reviewed .
I would like to illustrate my point with three examples .
Firstly , one of the basic clauses , the prohibition of performance requirements , completely contradicts the idea of a specific targeted policy against severe unemployment in the relevant regions .
In granting permission to an investor , the condition could not be made that regional staff must be employed , or that there must be preferential contracts with regional companies , or anything of that kind .
In the end , it is in fact European structural policy which will be called into question .
My second example concerns expropriation and the subsequent compensation .
The adoption of new legislation on fiscal , environmental and social issues could be seen to have the same effect as expropriation , which UNICE calls rampant expropriation , in that it would cause a gradual erosion of the conditions on which the decision to invest was taken and would automatically bring with it a right to financial compensation .
My third example concerns the principle of non-discrimination , or national treatment .
What would happen in the former countries of eastern Europe or in a country like Brazil if , in the process of land redistribution by privatization of collective farms or to meet the requirements of the indigenous peoples or landless peasant farmers , the same priority was given to multinationals as to the populations concerned ?
The answer is self-evident : it would be unacceptable to us .
Mr Kreissl-Dörfler 's report is an excellent one because it puts its finger on these very issues , and I think Parliament would promote its own cause by voting in favour of it by a very large majority .
Madam President , doubtless there were a thousand good reasons why the representatives of the OECD devised this multilateral agreement without the slightest degree of transparency . But some of these reasons , and certainly not the least of them , oblige us to reject this new economic order which they want to impose upon us .
Of course we can easily understand the advantages of such an agreement for the multinationals , all the more so since this draft , which could be summarized by the principle " the countries fulfil their obligations and the investors reap the benefits ' , offers them definite guarantees .
It is doubtless a good thing to remove obstacles to investment , but even so the principle of non-discrimination , or this broad conception of investment , must not have harmful effects on any country . For by creating a real threat to national sovereignty this agreement risks eventually calling into question the rights of peoples and their social and environmental demands .
The developing countries , which are excluded from the negotiations , will have clauses imposed on them which often oppose their own real interests .
We all know that if economic interests gain ascendancy over political ones , democracy will suffer .
The only proof I need is the way in which this agreement has been negotiated .
So it is critical that , as Members of the European Parliament , we reject this agreement since it would represent a grave blow to the European structure at a time when enlargement is in fact on the agenda .
What would become of our common agricultural policy , our European social model , or even our cultural identities , if the MAI were to be applied tomorrow ?
So we must welcome the initiative taken by the Committee on External Economic Relations and thank Mr Kreissl-Dörfler for his excellent work .
Furthermore , our group will not hesitate to vote for his report , but it would also be good if the Council took a stand .
In the same way , Commissioner , we expect the Commission , which is participating in the negotiations , to continue in its efforts , but always using reason and wisdom , for it is our European Community at stake and it is critical that we defend our cultural exception .
This exception was gained thanks to the mobilization of cultural professionals , who again recently raised awareness about the risks of the MAI .
This cultural exception , acquired at a high price during the GATT negotiations , must be extended to the MAI .
Also , the agreements which govern intellectual property rights must be maintained because , ladies and gentlemen , it is high time we realized that the world is not a huge game of Monopoly and that our cultural fate should not be determined by the throw of a dice .
Madam President , Commissioner , I would like to congratulate the Committee on External Economic Relations .
Faced with the secrecy surrounding these negotiations , which are already at an advanced stage , the Committee felt it was essential publicly to make known the opinions of those who realize what is at stake in the process of drawing up a multilateral agreement on investments .
So , three years after negotiations started , we in the European Parliament are today having the first debate on the MAI to be held in a parliamentary setting .
I would also like to congratulate the rapporteur , who kept the text coherent despite attacks by large groups for which the taste for compromise at any price and the weakening of any proposition have become second nature .
Mr Kreissl-Dörfler shows clearly that what is at issue with the MAI is not just the defence of a sector of activity as important as culture : it is a method , a logic , the division into hierarchies of the players on the international scene .
Organizing protection for investors is essentially a national responsibility and should remain so , even if close coordination between the Fifteen ought to allow the pursuit of a number of common goals .
Here I would mention in particular : the condemnation of legislation which has an impact beyond a country 's own borders ; the banning of any form of competition which aims to attract investment by lowering social standards or rules for environmental protection ; and the inability of an investment arbitration body to dismantle the clauses of a common policy , such as policies on agriculture or fishing , to attack cultural exception , or to challenge the decision of an internal or community jurisdiction which has the strength of having had judgement passed on it .
It is critical that the legitimate right of the investor to have his investment protected is not transformed into an absolute right to invest without any restriction applying in terms of legislation and regulation , to the detriment of responsibilities and countries .
Within the current logic of the MAI , countries would be limited to guaranteeing investors the full use of their investments , while national and Community legislation which aims to preserve the environment and social conditions would be considered a priori as potential obstacles to investment .
This is the logic on which the current MAI negotiations and its framework are based , with developing countries being excluded . We feel duty bound to challenge it rather than sticking to a tactic of exception and reserve , which would only serve to designate the scene of tomorrow 's negotiations .
The GATT and WTO processes should be a lesson to us .
In that sense , this report is sounding the alarm bells and that is why we will support it .
Madam President , we too welcome the debate on this report .
With a few exceptions we also find it a very interesting and highly intelligent piece of work .
Of course it would be good if the environmental , social and structural conditions prevailing in Europe and the West applied to the rest of the world , so that investors had to respect them worldwide .
Unfortunately it is somewhat arrogant of the West smugly to ignore the needs and living conditions of the third world and dream up obstacles to investment that ultimately prevent economic conditions from improving elsewhere on our planet .
There is no denying that modernization of infrastructure and communications systems throughout the world has created enormous competition for inward investment .
Investors acting on behalf of their shareholders will always pick those locations which promise the most profit .
Trying to protest or legislate against this process would be the modern equivalent of smashing up machines during the industrial revolution .
The question that the report does not resolve is how Europe can play its part in securing an economic upturn in the third world without laying down the law to how this upturn is to be achieved .
The restrictions that would apply in the area of culture are a problem .
I can only refer to the Dutch government 's report , which says ' Don 't get yourself a suit of armour , stiffen your backbone instead ' .
The measures for regulating foreign investment called for in the report must not , however , be allowed to generate a situation in which open competition is possible in every area of culture .
The same people who were critical of American companies getting their hands on EU money would certainly have nothing against American companies putting money into European films .
I particularly welcome the part of the report on the threat to copyright .
We have a lot of catching up to do in this area , and this needs detailed examination .
Madam President . It is a pleasure to be speaking in the Chamber and not noting my presence .
I and my group support Mr Kreissl-Dörfler 's report .
We support in particular paragraphs 5 , 14 , 23 and paragraph 15 on OECD guidelines .
May I say at this point , irrespective of where future discussions on investment procedures are held , whether it be at the OECD , the WTO , or UNCTAD , we would appreciate it if those who are in charge of our affairs would be a bit more transparent in their handling of them .
We parliamentarians should be at the forefront of the discussions , not at the tail-end .
Parliament has to be congratulated on producing this report .
The main support comes for the voluntary code .
It comes from the OECD countries .
We apparently cannot agree to change the voluntary code of guidelines into a compulsory one .
A statement from Mr Charles Bridge of the DTI , on the voluntary status of the OECD guidelines , says that the emergent majority view is that the voluntary status should be unchanged .
But he goes on to say that the OECD countries have , since 1991 , been under a binding obligation to set up national contact points for undertaking promotional activities , handling enquiries and discussing with parties concerned on all matters related to the guidelines .
We may want to consider exactly what these national contact points have achieved .
According to the trade union advisory committee from the OECD , the results of their studies suggest that with a few notable exceptions the national contact points are reactive rather than proactive and do little to fulfil their terms of reference .
Some national trade union centres which did not respond to the survey stated that there was little to report due to the fact that the national contact points in their country had fallen into abeyance .
It was also reported that requests for information on the guidelines were often ignored and this has led to a high degree of apathy amongst many TUC affiliates towards the NCPs , that is , the national contact points .
The report goes on to ask : ' has the national contact point in your country consulted the trade unions on its terms of reference ? ' .
The Swedish national contact point is the only one to consult trade unions proactively .
The Belgian national contact point does so reactively and all other affiliates replied negatively .
So perhaps the Commission could advise us of what steps it can take , if it is going to pursue the voluntary code , to actually beef up the national contact points to make sure they become relevant to those people who are meant to be served by the multilateral agreement on investments .
Can I also ask the Commission to look at the question of portfolio investment , because whilst we are talking about foreign direct investment many of these companies have their results as a result of the portfolio investment of shareholders ?
Can the Commission advise us if it is going to consider at these negotiations , and encourage the Member States to take up , assurances that the trustees of many of the pension and occupational funds and insurance funds are actually consulted prior to any investment taking place in any of the companies operating under the multilateral agreement on investment in many of the countries which , at present , are not being served very well by the voluntary guidelines ?
This would be a step towards democracy and the Commission should embrace it .
Madam President , the marked annual increase of 11 % in direct foreign investment is impressive , and far in excess of that of the other basic economic variables , standing at twice the growth of trade and four times the growth of products over the past decade .
It is , therefore , surprising that no multilateral code of conduct exists in this connection .
Since the free movement of capital is one element in making maximum use of resources , the growth of trade has not been hampered by the free movement of products and services , as might have been feared and would be undesirable .
Furthermore , in terms of space , having channelled investment towards the more disadvantaged areas , it has served as an equilibrating factor by anchoring labour that would otherwise have been obliged to emigrate , with heavy human and social costs . In this regard , the multinationals ' strategy of locating subcontracting units in different countries and regions has been important .
Despite all these characteristics , stringent codes of conduct must be established to prevent direct foreign investment from being used as an unacceptable form of exploitation and infringing the rules of competition .
In particular , as correctly emphasized by the rapporteur , Mr Kreissl-Dörfler - whom I congratulate - social and environmental rules must be respected to the letter .
Otherwise our workers and businessmen will have cause for complaint , if investment is relocated elsewhere .
As we have repeatedly emphasized , this is a requirement which simultaneously renders service to workers and to citizens of the most backward countries , by ensuring that they are not exploited and that their quality of life does not deteriorate .
Finally , we regret that advances in monitoring subsidies have not gone hand-in-hand with progress on the tax front . Competitiveness is being boosted by reducing taxes on capital , which ultimately exacerbates the existing imbalance whereby the tax burden on labour is excessive .
On only one point do we diverge from the rapporteur and some Members who have spoken before me : we fear that the exceptions proposed in the cultural sphere might lead us towards protectionism . We think that European culture should stand on its own merits and not be propped up by protectionism that will ultimately weaken it .
In that connection , I agree entirely with the Dutch point of view .
Madam President , I would like to say that I too share the concern that has been expressed over the multilateral agreement on investments .
This concern is felt in the parliamentary committees of the European Parliament and in artistic and academic circles alike .
Reports in the European press are equally justified in sounding the alarm concerning the likely and indeed hasty signing of this agreement .
In the Committee on Culture , Youth , Education and the Media , of which I am a member , we have fought long and hard against attempts to downgrade and to harm the cultural industry of Europe and to change our varied cultural identity , which this agreement threatens to do .
European cultural policy was threatened during the GATT negotiations , when we achieved , in part , cultural exception . This exception must not only remain intact but it must be enforced .
I remind you that there are other national representatives who are seeking their own exceptions , such as the Americans for certain sectors for which they have special regulations which are favourable to its citizens within the framework of the OECD .
We must ward off any attempt to fragment European policies and European structure as a whole in areas of cultural products and services , including new technologies , intellectual ownership , and all the other rights of our artists and creators . But we must not forget that other areas are also at issue , as has already been mentioned , such as transport , fishing and agriculture .
European solidarity must remain unshakable , despite being under intense pressure and attack . At this point I would like to stress that unfortunately there are Member States whose representatives wish to proceed more quickly to the signing of this agreement , without examining the problems this will create .
We do not deny that the negotiations need to come to an end , but certainly not before crucial matters concerning Europe are settled satisfactorily .
Mr President , I welcome this agreement very much in that it works for non-discrimination as far as investment is concerned , for application of the rule of law in terms of signatory Member States , and it is there to increase international investments and thereby also international trade .
All of those things are exceptionally good and I welcome them .
What concerns me is that when one starts to look through this agreement - I have tried to read it on several occasions , although it is far from finalized at present - it raises a large number of questions .
Clearly , because international investment is an area that is extremely competitive , one of the things that will happen is that , although it is an OECD agreement , there will be severe pressure on other nations looking for international investment to become signatories as well .
Again , in principle , I welcome that .
I am concerned about the level of involvement of developing countries in particular within the decision-making process , even though it is primarily an OECD document at present .
Along with Mr Falconer , I also would point to the OECD guidelines for multinational enterprises .
Although the OECD makes a lot of its own publicity material , I would like to have seen it have greater prominence in the context of this agreement .
Again , if you read through the agreement , it raises more questions than it perhaps answers about how well the area of environmental standards will be dealt with in the final version .
My other comment , which I make somewhat wryly , is to ask whether there will still be discrimination against home companies in terms of incentives for investment made by some countries which tend to discriminate in favour of foreign investment .
Finally , I wish to ask when the agreement will now be signed - it was supposed to be in May , and it looks as though it is being delayed - and whether it will go through the assent procedure in the European Parliament ?
Madam President , the MAI treaty is a real weapon of war against peoples , countries and states .
The interests of foreign investors have been favoured to an excessive extent , their rights extend into all domains since they can by law pursue governments to gain damages and compensation interest for any measure they consider to have a negative effect on their profits .
So , social rights , environmental protection , national and regional development , the preservation of natural resources , concern for the collective interest , and freedom of unions are all subjects which could justify sanctions , as would community preference .
In the current process of globalization , the interests of the people are being trampled underfoot ; with the MAI , the governments themselves are held up to ridicule and they have nothing more than obligations towards the multinationals .
This sort of approach is totally unacceptable , and has been widely refused .
Whereas since 1995 negotiations have been held in the utmost secrecy , the reality of the MAI has now burst upon us , triggering a huge protest movement in the United States , Canada , India and Europe .
Even in France , artists and creators are finding that our culture has everything to lose through this concept of merchandizing and they are up in arms about it .
Through the Prime Minister , the French Government has indicated that an agreement of this kind cannot in any way challenge the freedom of governments to implement their choices .
Apparently , France is calling for restrictive clauses , prohibiting competition between countries in order to attract investments by lowering social standards and weakening environmental rules .
Mr Kreissl-Dörfler 's report sets out a number of justified criticisms and rightly calls for a public debate and transparency in the OECD negotiations .
However , he does not go as far as he could , and finishes with the simple recommendation , and I quote , not to sign the MAI until an in-depth analysis has been held .
It is my opinion that the European Parliament - the first elected body to debate the MAI , thanks in particular to its REX committee - should call on the governments of the Member States not to sign the MAI , to adjourn negotiations and to allow for a preliminary broad public debate involving national parliaments .
The same demand could be made regarding the transatlantic single market project , known as the " Brittan project ' which takes its inspiration from precisely the same ultraliberal principles as the MAI .
As French elected members , we intend to support the development of the social movement which aims to thwart these projects which threaten jobs and freedom , and bring to bear an approach based on cooperation and lasting development , which is what civilization really needs as we enter the third millennium .
Madam President , I would like to say a warm thank you to my colleague Mr Kreissl-Dörfler for really giving us something to think about - not only us , but also the national parliaments - so that our eyes have really been opened to this .
People say this will be the basis of the global economy .
But they also say that it is not just economic interests which are at stake here , but also environmental interests , social interests , national rights to self-determination , and so on .
I would like to ask the Commission why we in the European Parliament have not been informed that this has been discussed ?
Where is the dialogue with the citizens and the democratically elected parliament ?
I am extremely disappointed with the Swedish Trade Minister who has sat in on these negotiations since 1995 without giving the slightest sign that they had taken place .
He is also a member of the Social Democrats , who said before the last election that they would ' bridle market forces ' .
Now we can see what happens with such promises .
So we want more democracy .
And as the previous speaker said : ' Stop the agreement until we have had a proper dialogue ' .
Madam President , it seems to me that it is time for those like us endowed with political responsibility as a result of universal suffrage to put an end to the technocratic drift of certain international institutions .
One particular question needs to be asked and I will ask it clearly : who is the OECD working for ?
Is it to support the economic , cultural and social development of countries and their peoples , or is it working on behalf of the powerful multinationals ?
The multilateral agreement on investments provides the answer .
How can we allow certain countries to carry on secret negotiations behind our backs in the corridors of the castle of silence , headquarters of the OECD in Paris , on agreements which will apply to countries which are less well-off than they are ?
These agreements are drawn up without any democratic control , by officials who have but one aim - to eliminate all cultural , social and environmental defences .
The MAI is a real lesson to us .
It is no chance mishap ; an entire ultraliberal concept is rearing its ugly head and intends to ride roughshod over all social and democratic progress , frequently obtained by a hard-fought struggle .
Saying no to the MAI is basically saying no to the current notions of the OECD , but perhaps it is also an opportunity to set the ball rolling on the question of whether to retain an institution of this kind . At the very least , it may be a chance to redefine its mission .
Would it not be much wiser and more efficient to strengthen the role of the World Trade Organization , which will be called upon to deal with the subjects currently being debated in the OECD ?
In any case , the question this raises more than ever is the issue of the democratic control of international institutions , if we wish to avoid harmful consequences for the people .
Madam President , there are currently approximately 1 800 bilateral agreements on direct foreign investments .
This leads to a lack of transparency and contradictions between agreements .
A multilateral agreement on investments in an OECD context makes sense , therefore .
The OECD nations are responsible for most of the direct foreign investments , and agreement is reached much more quickly and efficiently within the OECD context than within the WTO context .
Like Mr Kreissl-Dörfler I have some questions .
Is there not a risk that an international umbrella agreement of this kind places the interest of multinational enterprises over the general interest ?
Do developing countries have any room to negotiate when they join the agreement , or are they presented with a fait accompli ?
The rapporteur quite rightly devotes a lot of attention to this in his valuable report .
This agreement will limit sovereign powers considerably , and this is something which worries me .
On important policy areas such as the environment , and in the social and cultural sphere , it could have a negative effect .
It would not be the first time - we have hit our heads against this brick wall during the GATT negotiations .
We have to steer clear of Scylla , an agreement which is too liberal , and Charybdis , over-regulation and protectionism .
In the Netherlands the codes of conduct on the environment , human rights and social provision , drawn up by businesses themselves , appear to be working better than government regulation .
The report puts a little too much emphasis on ' overprotection ' , for instance in relation to culture .
The Commission has had many suggestions , but was it really necessary to include everything in the report ?
You can have too much of a good thing .
This position will be reflected in the way I vote .
Despite a few minor flaws , I would like to give my full support to this report , and I offer the rapporteur my sincerest congratulations .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , this agreement has very serious implications for the future of the European Union and our people .
Mr Kreissl-Dörfler 's report clearly shows all the risks and conditions which must be met to make an investment organization more transparent and simpler , but also to ensure that it works for the people .
All the same , our group tabled an amendment which would finally make the message from this Parliament clearer .
We do not want our governments to ratify this agreement as it has been debated and with its underlying logic . Parliament should say that loud and clear .
This agreement would in fact remove from our countries and the Union - indeed from the Community institutions - the ability to act efficiently , to set social and environmental standards or to operate policies favouring local development and employment .
I will give you some examples to demonstrate this .
Without doubt , the most scandalous point is the clause stating that countries can be censured if they take any measures liable to reduce or hinder the potential profits of a multinational enterprise .
This implies that the profit of a multinational is more important than the interest of the people .
Now why is the United States Congress slightly reticent ?
It is because this clause exists in NAFTA and it has led to an American association in Canada called " Ethyl ' demanding to be reimbursed by the Canadian Government because the latter set a standard prohibiting a product which damages an organism indispensable in fighting pollution .
So Canada was going to be censured because it was combatting pollution and was depriving a company of its profits .
The Americans can see the danger , or at least some members of Congress can see it .
Let us not ignore the danger ; it is great , not only in the environmental but also in the social context .
I would like to conclude by saying that of course we need to set up a global organization which is more transparent and more rational about investments , but several conditions must be met in order to do this .
Firstly , the framework of this organization must not only include rich countries , but the WTO or even the UN .
Secondly , social and environmental clauses must be possible , and even enacted at a global level .
Thirdly , countries - and the European Union itself - must retain sovereignty and the possibility of taking action , because even if security is necessary for investors , it is much more indispensable for people .
Madam President , the prime role of the economy is to serve the people .
That is why I think it so important that we are debating the Multilateral Agreement on Investments today .
Nevertheless , the Kreissl-Dörfler report contains several statements reminiscent of the campaign being run by various interest groups for some time now to use the MAI to stir up people 's fears about globalization .
I am being quite open about this criticism , Mr Kreissl-Dörfler , because you know that I rate your work very highly and want to carry on being honest with you .
Of course as a parliament we find it hard to accept that the negotiations have to a very great extent been kept secret from the public and from parliaments , as the report notes .
However , this criticism should be levelled at the Council , not the OECD , as there is a meeting of the Council 's ad hoc working party on this very subject today .
Your report includes a call for a socially and ecologically balanced economic policy , and the other side of the House - I see Mrs Castellina is here as well - takes this to mean that the MAI would circumvent existing environmental and social standards .
The Austrian Ministry of Economic Affairs said in its opinion that the MAI does not impinge on a country 's right to have its own environmental and employment protection standards , as long as foreign investors are not subject to stricter requirements than domestic companies .
It envisages outlawing social and environmental dumping , which means a ban on lowering environmental and employment standards as a means of attracting foreign investment .
Nor will the MAI lead to any limitation of EU law .
A proviso to this effect is included .
The arrangements for intellectual property are such that the MAI cannot affect TRIPS .
Furthermore , the OECD agreement is already subject to a democratic ratification process .
If we really want people to benefit from the economy , we cannot cram an investment agreement with conditions that only an army of lawyers can make sense of .
After all , it would also hit small and medium-sized enterprises , which do not have huge internal organizations .
Of course we also want the Council to keep the Parliament promptly informed about the progress of negotiations .
Madam President , I would like to congratulate Mr Kreissl-Dörfler on his excellent report .
It shows that even if liberalization of investments is an essential objective , the text as it stands is dangerous and on some points unacceptable .
It is dangerous because it is unbalanced ; the investors have all the rights and the countries have all the obligations .
It could happen that countries would even have to answer to an international pseudo-jurisdiction regarding the motivation behind taking certain measures , for example on social or environmental issues .
The text is also unacceptable in terms of intellectual property rights and the cultural sector , especially the audiovisual sector .
In this Parliament we have fought to help establish a strong and dynamic cultural industry , notably by the ' television without frontiers ' directive .
And now the text of the treaty risks wasting all these efforts .
However , I would add a new problem , Madam President .
Today I have learned that the Commission is going to negotiate with the United States within the framework of a transatlantic single market or New Transatlantic Market Place . We have never been informed about this , and it too could target intellectual and artistic copyright .
It is taking on a lot .
And these negotiations are shrouded in complete secrecy .
It is high time the Commission provided us with clear information about the MAI and NTM treaties . It is also high time for the Commission to renegotiate several points in the MAI treaty , to exclude the entire audiovisual sector and royalties from the field of international treaties , and for our Parliament , like its national counterparts , to finally accept its responsibilities with respect to these texts .
Mr President , it is at this point that I should congratulate the rapporteur , but I shall put off doing so for lack of time .
The rapporteur , however , considers it a good thing that it was the European Commission that negotiated the MAI treaty and not the Member States .
That means a shift of power to a federal stronghold .
It gives the Commission power over my country 's social security system , environment , labour laws , health policy and psychology , which , according to this report , we should not be prepared to yield up to a supranational entity .
From a small nation 's viewpoint , the Commission can also seem like such an entity .
The MAI treaty deals with ridding capitalism of all hindrances to exploitation , in the new regions and in the spiritual sphere too , including those countries that have not been invited to participate in OECD negotiations .
The MAI imposes global standards on state activity , but not on that of individual companies .
The MAI is thus one-sided .
Mr Kreissl-Dörfler has prepared an excellent report , although he has too much faith in the power of the EU and its benign nature .
The EU is capitalism 's answer to Europe .
But what will evolve from the MAI treaty will be a new form of capitalism for the world .
Mr President , I must point out to my colleague , Mr Seppänen , that my government and his were independent negotiators in the treaty .
But let us press on . We are in the presence of something of a scandal .
The Commission has negotiated a treaty that truly frustrates the cohesive strengths and ideas of a very large part of the EU .
Many forms of grants and aid are called into question because of recommendations for certain concerns at the expense of others , and it is hard to imagine that exceptions could in any way be long-term .
I am certain that in the end everything will be cast in the same mould and it is not worth hoping in vain for problems to be solved by exception .
That is a temporary solution at best .
We need strongly binding provisos for legislation and the protection of the environment .
Commissioner , I do not baulk from saying that if the European Parliament were able to dismiss individual Commissioners , then that might well be the situation here , and your future would be hanging in the balance .
Madam President , the objective of reaching multilateral international agreements favouring the spread of investment is of great importance .
Providing a framework of certainty for investors may certainly be one of the fundamental conditions for enabling them to pay greater attention to non-traditional recipients as well - in other words , countries considered less reliable than others by the international investors themselves .
However , this should take place under conditions which are fully acceptable to all the countries concerned and consistent with the objectives of a balanced development that can be maintained by those countries and their populations .
Hence our criticisms of the method and contents of the agreement which has been under negotiation for more than two years within the OECD .
Mr Kreissl-Dörfler 's report confirms those criticisms in a strong and convincing way , which is why we are in favour of it .
We would like to raise three issues .
Firstly , there is the problem of democracy and transparency .
Negotiations have taken place and are taking place in great secrecy , without any parliament in the world being minimally informed and , so far , with most governments having little knowledge of the scope of the agreement .
This is unacceptable , as the outcome of an agreement of this type are intended to have profound , long-term effects in every country of the world .
Secondly , we dispute the view that the OECD is the appropriate place for an agreement intended to be extended to almost every country in the world .
In this way , the requirements and problems of the developing nations in particular will once again not be given the slightest consideration , despite the fact that the poorest countries will suffer the most serious consequences .
Finally , the contents of the agreement seem to be totally unacceptable , as they would actually rule out any possibility of individual states and regional associations such as the EU being able to develop policies on social and environmental quality , public services , or protection and optimization of cultural differences .
They would also be a serious threat to the active policies of planning development .
It is for these reasons that we are asking for the MAI not to be signed , at least not before its contents and nature have been profoundly amended .
Madam President , I note with pleasure that organizations have had more success than the negotiators in trying to create debate about this agreement , which the negotiators have also tried to do .
But what has been said on some points about the consequences of the agreement is very exaggerated .
I think that first and foremost we should establish that a set of rules is needed when globalization in fact happens , and the EU and Parliament have an important role to play .
Also , I hope the Commission supports the Member States who have strongly demanded that the agreement should forbid a relaxation of environmental and social standards in order to attract investment .
How do things stand with this , Mr Commissioner ?
The MAI could actually lead to an increase in standards rather than a decrease , as is maintained .
I also hope it puts an end to the ' shopping ' for subsidies which can be observed in many places .
It could also lead to smaller companies daring to invest abroad .
What is unclear is how the arbitration procedure will work .
Will it be public or closed ?
What are the rules on evidence ?
I think this is something we must draw attention to .
On this point the agreement is not ready to be signed .
In addition we must think about the position of the OECD Council .
I also think this agreement is necessary in the long term , so that developing countries can join voluntarily if they meet the standards required .
Madam President , I am pleased that Sir Leon Brittan is present at this debate , because many things have been said about the MAI agreements , and the only part I will reiterate is the necessity to remain vigilant beyond the problems of culture .
Yes , there is a risk of a serious attack on royalties , but beyond this , who can touch agriculture , the environment and social rights which have been spoken about at length .
And anyway , what does the notion of culture include for us ?
We in this establishment and in the Commission know very well that culture is shrinking constantly , to the point of only including the less strategic sectors and leaving behind the audiovisual sector , publishing and anything involving information highways .
I am glad to be able to speak to you today , Sir Leon , because you have devised a project which is to be adopted tomorrow . I think the MAI will let you put to the test the fact that people and parliamentary members and a good number of the groups here do not want any more secret negotiations .
They do not want any more of these attacks of neo-liberalism in our institutions and in Europe , which are often inspired by the United States . I think the New Transatlantic Market Place project should be reviewed , given the welcome accorded to the MAI by us today .
But that is not all .
Mr Bangemann should be here today , because the Green Paper on convergence also poses this type of problem .
In conclusion , I would just like to say that this treaty is not a treaty , but rather an ideological text .
It is a real manifesto for neo-liberalism . My group will propose an amendment calling for postponement , to ensure that a real public debate is held with all due respect for public opinion , which increasingly influences international policies .
Madam President , I would like to begin by saying that this agreement should not have been negotiated only in the OECD .
It is far too important for that .
What I wish to comment on is that workers ' rights have been relegated to the preamble of the MAI agreement .
It is a matter for concern that in the OECD 's draft multilateral agreement on investments there is a large discrepancy between the rights and obligations of the investors .
It is important for investors to be bound to keep certain commitments in the countries in which they operate .
I would like to emphasize that it must be a cause for concern that the MAI has chosen to refer to workers ' rights and environmental considerations in the introductory text .
This implies that the references to workers ' rights are not legally binding , but are more in the nature of a statement of intent .
In my opinion , it is reasonable to add to the text the stipulation that countries must have ratified the International Labour Organization 's seven conventions on the basic rights of workers .
Countries must recognize the ILO 's regulations on working conditions and the protection of the right to form unions , the prohibition of child labour and so on , so that such matters cannot become a competitive consideration used by states to try to attract investors .
It is important to avoid either the state or the investors speculating in social dumping .
It is important to bear in mind that the relaxation of provisions relating to direct foreign investments should not just be to the advantage of the investors and the country of origin .
It should also contribute to securing sustainable economic development in the host country .
This Parliament is the only parliament - as far as I know - to have discussed the MAI .
It is important to initiate debate in the Member States and the national parliaments about this agreement .
Madam President , the Director-General of the World Trade Organization , Renato Ruggiero , has called this agreement ' a constitution for a single global economy ' .
That gives an idea of the unprecedented consequences the MAI could have .
Who has the right to draft global constitutions ?
Of course , it is obviously the 29 richest industrialized countries in the world .
The other countries are in practice excluded , as is the intention , because when similar agreements were discussed in the WTO there was far too much opposition from other countries in the world .
The only reasonable thing , of course , would be to discuss this agreement in the UN , or possibly in the WTO , instead of in the OECD .
In the OECD countries negotiations have taken place in secret with the minimum possible parliamentary supervision .
However , the agreement is unacceptable not only because of the way it is being negotiated , but also because of its content .
The agreement gives rights to transnational companies at the expense of states .
It is totally unreasonable for companies to be given the ability through the courts to overturn democratically made decisions concerning important areas such as the environment , the management of natural resources and social conditions .
I do not like everything in this report . For example , I do not like paragraphs 7 and 8 .
However , the report does contain a lot of important criticism , not least in paragraphs 5 , 14 and 23 , which is sufficient for me to vote for it .
Madam President , all praise is certainly due to Mr Kreissl-Dörfler who had the initiative to write this excellent report .
The fact that the negotiations currently under way have given rise to such intense debate and opposing views demonstrates that a global economic issue of such vital importance needs plenty of time for exhaustive dialogue under conditions of transparency and continuous parliamentary supervision .
When the Director-General of the World Trade Organization characterizes the MAI as the constitution for a global economy , this naturally provokes justifiable concern and unease as to the likely restrictions that will be imposed on the rights of Member States in relation to national policies and , more especially , in the areas of industrial , social , environmental and cultural policy , and in the domain of intellectual ownership .
Of course , no-one can be opposed to the laying down of regulations to stimulate and safeguard foreign investments in order to prevent conditions which would distort international competition .
Nevertheless , we have every right to be puzzled by the study and by the urgent character which the issue has taken on .
We do not discern such study in relation to other serious issues which also stem from the globalization of the economy , such as labour rights , child labour , the tax position of multinationals , the protection of the environment , the promotion of viable and regionally balanced economic growth , and the preservation of cultural diversity .
Fortunately , multinational companies and international groups of enterprises already have enormous power and it is not permissible to give them any priority over national enterprises , such as the automatic right of recourse to international arbitration or the right to bypass legislation aimed at ensuring equal treatment .
Finally , I believe that the European Parliament must defend and protect its own rights and powers and those of the European Union from all attempts at curtailment through this agreement on investments .
Madam President , very simply , the European Parliament must demand the immediate rejection of the multilateral agreement on investments .
This agreement was drawn up in secrecy by large financial interests without including the national parliaments and the European Parliament and even without including the governments themselves .
It is a multi-faceted ideological assault by large multinational corporations and , as has already been said , the first step in the formation of a global government of multinationals .
Its implementation will have tragic repercussions for the peoples and economies of less developed countries .
This new manifesto of global capitalism will lead to the complete overturning of the social freedoms and labour rights of working people . Together with EMU , it will lead to a totally deregulated market where the margins for exercising national policy and the national sovereignty of Member States will shrink dramatically in favour of multinational groups , international banks and international capitalist organizations such as the International Monetary Fund , the World Bank and the OECD .
I repeat , the European Parliament makes only one demand - the rejection of the agreement . Furthermore , the amendments that have been tabled must be voted on by our Parliament .
Mr President , the compatibility of the MAI with environmental protection has not yet been sufficiently addressed by the negotiating parties .
It is of great concern .
As we move into more and more multilateral environment agreements I feel there is an increased chance of running into difficulties should the MAI , as presently formulated , come into being .
A paper from the OECD secretariat on the legal aspects has noted that : ' The absence of any evident legal incompatibility does not necessarily dispose of all concerns about the potential inter-relation between the MAI and MEAs ' .
In particular there is some concern that the transfer of clean technology agreements contained in the Kyoto Protocol to combat climate change could be at risk .
The clean development mechanism is essential to that protocol 's success and has the potential to run directly contrary to the MAI .
A binding environment clause should be included which will offer at least similar safeguards to GATT Article 20 and not prove to be an inadequate voluntary clause , such as Article 114 in the NAFTA agreement .
Furthermore , there needs to be provision for environmental reviews of all foreign investors .
Without these safeguards for sustainable development , we must have great cause for concern about the agreement at this stage .
Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the draft multilateral agreement on investments , or MAI , has been negotiated in the utmost secrecy ; it is a recognized symbol of the absolute triumph of unbridled liberalism ; and it aims to ensure the domination of multinational financial groups over nations and to support the supremacy of rich industrial countries over developing nations . Clearly this agreement is completely unacceptable as it stands today .
Consequently , without fundamentally prejudicing my final opinion , I fully agree with the call by the rapporteur , Mr Kreissl-Dörfler , and I would like to congratulate him on his work .
Yes , ladies and gentlemen , I am in favour of the rapporteur 's request to the Member States of the European Union not to sign the MAI without a broad public debate , for that is the only way to ensure the total transparency essential in this case .
Otherwise , without going into detail , I broadly agree with the questions asked and the remarks made by the rapporteur , which again prove the need for a detailed study and absolute transparency .
If by some unfortunate event the MAI were to be signed as it stands , we would no longer have any means to halt globalization in its most negative form , that is , the law of the most powerful .
I hope and believe that all the governments of the European Union will realize this .
I have one last word to say on the issue of European culture and audiovisual production .
Although I agree with the rapporteur 's fresh demand for a special exception , I would insist that it is not solely within the framework of the MAI , but has reference to GATT .
This issue is much too serious for us to give any sort of an impression of backing down , no matter how small .
Finally , I repeat once again that on this issue the European Parliament should display its avant-garde role .
I think we are in the process of doing that this evening .
Madam President , I would like to raise a few concerns I have about developing countries in relation to the MAI , particularly , as others have pointed out , that they have been excluded from the negotiations even though those negotiations have a very significant impact on them .
They also need to raise the issue of the effect of the liberalization on the ability of developing countries to adopt the poverty focused programmes which are essential to their progress .
It is also the case , as others have said , that employment , environment and labour rights need to be an integral part of the process , not bolted on as some kind of afterthought .
I am also concerned about the increased powers which MAI will give to multinationals in developing countries , where they will be given almost nation-state status within developing countries .
There is far too much emphasis on their rights rather than on their duties and responsibilities .
They contain no binding enforceable obligations for corporate conduct and the level of liberalization required would be inappropriate for developing countries .
The rules on investment should be about more than economic liberalization and should include a very clear commitment to sustainable development and to long-term quality investments .
I would like to see a substantial revision of the current proposals and a delay pending a much more inclusive process .
I would like to see a legitimate international forum where developing countries can be included and where international institutions like UNCTAD can be involved .
Only then will we be satisfied that we have a fair process in place on multilateral investments .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , may I firstly thank the Committee on External Economic Relations and its rapporteur Mr Kreissl-Dörfler for an excellent report on the negotiations on the MAI .
I would also like to thank the other committees and their rapporteurs for their efforts in preparing the present report .
This is a timely debate .
The negotiations are not completed .
The European Parliament 's decision to hold this debate has the importance that Mrs Castellina ascribed to it .
I share that view and I can also assure Mrs Schörling that we have had a real debate and that this will play an active part in the course of the negotiations .
The European Community is the biggest outward investor in the world , sending half of our investment to the OECD and half to non-OECD countries .
At the same time we are the most open to inward investors in the world .
The Community therefore has a big interest in the establishment of transparent , non-discriminatory and enforceable rules for foreign direct investment at the plurilateral as well as at the multilateral level .
That is why I very much agree with Mr Valdivielso de Cué , Mrs Baldi , Mrs Plooij-Van Gorsel and Mr Teverson , all of whom stressed the importance and potential benefit of this negotiation .
There has to be a balance between the opportunities provided for investment and also the necessity for there to be national possibilities to regulate and control certain matters .
That is what the negotiation has been about and this debate has contributed to that balance .
I can assure Mrs Plooij-Van Gorsel that this will be a negotiation in which at the end of it the EC will be a member .
In the Commission communication on a level playing field for direct investment worldwide , we made the case for starting negotiations in the OECD and launching discussions in the WTO .
Let me remind you that the Council and the European Parliament , in its resolution of December 1995 , supported this approach .
I still consider that the successful conclusion of the MAI negotiations is the best possible starting point for multilateral rule-making in the WTO in order to achieve a worldwide level playing field for FDI .
Let us not forget that it is the view of the vast majority of developing countries that it is in their interest that foreign direct investment should be encouraged and not discouraged .
Therefore a proper agreement will help them as much as it will help the investing countries .
The relation between what we are doing in the MAI negotiations and what we want to do in the WTO is the key , as Mrs Mann has rightly stated .
That relationship was something very relevant to the remarks of Mr Lannoye , Mrs Leperre-Verrier and Mrs Kinnock .
We have been very conscious of the importance of the interlocking relationship .
The MAI negotiation is one between essentially developed countries .
It is a negotiation which nobody need participate in and nobody need join and the results of which nobody need accept who is not a party to that negotiation , although it is open to them .
It is because of that and because of my view , which I very strongly hold , that to have an agreement that adequately reflects the interests of the developing countries as well as the developed ones , there should be discussions in the WTO leading to a negotiation in the WTO which will take account of the MAI negotiation but which need not be the same .
That is the best way of ensuring that the MAI does not exert unreasonable pressure on developing countries to adhere to it .
However , we have some barriers to deal with there .
So far we have only reached agreement on discussion in the WTO and the obstacle to going beyond that to a negotiation in the WTO is the fact that some developing countries have resisted that .
I hope very much therefore that those - and there are many in this House - who have an influence on the developing countries will encourage them to move to a position in which they will welcome a negotiation in the WTO as well as a negotiation in the OECD , precisely in order that the agreement which will eventually come into effect in which they can participate will be one that fully reflects their interests and that they will not simply be faced with the alternative of signing up to the MAI negotiation or not signing up to anything at all .
As it happens , I do not believe that the MAI negotiation need result in a conclusion that is inimical to the interests of developing countries .
However , I can understand their feeling that they have not been parties to that negotiation .
The best thing for them to do is to supplement the negotiation in the OECD with a negotiation in WTO as soon as possible .
The failure of the OECD negotiation will not help them because that will be used to oppose the beginning of negotiations in the WTO by people who are bound to say : ' if the developed countries cannot even reach an agreement on this , how can you expect there to be a world agreement ? '
If there is no world agreement on this , then the balance which attracts investment to developing countries , that they desperately need on the right terms , will not take place and it will be counterproductive on the part of those who seek to defend their interests to have opposed the OECD negotiation .
It is with these considerations in mind that in May 1995 negotiations in the OECD context were launched , and in December 1996 at the Singapore Ministerial Conference we achieved the setting up of a WTO Investment Working Group .
The deadline set for negotiations in the OECD to come to a conclusion is the end of April 1998 .
Anybody who has ever been involved in negotiations of this kind will know that a month and a half at the end of a negotiation is a very important and crucial time in which much can be done .
I cannot tell you whether we will reach a conclusion .
If we do , it will be much informed by what has been said today .
But I can tell you that we will only reach a conclusion if we are able to accommodate the legitimate interests of the European Union .
I agree with most , if not all , of the recommendations made in the draft resolution which is the subject of discussion today .
We agree on the need to safeguard in the MAI the right of contracting parties to take action to protect the environment , not only now but in the future .
Therefore , I have no difficulty at all with what has been said by Mrs Pollack .
In the field of labour , we think it is very important that the respect of labour standards should be protected in this negotiation .
So I agree with Mr Kreissl-Dörfler and , indeed , with Mr Habsburg-Lothringen on that .
We also insist on a provision to cover present and future policies related to European integration . That is why I welcome the words of Mr García-Margallo y Marfil , Mrs Ahern and Mrs Castellina about the importance of a regional economic integration clause which allows both for further harmonization among existing Members of the European Union and a progressive alignment on EU policy of the laws and practices of our Europe agreement partners .
I would say to Mr Falconer that this agreement - if it goes through - will reinforce the status of national contact points , and that the guidelines he referred to as being inadequate are due for review .
The draft resolution also deals extensively with the aspects of culture and intellectual property rights under the MAI , and rightly so .
I wish to say a word about that .
The objective of preserving European cultural identity through specific policy measures and actions , in particular in the audiovisual sector , is fully shared by the Commission .
I share the concerns expressed by many , especially Mr Elchlepp and Mrs Daskalaki .
Among negotiators there is now a consensus that the MAI should not undermine the GATT acquis , excluding audiovisual services , that is to say , the conclusion of the Uruguay Round .
It is only a question of exactly how that should be done .
Our view is that a general exception , which seems superficially attractive , is not the best solution .
A Europe-specific detailed reservation actually gives greater legal security for present and future policies than a one-sentence general caveat .
There is one thing I want to assure this House of beyond a doubt : I had the privilege and the honour of conducting the Uruguay Round negotiations on the part of the European Union .
On the last day of those negotiations , when the whole of the world was standing by and wanting a conclusion to those negotiations , we were under intense pressure from the United States to agree to provisions relating to audiovisual and cultural matters which would have weakened and put at risk our own audiovisual and cultural policy .
I had absolutely no hesitation in resisting that pressure and in saying that we would not agree to the whole Uruguay Round agreement if we were forced to succumb to such pressure to reach such an agreement .
And we succeeded .
It was the United States which blinked .
I can assure this House that , faced with a situation of that kind , if the European Union , through its negotiator , the Commission , was prepared to resist that pressure , do not think we are going to be so naive as to give away in the MAI negotiations what we resisted successfully in the Uruguay Round negotiations .
There is absolutely no question of that happening and any disagreement can only be about the way in which we are most effectively protected .
On IPR let me say we are still looking for a solution which would respect European and WIPO rules in the area while , on the other hand , providing value added mainly in the field of dispute settlement .
I can assure Mrs McKenna that the reservations on fisheries will be effective , but all of these issues are still under negotiation .
With political will , taking account of the points rightly raised in this House , we can reach a conclusion which will be in the interests of the European Union as a major investor outside the European Union , in the interests of the developing countries and in the interests of all the policies that we hold dear .
We shall only sign up to an agreement if we reach that .
I do not myself think that there is any necessity or value in obtaining the opinion of the European Court of Justice .
We negotiate habitually on matters of great importance , we have our legal advisers , and if every time there was a negotiation we ran to the European Court of Justice that would undermine the institutional balance .
Of course I can happily confirm , as Mr Kreissl-Dörfler invited me to do , that the Commission will recommend to the Council that if there is an agreement that the Member States and the Commission support , we will request the assent of the European Parliament before its enactment .
In presenting the MAI to the Council I can assure Mr García-Margallo y Marfil that the Commission will analyse the compatibility of this agreement with the important international agreements to which we are a party , including multilateral , environmental and social agreements , and with our own legislation and policies in areas such as fisheries , transport and development , as well as with the European Community Treaty itself .
But at this stage I do not see any incompatibilities and in the continuation of the negotiations we will ensure that this remains the case .
At the present stage the negotiations are in a difficult phase .
Our American partners have indicated that given the need for continued negotiations on a number of crucial issues they think that the April deadline cannot be met .
They tell us that they are not in a position to suggest an alternative date for conclusion of the MAI .
That sends a bad signal concerning our determination to hold the OECD countries to their current economic policy course despite the recent crises in , notably , Asia , and to respond to the challenges of globalization by enhancing the present open system for trade and investment .
We cannot accept the American announcement as a fait accompli .
In the period ahead important progress can be made if the political will is there .
It will then be for ministers to decide on the fate of the MAI reflecting the wishes of democratically elected governments .
It is now up to us to test in the weeks to come if the political will is there .
We are determined to do everything we can to achieve a successful conclusion of the negotiations , but an agreement at any price is not what we are looking for .
It is also important to stress the need to find a suitable arrangement with the United States inside and outside the MAI , to deal with the problem of extraterritorial legislation which Mr Souchet referred to in general and the Helms-Burton Act and ILSA in particular .
The OECD ministerial meeting to be held at the end of April has to set out the course .
We will seek to make substantial progress between now and that date .
In the meantime the Community and its Member States have a clear interest in having an MAI that protects our interests , protects the interests of developing countries and secures our ability to continue with the policies which we hold dear .
We shall seek to achieve that ; we shall not yield to any seeking to destroy our interests .
If we proceed boldly but coolly , ready to defend our interests but also recognizing that the right kind of MAI on the right conditions is in the interests of the European Union , then we shall be doing something that reflects the will of the peoples of Europe .
I asked a very specific question .
I asked Sir Leon Brittan to shed some light on the procedure because there might be a conflict of interest between the European Communities and the Member States that want to become partners .
I would like to know about a decision procedure .
Will there be unanimity in the Council on this before signing , or is it possible that there is ...
( The President cut off the speaker )
I thought I had answered the question .
There has to be unanimous support of the Member States and there has to be assent given by this Parliament , as I said in my speech .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 11.30 a.m.
Question Time ( Commission )
Ladies and gentlemen , we are now going to begin questions to the Commission , 35 minutes later than stated in the agenda .
Please excuse this delay , which is not my fault .
I have spoken about it with the President , and I hope that in future we will be able to take appropriate measures in order to keep to the timetables set by our agendas .
Mr McMahon requests the floor on a point of order .
I raised a question this morning about my own question which I submitted about the NUTS nomenclature and eligibility for a designation under the various funds .
As you well know , I take Question Time very seriously .
I saw that Commissioner Wulf-Mathies was down to answer regional and structural fund questions this week , so I decided to table this question .
Unfortunately it appears to have been tabled at the end , under ' other Questions ' .
It should be in its rightful place .
The then President undertook to find out from the service what had happened .
Could you give me an answer , please ?
Mr McMahon , I was present myself this morning when you raised that question , and in accordance with Parliament 's services , we contacted the Commission .
I should remind you that the Commission is responsible for deciding which Commissioner replies to a given question .
The Commission explained to us that your Question No 102 is a matter for Mr de Silguy , since it concerns Eurostat figures .
So it does not fall into Mrs Wulf-Mathies ' remit .
The next item is questions to the Commission ( B4-0260 / 98 ) .
The 1993 structural funds reform incorporated equal opportunities for men and women on the labour market as a policy goal , and equal opportunities in the Social Fund is defined in Art. 1 ( 1 ) ( d ) as a specific priority .
Member States have chosen to implement this priority of the present ESF regulation with a dual approach .
The majority have adopted specific equal opportunities programmes whereas the Nordic countries and the United Kingdom are using a mainstreaming approach .
Even though approaches differ the measures undertaken are very similar : promotion of greater participation of women in fields where they are under-represented , training and vocational training of unemployed women and women returners and the promotion of female entrepreneurship and other related measures .
In the preparation of the new draft general structural fund regulations one of the goals is to reduce existing disparities and to promote equal participation of women and men in economic and social activity through a mainstreaming approach .
The intention is to have the mainstreaming strategy permeate the whole implementation process from the programming phase right through to reporting .
At all phases and levels of decision-making the aim is to have a ) balanced participation of women and men and b ) a partnership which includes representatives of competent authorities and bodies in the field of equality between women and men .
It is foreseen that the European Social Fund activity will be based on five policy fields : active labour market policy , promotion of social inclusion , lifelong learning , anticipation and facilitating economic and social change and equal opportunities for men and women .
In addition to the specific equal opportunities priority in the social fund regulation it is intended to implement the mainstreaming approach through all policy fields and to build on actual experience in the regional and local development context including local employment initiatives and territorial employment pacts .
I hope that a clear message in favour of positive action will be given in the new regulation .
Finally , I should remind the honourable Member that the employment guidelines which were adopted at the special job summit in Luxembourg last November are constructed around four pillars and one of these is strengthening the policies for equal opportunities .
In this connection Member States are required to take measures which will reduce the gender gap in unemployment as well as in occupational segregation , to raise the levels of care services which very often represent a key barrier for women who would like to return to work and to facilitate the return process .
The Commission expects that particular attention will be paid to these guidelines in the action plans which are being prepared by the Member States just now and which will be presented at the Cardiff European Council in June .
Commissioner , my precise reason for asking this question is my wish to see women become the subject and the main object of the new employment policies . So thank you for your magnificent reply , which was so thorough and encouraging .
I would just like to ask if you really believe these benefits are going to reach all Europe 's women , even in Granada . Also , financially speaking , what is the exact amount involved ?
I should also like to know if these benefits are going to reach the places where women most need them .
Lastly , are efforts going to be made to ensure that there are more programmes , and that they are better funded in those places where there is most male chauvinism ?
Thank you for your question , Mrs Izquierdo Rojo , and for keeping to time .
Mr Flynn has the floor to answer the supplementary question which , as you will have realized , mentioned the women of Granada .
I do not know whether you are familiar with Granada , Mr Flynn , but if not I recommend that you visit that magnificent city .
I take up your invitation Mr President and I should look forward to the visit very much .
I have been there on a few occasions privately but perhaps I can go on an official visit and I am grateful for your interest .
I should like to say to the honourable Member that I am not just full of hope but I am full of expectation as well , and of course you will appreciate that all these changes will depend on the programmes that are submitted from the Member States when they look for assistance insofar as the promotion of equal opportunities are concerned .
Bear one thing in mind : it is a Treaty obligation , and since the job summit all the Prime Ministers and the Presidents of the 15 Member States have signed a personal commitment to advance equal opportunities and to provide specific activities to deal with this .
I will be particularly interested in what the social fund does because I foresee a framework there that will provide employment aids and aids for the self-employed .
It will develop new sources of employment and will give assistance in the provision of services for beneficiaries .
Here I am talking about care services which I think you will agree with me are very often a fundamental matter in accommodating women returning to work .
I look forward with quite a lot of expectation following the commitments of the job summit .
Commissioner , the autonomous region of Valencia has Objective 1 status but it has still not been decided if it will retain that status , because it is a few points above or below the figure of 75 % of Community income .
Of course , unemployment certainly is above average , and not just the Community average but the Spanish average too .
That , in its turn , is twice the European figure , or three times in the case of women .
Given that employment is a priority objective in all the European regions , and that training and new jobs are both absolutely essential , especially for the women who make up 30 % of the unemployed in the Valencian Community , does the Commission think that region should retain its Objective 1 status ?
Very briefly I should just say to the honourable Member that Valencia does have certain particular problems .
A decision has not yet been taken concerning the particular areas that will qualify for Objective 1 under the new tranche from the year 2000-2006 .
That will all have to be negotiated between now and some time early next year .
I would like to point out that the regulations that will apply to the structural funds will be up for approval before the Commission on 18 March and after that we will see how things progress .
Thank you , Mr Flynn , for your presence here today , for your answers , and for having accepted the suggestions that you visit the two lovely Spanish cities of Granada and Valencia - for different reasons , but both very interesting .
Question No 42 by John McCartin ( H-0176 / 98 )
Subject : Beef market
The five main supermarkets in Britain have monopoly control over the sale of meat ; they have over 80 % of the total market .
Can the Commission prevent these retailers using their market domination in an anti-competitive manner by excluding Irish beef from their outlets ?
The retail market for meat in Britain contains a number of supermarkets with significant market shares but the Commission has no information to the effect that they are collectively or individually in a position to dominate the market .
Currently we do not have sufficient concrete information to make an assessment of the situation on the market .
Commission services are currently trying to verify reports that Irish beef has been excluded from supermarkets and find out , if it is the case , whether the exclusion is due to restrictive practices or for other reasons . If the Member or anybody else has relevant information the Commission would be interested in receiving it .
I understand there is plenty of information that some supermarket chains in the UK have publicly declared that they have excluded Irish beef from their shelves for the moment .
In those circumstances , I understand , considering that this is a market which has traditionally been supplied with Irish beef , that this is a deliberate discriminatory act which has been declared and confessed by the people concerned .
I would like to ask the Commissioner - assuming that he can verify that - if he has the power to prosecute the people in question for this declared and confessed discrimination .
We will have to look into the facts .
Much will depend on whether the exclusion is due to restrictive practice or whether it is a unilateral exclusion .
So I cannot really say whether anything can be done , and whether anything should be done , until further information is obtained and analysed .
Question No 43 by Simon Murphy ( H-0192 / 98 )
Subject : Sport and Alcohol Sponsorship
Following recent speculation in the British press , will the Commission confirm whether the Green Paper on commercial communications in the internal market will result in an imminent decision on sport and alcohol sponsorship within the EU ?
What are the Commission 's plans regarding the future of drinks advertising in the EU , especially in view of the French which limits alcohol sponsorship and has resulted in the effective banning in France of the retransmission of televised sporting events benefiting from alcohol advertising / sponsorship in other countries ?
The honourable Member refers to recent press articles which have speculated that the Green Paper on commercial communications in the internal market will result in an imminent decision on sports sponsorship by the alcohol industry in the EU .
That is not the case : the Green Paper , whose proposals were adopted on 4 March , sets out a methodology to assess whether the effects of restrictions on crossborder commercial communications are proportional to the public-interest objectives that such measures are intended to achieve .
The communication has also established an expert group of Member State representatives to examine the differences in national regulations with a view to exploring the scope for agreement on mutual recognition in this field .
The communication sets up a framework where the issue that the honourable Member has raised could be discussed openly in order to resolve internal-market problems that may arise .
The press are confusing this consultative exercise with an infringement case that the honourable parliamentarian has referred to against a provision of the French loi Evin .
This provision bans TV transmissions by French broadcasters of certain sports events held outside France , but mainly of interest to the French public , which are sponsored by alcoholic beverage producers .
This restriction on retransmissions has led to sports bodies in other Member States breaking their sponsorship contracts with alcohol beverage producers , for fear of having their events not transmitted in France , and therefore losing their TV rights .
The Commission sent out a reasoned opinion in 1996 underlining its doubts as to the proportionality of this restriction , and is currently discussing the issue with the French authorities .
I would stress that , in this case , the Commission is not contesting the loi Evin as such , but the consequences of the application of the law on televised events held outside France .
The Commission seeks to ensure the highest level of public health protection and to that end is taking the utmost care in assessing the proportionality of this restriction .
With regard to our willingness to take harmonizing measures in this field , that will depend on the outcome of the investigations .
It would be in our power to propose such measures but , at this point , we have no intention of doing so .
I have no further question , other than to thank the Commissioner for that very clear and straightforward answer .
We look forward to developments in the future .
I want to ask you whether you do not agree with me that what we have here in relation to the loi Evin in France is in Europe what we are protesting against over the laws which are blocking trade with Cuba .
In other words , this is an international intervention which has no justification whatsoever , and we would weaken our position if we really carried this out within Europe .
We could no longer be fighting against the American legislation on international trade .
I certainly agree that in considering what we are saying about what other people outside the European Union do we should be very careful to ensure that we are consistent in not objecting to what happens outside the European Union and not at the same time objecting to anything similar within the European Union .
I have already mentioned that the Commission sent out a reasoned opinion in 1996 underlining its doubts as to the proportionality of the restriction in the loi Evin and to go further than that would go as far as I am tempted to go but further than I would be wise to go .
Like the speaker , Sir Leon , I am pleased with the statement published last week on commercial communication .
In view of the fact that the many recent complaints , particularly on the loi Evin , have not been dealt with seriously , my question is whether it was President Santer 's office or the President himself who considered it necessary to wait until the statement came out . Also , will the expert group which is soon to be set up investigate the complaints thoroughly ?
Could you give this Parliament and me some more information about the various positions within the Commission on the treatment of the complaints we have before us ?
It would not be normal to give details of every kind of discussion that takes place within the Commission , apart from the fact that I am not aware of them all .
But the normal position is this : you send out a reasoned opinion expressing doubts as to the legality of what has been done and you then engage in discussions with the French authorities if they are prepared to do so , which they are , and that is currently the stage that we have got to .
I am not able to go beyond that .
Question No 44 by Graham Watson ( H-0257 / 98 )
Subject : Ticket allocation for the 1998 Football World Cup
Following the request made to the French World Cup organizing authorities by the European Commission to recast its ticket allocation for World Cup football matches , will the Commission make a statement on the steps taken by the CFO ?
Does the Commission believe these steps bring the ticket allocation system into compliance with Community competition law ?
The Commission wrote to the World Cup Organizing Committee on 20 February outlining its objections to the current ticketing policy and asking the committee , within two weeks of its receipt of the letter , to inform the Commission of the steps which it proposed to take to ensure that its system of ticket distribution did not discriminate against football supporters resident outside France .
This request followed a preliminary assessment of the current ticketing arrangements , which led the Commission to believe that the organizing committee might be abusing a dominant position on the World Cup ticketing market , contrary to Article 86 of the EC Treaty .
The Commission met the organizing committee on Thursday , 5 March to discuss its concerns over the current ticketing arrangements , and , in particular , the CFO rule which requires all those wishing to purchase tickets directly from the CFO to provide an address in France to which the tickets can be sent .
Does this mean that the Commission will take no action to forbid the issue of tickets which have already been sold , even though many of these tickets have not yet been issued but merely applied for ?
Can the Commissioner guarantee that if the Treaties have been infringed , then formal infringement procedures will be initiated ?
Or is the Commission seeking merely a sop to football fans stitched up with the CFO in a cosy compact in the changing rooms ?
I do not envisage anything cosy of the kind that the honourable Member describes .
If there has been a breach of the law then action will be taken unless that breach is put right in a very specific way .
That will be the position of the Commission .
As I have said , there were discussions as recently as last Thursday .
I cannot give a specific answer to the point the honourable Member has made because , in fact , the outcome of those discussions is being considered and my colleague will be making a statement in a debate on Thursday at which I have little doubt he will convey the outcome of the meeting , the conclusions the Commission has drawn and the action that has been taken .
With the situation as the Commissioner has described and the restrictions it places on the distribution of tickets , there will undoubtedly be people who will look for a way round it .
Has the Commission had any communications with the French authorities to look at the potential for problems when it comes to the resale of tickets ?
There will always be legitimate travel companies who , one way or another , get hold of tickets and start offering alternative packages but there will also be ticket touts who will get hold of tickets and be reselling them at inflated prices .
This could create massive problems from the point of view of policing , from balance and the whole potential for crowd problems .
It could throw the whole scheme into disarray .
It might create a very free market , which I am sure the Commissioner would support , but it will be one that could lead to problems .
Has there been any contact with the French authorities regarding this ?
I am sorry that I cannot give a definitive answer as to exactly what is happening .
I can assure the honourable Member that as a result of the discussions that took place last Thursday , the whole issue is being looked at .
The Commission will certainly not agree to any solution which permits very obvious abuses and can be got round in a very easy way .
Those considering these matters have adequate knowledge of what people might get up to not to be fobbed off by a solution which has obvious holes .
Question No 45 by Gary Titley ( H-0229 / 98 )
Subject : Anti-dumping duties
In view of the repeated anti-dumping complaints by Eurocoton , does the Commission intend to revise its procedures so that serial complaints will no longer be possible ?
The current Eurocoton complaint followed the rejection by the Council of the Commission 's proposal for definitive anti-dumping duties on unbleached cotton fabrics in May 1997 .
This complaint also concerned unbleached cotton fabrics but , unlike the old proceeding , it was based on evidence of dumping and injury in a different time period .
Following receipt of the new complaint the Commission examined whether it was lodged by a sufficiently representative proportion of Community producers and whether it contained prima facie evidence of dumping and resulting injury .
Since these requirements were met the Commission decided to open a new investigation on 11 July 1997 as it was obliged to do under EU anti-dumping legislation which is in conformity with WTO rules .
Consecutive anti-dumping complaints are extremely rare .
Grey cotton fabrics is the only case in the history of the EU anti-dumping regulation where a second complaint was lodged after the rejection of a Commission proposal by the Council .
In these circumstances the Commission has not yet formed a view as to whether a legislative change that would prevent consecutive complaints is warranted .
In order to investigate anti-dumping complaints , the Commission has to come to a view on whether there is injury to the European Community cause .
Is it not the case that serial anti-dumping complaints are themselves damaging to the Community interest given the cost of dealing with the investigations , given the uncertainties which companies are then placed under , which makes it very difficult to engage in any sort of forward planning ?
Does the Commission accept that serial complaints are themselves injurious to the Community interest ?
Does he have a view as to whether serial complaints are fundamentally undermining the EU 's commitments to the World Trade Organisation , given that they can be seen to represent trade harassment of importing countries ?
I certainly accept that any complaint that is made imposes a burden on the interested parties but I do not accept that the receipt of a second or a third complaint is contrary to the rules of the WTO .
I am a bit reluctant to regard the lodging of a complaint as something that itself should be looked at in the context of Community interests .
But I assure the honourable Member that in the case of this complaint the whole question of Community interests and the balancing of any Community interests - in an opposite sense compared to the damage done to the producers who have made the complaint - is something that will be looked into and has been very fully looked into .
I tabled a question on this and it did not come up in today 's session .
I would like to follow up on Mr Titley 's question .
In the light of tomorrow 's debate on the competitiveness of the EU industries generally and Commissioner Bangemann 's action plan on the competitiveness of the European textile industry , would you not agree that Eurocoton 's complaint belongs to the past for our industries ?
Does the Commissioner not accept that the Community interest is not served , nor is the competitiveness of the EU textile industry served , by the imposition of such duties ?
Indeed we already have evidence that this will lead to job losses not only in the finishing sector but also in increased imports of finished goods at the end of the day .
Therefore , I ask you , Commissioner , what proposals will you make to the Council of Ministers and to the expert group for enhancing and strengthening Community interest in this area ?
Will you be making a strong case for Community interests ?
Are you prepared to put forward proposals in this area in future ?
In terms of representation , 30 companies producing cotton are not representative of the whole of the EU textile industry .
There is really no mystery about this .
We have looked to see if there has been dumping or injury - and we all know to whom injury is alleged to have been done .
Against that we have balanced all the points made by another section of European industry that says that injury would be suffered if there were anti-dumping measures taken .
Indeed , it has said that the net effect of the measures would be beneficial to the European economy as a whole .
That is a legitimate argument .
There is a procedure for considering it .
It is important that the question of Community interest should be considered properly .
We have done so in this case .
I am not in a position to announce a final outcome yet but I can assure the honourable Member that all the points she has raised have been taken very fully into consideration .
I have received complaints against the anti-dumping measures .
They have been from small companies who feel they are going to be very severely disadvantaged if they are no longer able to import the cotton .
I would like to ask : are not both developing countries and some small companies who depend on imported cotton being disadvantaged very considerably ?
When you are looking at the balance of interest , you take on board those issues as well .
In the answers you have already given , you have given some indication of that .
I am very grateful for what the honourable Member has said about my initial response .
It is very difficult .
There is no doubt at all that there are people within the European Union who complain that they are suffering from dumping and there are others who complain that they would suffer even more if anti-dumping measures were taken .
So , leaving aside anybody outside the European Union , we have to balance those interests .
That is why this has proved to be one of the most difficult and controversial cases we have had to deal with .
I am sorry I cannot say just at the moment where it is all going to end but I can say that I have been personally involved in a serious examination of the arguments that everybody has put forward - the producers outside the European Union and those represented by the honourable lady .
It is impossible to please everybody .
Therefore , the only thing to do is to try to be fair and that is what we shall try to do .
Question No 46 by Inger Schörling ( H-0007 / 98 )
Subject : Salmonella
Salmonella-infected products may be sent back to the country of shipment provided prior authorization is obtained from the competent authorities of that country .
It seems peculiar that the competent authorities in the country of shipment must grant authorization for the contaminated meat to be returned when it should be the supplier 's responsibility to take back such consignments while the relevant authorities are informed .
The background to my question is that inspections of meat imported into Sweden have revealed far too many cases of salmonella , despite all the certification from the country of shipment being present and correct .
This gives rise to complications , not only for people who consume the contaminated meat but also for importers and retailers who , apart from the financial implications , are also embroiled in bureaucracy .
A question of interpretation has also arisen as to who should be considered to have handled the product first ?
Is it the importer , the distributor or another party ?
Is it possible for the competent authorities in the country of shipment not to authorize the return of contaminated meat ?
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , Mrs Schörling 's questions relate to Article 7 of Council Directive 98 / 662 of 11 December 1989 on Arrangements for veterinary checks on intra-Community trade with regard to the single market , with particular reference to the checks to be carried out at the relevant destination .
It is necessary to distinguish between two different scenarios in this context : in more serious cases the consignment delivered must be safely disposed of or treated in accordance with the relevant Community rules to eliminate any further risk .
In other , less serious cases , the appropriate authorities in the country of destination can give the shipper or the shipper 's authorized agent two options , depending on the animal health and sanitary conditions . The first is to safely dispose of the goods and the second is to use the goods in some other way , including the option of sending the goods back , subject to permission from the appropriate authorities in the country where the production unit of origin is located .
This permission from the authorities in the country of dispatch was regarded as essential for these authorities to confirm the whereabouts of the contaminated consignment and ultimately prevent its being placed on the market .
If the check is carried out at a later stage in the marketing chain , and the result is unfavourable , the relevant national regulations apply .
For products originating from another Member State , the same regulations apply as for products originating in the Member State concerned .
When Sweden became a Member of the EU we were given a unique derogation because we do not have any salmonella in Sweden .
The derogation was that all meat imports from other EU countries should be accompanied by a certificate to say that the consignment of meat was free of salmonella .
It now appears that this was much more complicated than our authorities ever thought because , among other things , it appears that many of the certificates are false or incorrect .
No less than 25 % of all beef , pig-meat and poultry consignments have incomplete certificates , and 20 % of the meat consignments which have the correct certificates prove to be contaminated with salmonella .
No less than 85 % of the tests on poultry from France showed that the meat was contaminated .
So you will understand that this is not a question of having to deal with a few small consignments .
Another problem is that people do not know and cannot figure out who is responsible .
I think the Commission is responsible for ensuring that the derogation Sweden has received works .
I do not think Commissioner Fischler 's answer really explained things , although I am certainly grateful for it .
I would therefore like to hear a bit more about how the Commissioner thought this would work .
Mr President , Mrs Schörling , first of all I can confirm that Sweden was indeed granted derogations as part of its accession to the European Community .
In accordance with these derogations - and this also applies to Finland by the way - Sweden can apply special guarantees to various products , namely fresh meat , eggs and poultry meat , as the Commission authorized operational programmes for combatting salmonella submitted by Sweden .
The Commission approved these programmes in its 1995 decision .
We will be coming back to the subject of checking in the next question , but the essential point is that a procedure certainly exists under which countries of dispatch are responsible , as the Commission cannot check every consignment shipped from every Member State on the spot .
The Commission can only ensure that appropriate rules exist .
The Member State concerned is of course then required to ensure that these rules are observed .
Commissioner , today the Commission has been presented with questions on contamination , meat hygiene , BSE , brown rot , and so on .
I want to point out to the Commissioner that the FAO has called on the European Union to increase and strengthen its prevention and monitoring systems for the transformation and transmission of diseases in the area of agricultural health .
Also , there are eleven central and eastern European countries at our door , and as things stand , their safeguards in that area are dubious , to say the least .
In order to guarantee the health of consumers and of our agricultural producers in the face of this worrying situation , I want to ask the Commissioner what measures the Commission is taking to ensure that Member States comply with this legislation - since there is plenty of legislation - in matters of both veterinary and phytosanitary health . Also , are the same measures going to be demanded of third countries and other countries ?
Mr President , I am pleased to answer this question because it leads on to the Commission 's general policy in this area .
As you will probably know , we have started to review the whole area of meat hygiene and all legislation in this field . Our goal in doing so is as follows : on the one hand , we want to establish clear Community rules governing checks necessary from the beginning of the production chain for a foodstuff right to the consumer 's table .
But in doing so , we want to break new ground with the HACCP system .
Under this system , private processing companies are involved in the actual checking work , while they in turn are subject to checks by the appropriate authorities , so that the checking work stipulated is also monitored .
This is the approach on which the FAO has agreed .
It is an approach supported by the World Health Organization and I think that we are definitely on the right track here .
Of course we must ensure that the requirements we are imposing on our own farms and factories also apply to third countries , so that exactly the same criteria are applicable to imports .
For example , exactly the same system will be required for imports under the bilateral agreement currently being discussed with the USA .
I would like to ask Commissioner Fischler what advice he has to give to a Member State if the certificates continue to be inaccurate in future , and if in future meat contaminated with salmonella also enters the country , in this case Sweden .
Is it not the case that it should be every country 's natural right to be able to protect itself against products which are harmful to health ?
What advice does the Commissioner therefore have to offer to Sweden if these inaccurate certificates and contaminated products continue to enter the country ?
As I have already explained , special arrangements are in place to prevent shipments of meat which do not conform with the special standards applying to Sweden and Finland .
If shortcomings are discovered when these arrangements are implemented in practice , that is if checks reveal that the consignments being shipped do not comply with the requirements of the directives , it is then open to the country of destination to destroy the consignment in serious cases , or in other cases to decide on an appropriate course of action after contacting the country of origin . The outcome may once again be destruction , or alternatively sending the consignment back .
With regard to shortcomings which have actually been discovered , especially in shipments of poultry from one Member State in particular , consultation involving that Member State and the Swedish government is currently in progress , and it is hoped that this consultation will yield agreement on how such shortcomings can be avoided in future .
The parties concerned are expected to reach final agreement on this in the near future .
Question No 47 by Sören Wibe ( H-0210 / 98 )
Subject : Salmonella inspections
Since joining the EU , Sweden has discovered on several occasions that meat imported from other EU countries has been contaminated with salmonella despite the existence of a certificate from the exporting country stating that the consignment in question was salmonella-free .
In reply to a written question by myself ( P-3933 / 97 ) the Commission stated ( 19 January 1998 ) that this may be due , among other things , to cases of manipulation or incompatibility between different inspection techniques .
Is the Commission here seeking to indicate that there are shortcomings in Sweden 's inspection arrangements or is it confident that the Swedish tests are entirely accurate ?
Furthermore , has it analysed this question ( i.e. the problems of salmonella infection in meat imported into Sweden ) and reached any result ?
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , Mr Wibe has asked for more detail in my reply about certain aspects of Written Question No 3933 .
These issues , like the question just asked by Mrs Schörling , relate to the broader subject of compliance with the additional guarantees given for salmonella in meat during Sweden 's and Finland 's accession .
I would first like to describe the checking regime established by the Swedish authorities for imported meat .
According to our information , meat imported into Sweden from another Member State is checked by the recipient under a self-checking regime .
Any irregularities in certification are reported to the appropriate authorities .
The consignments concerned are then officially tested by a laboratory authorized to test for salmonella .
These tests are quite separate from the routine tests which producers and the appropriate local authorities themselves carry out .
The sampling method used in all these tests is that prescribed by EU regulations .
The Swedish authorities have used their own analysis method , known as the Nordic method , whereas the other Member States use the ISO method for checks in the country of origin , as stipulated in the EU regulations .
Furthermore , the Swedish authorities carried out special monitoring on a trial basis between 1 March and 1 September 1997 , in order to check that the supplementary guarantee regime was being correctly applied .
In all , 569 consignments were tested and salmonellae were found in twelve .
In addition , according to our information the problems , that is the detection of salmonellae , were mainly with poultry meat , to be specific poultry meat from a particular Member State .
In such cases Article 8 of the 1989 directive applies . This stipulates that as a first step bilateral discussions such as I have already described must take place between the Member States involved , and these discussions are currently under way .
As also stipulated in the directive , the Commission is awaiting the outcome of these discussions before taking any further steps .
With regard to analysis methods , the Council committees responsible are now considering whether the ' Nordic method ' can be recognized alongside the ISO method as a reference method , with the objective of allowing the Nordic method to be used throughout the European Union as a second routine method .
We have just discussed this in the previous question , so perhaps not so many comments are needed .
It is clear , Mr Commissioner , that in this area we have two different methods .
In the same consignment using the Swedish method we find salmonella bacteria , while using the other method we do not find any salmonella bacteria .
Now there are a hundred different ways to make a mistake and not find bacteria where there are bacteria , but there is no way to find bacteria where there are no bacteria .
In this case these results must clearly point to the fact that of these two methods the Nordic method is superior , because when it is used people clearly find bacteria when the other method fails .
I interpret the end of your reply to mean that you will also use the Nordic method as a routine measure and that it will at least be given equal status with the current method used under the relevant EU directive .
Is that a correct understanding of your reply ?
Let me just explain again exactly what we have in mind and what is now happening in the Council committee responsible . Firstly , under the present system the reference method for the European Union is the ISO method .
Secondly , the Nordic method has up to now been used in Sweden , and Sweden wants this system to be recognized as a reference method as well .
There are no doubt certain differences between these two methods , and the aim is to take account of this so that the Nordic method will also be a valid reference method in future .
That is the objective .
However , as that is a Council requirement , or rather as it is stipulated in the regime adopted by Council , the Council must consider whether to accept this .
Until it has done so , should there be any disagreement , that is if a genuine legal dispute should arise , the present directive will apply , and the ISO reference method will prevail .
Question No 48 by Mark Watts ( H-0032 / 98 )
Subject : Reform of the common agricultural policy and farm animal welfare
Is the Commission in favour of including the need to ensure high standards of health and welfare for farm animals among the principal objectives of a reformed common agricultural policy ?
Is it also in favour of reforms to encourage mixed farming which will lead to more animals being kept outdoors or , because straw is available from the crops , in good straw-based indoor housing , and reforms to the beef and dairy regimes to discourage over-production of cattle , thereby allowing the European Union to abandon schemes designed to dispose of surplus animals , such as the calf processing aid scheme and export refunds on the export of live cattle to third countries , schemes which are both expensive and cause widespread animal suffering , and reforms to the dairy regime which discourage the pursuit of ever higher yields per cow which lead to serious animal welfare problems ?
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I would first like to emphasise that the Commission intends to take the Protocol on protection and welfare of animals annexed to the Treaty of Amsterdam very seriously .
According to this protocol , and I quote , ' in formulating and implementing the Community 's agriculture , transport , internal market and research policies , the Community and the Member States shall pay full regard to the welfare requirements of animals ' .
Of course this protocol also has implications for the future development of the common agricultural policy .
The most important agricultural policy objectives are , first , to ensure that agricultural production reflects the wishes and requirements of consumers , and , second , to increase the competitiveness of European producers on international markets as well .
The approach set out in Agenda 2000 in July last year specified that the Commission wishes to improve the competitiveness of European agriculture both within the internal market and on the international market , whilst preventing the formation of new surpluses like the butter or grain mountains of the past .
Not only does the Commission propose a reorientation of the CAP with less focus on price support and more on direct income support , it also anticipates that production will in future be geared more to consumer demand , both quantitatively and qualitatively .
This should prevent new surpluses from accumulating and it should therefore also eliminate the need to export surplus beef .
But market orientation is not just about price .
It is equally important for consumers that food should be wholesome and of good quality , and that its origin should be clear .
Animal health and welfare naturally have a part to play here .
We therefore proposed in Agenda 2000 , as part of a new policy for rural areas , that there should be more funds for agroenvironmental measures as a second arm of agricultural policy , and also more funds for animal welfare .
We hope that this policy too will have a positive effect .
However , please bear in mind that the Community has already adopted a panoply of animal protection and animal welfare measures , and that the European Union is undeniably doing a good job in this area by international standards .
These rules are subject to constant monitoring and will be developed further if necessary .
Regarding transport , measures in this area are concentrated more on improving transport conditions and less on a complete ban on transportation , as transport will always be necessary , whatever happens .
With a view to improving animal protection for cattle exports , the Council recently approved a proposal which will make the payment of export refunds conditional on compliance with EU animal protection and transport rules .
The Management Committee on Trade Mechanisms recently approved the corresponding implementing Regulation , so we can now adopt that Regulation .
I wish to begin by welcoming the Commissioner 's clear commitment to taking the protocol very seriously .
I genuinely thank him for that .
Secondly , by way of example , perhaps he could comment on whether he would be willing to contemplate schemes to help intensive pig or poultry producers to switch from current intensive methods to extensive methods in the future .
Would he envisage such a scheme under his reform proposals for the CAP ?
Finally , whilst I understand what he says about high standards of animal welfare already being regulated by EU legislation , this is not always enforced , as he is aware .
I give you one example : on 7 April this year we fear that in the Eid-El-Kabir in France the French authorities will not be enforcing the animal welfare regulations he quite rightly points to .
It is all very well having these regulations but we must surely all work together to ensure they are complied with .
As Mr Watts said himself , there are two parts to his question .
Firstly , under the new rural development policy package , investment aid for agricultural holdings will be linked to certain conditions .
In the two instances you mentioned it will in any case be necessary to observe the relevant minimum animal welfare standards when building new poultry or pig housing or converting old housing .
Secondly , farmers prepared to convert their existing livestock housing or build new housing in such a way as to appreciably improve animal welfare , will receive more investment support than others .
Turning to the question of poultry housing in general , a proposal will be presented to the Commission tomorrow in which we report on experience to date with poultry cages and provide for a whole series of measures for improving poultry housing . However , these measures will also have to apply to third countries , because we cannot accept a situation in which we honourably stick to worthy rules and create good conditions , only to find our producers competing with importers producing under quite different and far worse conditions .
Commissioner , in relation to your answer on animal welfare , which you yourself consider to be closely linked to animal health , I would like to ask whether the Commission does not think it would be a good thing - and necessary - to also extend the measures to protect animal welfare ( and therefore animal health ) to the process by which animals arrive at the slaughterhouse , when it is necessary to observe appropriate hygiene .
That would contribute greatly to improving animal health and improving the quality of the hides and therefore , I would say , is the first link in that chain you mentioned in your reply to Mrs Redondo Jiménez .
The hide is the first link and , at the same time , its quality is essential to the tanners .
Thank you , Mrs Ferrer .
Allow me to congratulate you on the skilful way you expressed your question .
You have the floor , Mr Fischler , to reply to Mrs Ferrer 's clever supplementary question .
Mrs Ferrer , this issue not only relates to your actual question , it also goes somewhat further .
Firstly , I would like to comment that the developments we are aiming at , and in particular our proposals for reform , should mean that the repeated accusations that we subsidize exports of live cattle to foreign abattoirs will certainly not be true .
The transport subsidy element has already been eliminated , and there is already a lower subsidy per animal for livestock than for meat export , so that only 10 % of total exports are now in the form of livestock .
This will apply even more so in the future , and the reduction in price guarantees in particular will enable us virtually to eliminate export subsidies for livestock .
However , to return to your more specific question about the condition of animals when they arrive at abattoirs , it is certainly not true that all animals reach abattoirs in poor condition .
Above all , it would not be in the interest of those doing the marketing , as you are quite right in saying that quality suffers when animals arrive in a poor state .
What interest could marketers possibly have in paying a higher price for poorer quality when animals are delivered ?
On the other hand , it is true that a number of cases of disease transfer were reported recently in circumstances suggesting that inadequate hygiene was to blame .
In order to tackle this problem , the Commission - having taken advice from the relevant scientific committees - has decided to amend Directive 433 so as to minimize the risk of contamination of animals on arrival at abattoirs .
A proposal to this effect is currently being considered at Commission level .
Since we have now used up the time assigned to Mr Fischler 's block of questions , Questions Nos 49 to 61 will be dealt with in writing .

Mr President , Miss McIntosh , in Agenda 2000 , the Commission suggested cutting the number of objectives for Community initiatives and concentrating measures on transnational areas of Community interest , with the aim of preserving or enhancing their innovative character , the value added by the Community , and the role of partnerships .
Three fields were chosen : cross-border , transnational and interregional cooperation ; rural development ; and human resources , paying special attention to equal opportunities .
The fact that the Commission has not proposed any new initiative in favour of areas particularly affected by the decline of the armaments industry and the pruning of military bases does not mean that these areas are not to receive support as a matter of principle .
In fact there is continued scope for assistance under Objective 1 , Objective 2 and Objective 3 , as well as under the proposed new Community initiatives I have just mentioned .
Outside the targeted areas , measures for adapting and modernizing education , training and employment systems with a view to improving competitiveness and cushioning socio-economic change are also eligible under the new Objective III .
While I thank the Commissioner for that response , I have to say I am deeply disappointed .
In areas like Essex , Suffolk , Yorkshire and Cumbria , substantial job losses through the peace dividend have been suffered in defencerelated industries .
In particular , if you were to take two towns - Witham and Chelmsford - where the companies of Marconi and EEV operate , the substantial reduction to the workforce is quite worrying .
What assurance can the Commissioner give me tonight that areas like these , where they have benefited substantially from a programme tailor-made to defence-industry job cuts and training schemes to help those people who have lost their jobs through the peace dividend , will continue to benefit to the same extent as at the moment ?
That is the question .
They are going to be competing for a smaller pot of money under three broad objectives with no direct funds for defence cuts .
I am not in a position to give any answer at all to questions about a specific region and its future level of support , because we have not even agreed the proposals for the new Structural Fund Regulations within the Commission yet , and even then the support system will be far more partnership-oriented , and thus based on both European and national criteria .
I cannot tell you now what proposals the British government will choose to implement .
I am afraid I therefore have to disappoint you .
My constituency has benefited considerably from the KONVER programme .
The London Boroughs of Hounslow , Ealing and Richmond have all benefited at some time and I am very pleased about that .
But a problem has arisen which I wonder whether the Commissioner would agree to take on board , in whatever changes and variations are to be made in the future , and it is this : in areas like mine where the population is extremely mobile , it has been very difficult under the rules of KONVER to direct the assistance precisely to the people who have lost their jobs , because many of them have whizzed off to other parts of the country or even abroad to find other employment .
Local authorities have tried to put forward proposals to reinvigorate the area using KONVER funds to generate more employment , but they have run into difficulties with the existing programme rules .
I wonder whether we could , in the future , whatever changes are to happen , take on board this difficulty ?
Yes , I think the Commission 's proposals might well solve your problem , because our experience has been that isolated programmes are a lot less successful in structural policy terms than programmes related to regions in a somewhat broader context . That is why we are also planning to have larger regions for Objective 2 areas in future ; the programmes would be designed to ensure , as far as possible , that there is a tailor-made option on the spot for people who lose their jobs , with infrastructure and investment dovetailing with training measures for the unemployed .
Anyway , I am pleased to take your point on board .
I notice the Commissioner smiling , but it is not the first time we have debated these issues and I will not ask her about any particular region .
However , I will ask her this about the future of the KONVER programme : if the answer from the Commission is that the areas are going to be eligible under the new Objective 2 , we have yet to really understand what the mechanism is going to be which enables them to qualify .
It seems that the Commission is not minded to have a special arrangement such as it intends to have over Objective 6 .
If I am wrong about that , please tell me .
If that is not the intention , I still do not understand why there are not going to be transitional phasing-out arrangements for KONVER areas and other Community initiative areas , as there are going to be for Objective 2 areas that fall out of the net .
If the same need for structural change based on unemployment and low growth exists for Objective 2 areas , why not for the KONVER areas ?
Finally , 50 % of KONVER areas Europe-wide are not Objective 2 - or other regional fund - eligible areas at the moment .
Does the Commissioner not agree that there is a special case here for her to study carefully ?
I know that the European Union cannot clear up all the problems in the Community with Structural Funds money .
I am also all too well aware that a few changes in the regions can also lead to problems .
But I hope you will understand that in proposing generous measures for Objective 1 , 2 and 5b areas for phasing out regions that will in future no longer be eligible , we really want to do what is necessary to consolidate existing successes .
Again , I want to make it quite clear that KONVER areas , like all other initiatives , will continue to qualify for Objective 3 funds , that is for the training of the unemployed and people faced with unemployment .
I assume that in future this could be of real help in precisely this area .
One last comment . Community initiatives as a whole , as you can see from the utilization rates , have not been as successful as we hoped , which is another reason for integrating such measures .
The defence industry is also ' industry ' , of course .
As long as the relevant criteria are met , Objective 2 support is also available .
If these criteria are not satisfied , there is still horizontal Objective 3 .
Question No 63 by Ian White ( H-0172 / 98 )
Subject : Urban II
What are the Commission 's rules for the establishment of programme Monitoring Committees , and where are such rules published ?
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the general provisions on monitoring committees for Structural Fund applications are in Article 25 of amended Council Regulation No 4253 / 88 .
Implementing rules governing the use of monitoring committees to keep track of programmes carried out under the URBAN initiative are drawn up by the Commission in conjunction with the Member States concerned .
They are to be found in the Commission decisions granting approval to the individual URBAN programmes .
I should have listened to the original answer rather than the interpretation but I did not understand where the documentary sources for the rules governing the URBAN programme can be found .
I will tell you why I am concerned about it .
It seems to me from reports I have received from interested organizations that there is a degree of anarchy amongst those who wish to apply for URBAN funding .
Naturally I assumed that there would be rules and regulations governing this .
What the Commissioner has just said does not appear to give me a source on which I can rely .
I would like to go to a booklet , to a regulation itself , so that I can decide for my own purposes whether the Member State concerned and the Commission and the United Kingdom are operating on the same basis of an agreed rule book that I can check for myself .
Is there such a rule book ?
Is there such a regulation , apart from 25 ( 2 ) to which you have already referred ?
The Commission decisions granting approval to individual URBAN programmes also contain the rules for those programmes .
I will also briefly mention them by name , because I think it is better to talk about specifics than regulation numbers .
URBAN has Objective 1 and Objective 2 monitoring committees , which are the general monitoring committees for Objective 1 and Objective 2 .
Outside the assisted regions , and this is where Bristol comes in , I understand that there is an independent monitoring committee .
I have to agree with you that the process is somewhat complicated , as this monitoring committee is advised by the URBAN management committee , which is a sub-committee for monitoring the management of non-Objective areas , and there is also an URBAN partnership group , which brings together local partners and non-governmental organizations .
I noted that the Commissioner said in her earlier reply that the Community initiatives had not had the success that was hoped .
But I hope she recognizes that URBAN has provided an ideal opportunity to develop the sort of bottom-up Community initiatives that the Commission has promoted in its economic development plans and has provided a very good vehicle for promoting the Community with the citizens because of its very local , neighbourhood-level focus .
I hope that in URBAN II that local element will not be lost and will , indeed , be recognized in the monitoring committees , however they are constituted .
I hope she can reassure us on that point .
I have to agree with you .
Even if the utilization rates are not always very encouraging , URBAN is one of the more successful Community initiatives , because it is particularly close to local people and above all because it involves citizens from various local groups and has thus been a strong motivating force .
There have been no changes in the management process compared with URBAN 1 , but it can be taken as read that the positive aspects of URBAN 1 have been incorporated into URBAN 2 .
Because URBAN has been such a success , we want to incorporate assistance for sociallydeprived inner-city areas , the most deprived areas , into mainstream assistance , that is into the new Objective 2 .
This demonstrates that URBAN has paved the way to providing Community assistance for inner-city problems on a larger scale .
Question No 64 by José Apolinário ( H-0173 / 98 )
Subject : Application of Interreg II C
Can the Commission say what aid was granted via the Community funds to the regions in the Azores , the Algarve and Alentejo which were affected by storms at the end of 1997 ?
How does it account for the proposal to grant financial support via Interreg II C to certain Member States but to withhold it from Portugal ?
Mr President , Mr Apolinário , the Commission is of course distressed about the storm damage in Portugal , particularly in the Azores , the Algarve and the Alentejo region .
It therefore declared its willingness to make a transfer of appropriations straight after these catastrophic events .
When the interim assessment of the Community support framework for Portugal was completed in February , the regions affected were granted further appropriations not as yet committed together with appropriations from the annual indexing , which were prioritized for environmental improvement measures .
The Commission successfully sought a higher level of appropriations for the reinforcement of the programmes claimed by these three regions than originally proposed by the Portuguese authorities , so that these regions are to receive an additional 73 million ECU instead of the 44 million originally proposed by Portugal .
It will be recalled that part of the funding available under the Community 's INTERREG 2C initiative is intended for regional development measures to prevent floods and combat droughts .
No Community financing for the prevention of floods was granted to Portugal in 1997 / 98 , because the Portuguese government did not submit an application to that effect .
On the other hand , a programme to combat drought in Portugal was approved by the Commission on 29 September 1997 .
This programme has an indirect bearing on structural measures to prevent flooding , given that it contributes to improvements in water management and hydrological research , and assists with prospecting for water resources and with improvements in ecological balance .
The Commission is willing to consider an application by the Portuguese authorities for an INTERREG 2C programme on flooding , within the general guidelines and within the budgetary appropriations already allocated to Portugal .
Mr President , may I begin by thanking the Commissioner for her answer .
I agree with her that the priority of the environment and national development planning should be protected .
I would , however , emphasize that the part of her answer relating to the Portuguese Government is erroneous , in that the Interreg II C allocation of funding clearly states that Portugal , Spain , Greece and Italy can apply only in connection with drought , while Belgium , Germany , the United Kingdom , Italy and the Netherlands could make applications in connection with floods .
This is the point I cannot understand because I feel that the services for which the Commissioner holds political responsibility have adopted an excessively technical approach .
However , my question relates to the ultra-peripheral regions , and specifically the Azores .
I would like to know how the Commission intends to act in situations that have unfortunately reoccurred , given that in the future the REGIS initiative will cease to exist , particularly since while the Commission increased its technical justifications , the United States army , for instance , offered cooperation in carrying out the technical restoration of the Ribeiro Quente area .
It is merely a difference of approach .
Firstly , as an ultraperipheral region , the Azores will continue to be part of the most heavily assisted group of regions .
Secondly , I assume that the other regions you mentioned will also continue to receive financial assistance from the European Union .
The problem with the Structural Funds is that they are not an emergency aid mechanism and that the European Union has abolished emergency aid within Europe .
So we have no means of offering specific emergency aid .
However , what we can do in the case of an emergency , and have in fact done in Portugal , is to divert money available under the Community Support Frameworks and to use it for economic regeneration and to mitigate the environmental damage caused by such disasters .
That is what we have done in this case .
We certainly need to discuss how INTERREG 2C can be used more in the southern Member States in future to combat flooding .
I would ask you to remember how long we discussed how to combat droughts effectively , and that despite that neither the Commission nor perhaps the Portuguese government were farsighted enough to incorporate appropriate preventive measures in their plans for INTERREG 2C and Portugal .
I hope , however , that this will not be needed in the future , and if it is , we should be flexible enough to reconsider our programmes .
I do believe , however , that the funds we are making available are really an enormous extra help to these regions in coping with the aftermath of the emergencies .
The Commissioner is quite correct in saying that drought and floods in Portugal and Spain are connected .
It is well known that the sources of all Portugal 's major rivers lie in Spain , and half Portugal 's water comes from Spain .
As the Commissioner knows , all the hydraulic works in progress in Portugal and Spain are being carried out with Community funding .
And as the Commissioner is also aware , there has been a disagreement , a conflict , between Portugal and Spain in connection with the Spanish hydrological plan .
I think this could be overcome with common sense , while the intervention of Brussels and the Commission is essential in view of the fact that the funding of hydraulic works in Portugal and Spain comes primarily from Brussels .
Now that negotiations are resuming , what role do the Commission and the Commissioner intend to play ?
The Commission normally has no right of say in bilateral negotiations , not only because of subsidiarity , but also because in the interests of sovereignty Member States do not normally welcome Commission poking its nose into things that Member States can sort out better themselves .
However , we have not been mere bystanders here .
For example , we financed a joint Spanish / Portuguese study to get the facts on their common water resources .
Furthermore , when authorization for the dam was being sought , we took the opportunity to ensure that joint water management was proposed as part of the plans to ensure that sufficient water of acceptable quality reached the dam .
I assume that the authorization and the precautions taken were helpful in this respect .
Vessels carrying dangerous goods
The next item is the recommendation for second reading ( A4-0069 / 98 ) , on behalf of the Committee on Transport and Tourism , on the common position adopted by the Council with a view to adopting a Council Directive amending Directive 93 / 75 / EEC concerning minimum requirements for vessels bound for or leaving Community ports and carrying dangerous or polluting goods ( Rapporteur : Mr Novo Belenguer ) ( C4-0621 / 97-96 / 0231 ( SYN ) .
Madam President , the report we are going to debate this evening is the second reading under the cooperation procedure and refers to the proposal to amend the directive on the minimum requirements for vessels bound for or leaving Community ports and carrying dangerous or polluting goods .
To briefly review the process described in the report , I should first mention that in April 1997 this Parliament approved eleven amendments in first reading . These could be divided into three main groups .
The first group reinforced the requirements for information to be provided by the operators of vessels transporting radioactive goods .
The second group concerned measures designed to extend the requirements of this Directive ( 93 / 75 / EEC ) to ships in transit through Community waters .
Finally , the third group involved amendments to the directive 's annexes .
The Commission and the Council accepted the amendments allowing the inclusion within the directive of future amendments to the international code on irradiated nuclear fuel , and concerning the obligation on vessel operators to supply a list of crew members to the port authority in advance , in case of any possible accident .
The report we are currently debating and will vote on tomorrow proposes three things : firstly , to bring Directive 93 / 75 / EEC up to date , by requesting the inclusion of certain maritime transport safety requirements , especially with respect to irradiated nuclear fuel , plutonium and high-level radioactive waste ; secondly , to increase the amount of information to be supplied when transporting these types of goods ; and lastly , to facilitate future amendment of the directive 's annexes , by simple recourse to the committee procedure , in order to bring national regulations into line with established international regulations on maritime safety .
In this respect , the present report proposes four amendments , which were all approved almost unanimously by the Committee on Transport and Tourism .
The first amendment refers to the fifth recital of the directive .
We propose a change in the wording of the Council text . The new text is wider and more general - at least that is how we interpret it - and expresses our concern about the advisory committee being able to make significant or substantial changes to the directive .
Amendment No 4 , which refers to paragraph 2 of Article 1 , is directly related to the one I have just mentioned , and aims to prevent subsequent modifications to the directive weakening the existing provisions for safety and the protection of the marine environment .
In other words , we are introducing a minimum to prevent the guarantees which the directive itself recognizes from being weakened in any way .
Our second amendment refers to Article 1 . In it we propose that the INF Code defined in the directive should be the updated version , as in force on 1 January 1998 rather than 1996 .
Our reason is that apart from being much more recent and up-to-date , in November 1997 the International Maritime Organization adopted some amendments to strengthen the Code , and not to include them by that date would provide the advisory committee with a motive for amending the directive .
The third amendment repeats a proposal we made at the report 's first reading .
Specifically , we request that when vessels of the type referred to in the report are in transit through a Member State 's waters , it should be compulsory to notify the authorities of that state of the contents of Annex 1 .
Furthermore , Madam President , as regards the content of this report , I think this proposal is appropriate and advisable , although we hope the provisions can also be applied to vessels in transit .
We must bear in mind that in effect this system is covered by the 1993 EUROREP proposal , but it has made hardly any progress .
So in view of the difficulty of changing this directive 's approach , we suggest that the Commission , if it sees fit , should withdraw that original EUROREP proposal and present a new one , to include the legislative changes which have been made and approved by the International Maritime Organization .
I am just finishing , Madam President , and I hope the honourable Members will bear these amendments in mind when it comes to the vote on my report tomorrow . What we are requesting is the implementation of a series of Community regulations , to try - among other things - to improve maritime safety and protect the marine environment for future generations .
Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , at second reading we are concerned today with the minimum requirements for ships which are using the Community 's ports and carrying dangerous or environmentally harmful goods .
I think we are dealing here with an extremely important subject , which causes people to react once something has happened .
The aim of our legislation is to ensure that there will never be a catastrophic accident , or if an accident should occur , that possible damage is kept to a minimum , so that the people are not preoccupied with this subject .
I think there has rarely been a better starting point for European legislation .
I would like to thank the rapporteur explicitly for dealing so seriously with this subject , both at first reading and now at second reading .
The Group of the European People 's Party shares the rapporteur 's view .
We support all the amendments tabled , especially the request that appropriate information is also made available about ships which transport dangerous goods , do not use EU ports , but which do sail through the territorial waters of the European Union .
It is not just a question of accidents associated with the entering or leaving of ports but of the broadest possible measures to avert risks , even if it is only territorial waters which are affected , because experiences in recent years show that there really can be problems on European soil without a ship having initially entered a European port .
I would therefore strongly urge the Commission to take up this matter of concern .
We are unfortunately only at the cooperation stage .
The Treaty of Amsterdam is not yet in force , otherwise we would be more deeply involved in the legislative process .
I therefore request that you really do take up this matter , so that we can find a solution to the benefit of all the people in Europe .
Madam President , I would like to congratulate the rapporteur for dealing with a sensitive and difficult issue .
I would also like to congratulate the rapporteur for continuing to resist the pressures of the Council and the Commission , which may have endorsed some amendments , ladies and gentlemen , but which endorsed the insignificant amendments .
The essential amendments which you had proposed and which we had voted on during the first reading were not endorsed .
I am also very pleased that the matter has been raised again . We will support these amendments since it is clear that the Council and the Commission have forgotten ( or rather , do not wish to remember ) that nuclear waste is not simply a question of protecting the environment , it is a question of laundering black money .
It is also , under certain conditions , a question of certain nuclear waste , after it has been enriched with plutonium , being used for other purposes , Mr Commissioner , for military purposes . So the Commission and the Council should not only have accepted the rapporteur 's original amendments , which imposed strict conditions for the control and safety of such loads , but the Council should have proposed even stricter conditions .
You all know very well what is happening with the trade in nuclear waste .
I am talking about the trade in nuclear waste by countries of the former Soviet Union . And you all know very well that this nuclear waste goes to certain countries which , as we discovered , are a danger to their neighbours , and in which we decided to intervene either in the guise of NATO or in I do not know what other guise .
It is our opinion that we supplied them with this nuclear waste because we had not imposed conditions of control and safety .
Madam President , I would first like to remind people that the Green Group in the European Parliament considers it highly positive that this directive has been proposed to amend the earlier Directive 93 / 75 / EEC , to incorporate into the scope of the old directive the conditions for the transportation of nuclear fuel , plutonium and high-level radioactive waste on board ships .
This is certainly a positive fact , just as we believe the rest of the directive to be positive .
However , we believe Parliament 's proposals are serious and credible , which is why we do not agree with the Council amendments which fail to include them .
For these reasons , we believe all the amendments proposed by the rapporteur should be firmly maintained , particularly Amendment No 3 because we believe it is of vital importance that ships in transit through our waters should inform us of the presence of toxic or radioactive substances on board even if they are not stopping in a Community port .
This is very important for the future of our seas and for the ecology and health of our peoples .
Commissioner , this recommendation we are debating , which is attempting to fix minimum requirements for vessels carrying dangerous goods and entering port within the European Union , is experiencing a situation which is all too common . That is , on the one hand the Commission makes efforts to ensure that Community legislation is obeyed - in this case concerning maritime safety and the protection of the marine environment - but on the other hand , some Member States do their own thing completely .
In this case there are still four Member States which have not even transposed the original directive .
In view of this situation , Commissioner , we support the Commission .
As has been said , this really is an extremely important matter .
For example , passenger transport should be incompatible with the transport of dangerous goods , or it should be compulsory to present a passenger safety certificate .
Let us not forget , ladies and gentlemen , that we are talking about highly dangerous substances , such as irradiated nuclear fuel , plutonium or high-level radioactive waste , which persist in many cases - and I am not exaggerating - for more than 30 000 years , which is really saying something .
So there is an enormous responsibility to the future .
And if due attention is being paid to the risks of transporting these substances by road - another terrestrial mode of transport - the same should be done with maritime transport .
For all those reasons , we are going to support the amendments presented by Mr Novo Belenguer , the rapporteur , and we congratulate him on them .
Madam President , I would simply like to say that I agree with the rapporteur 's amendments but I would like to underline another aspect of the problem . The Council publishes directives and regulations which are not implemented by the Member States .
A classic case of this is the report that we are debating today .
I have to say that Directive 93 / 75 / EEC , amended by the new Commission proposal , has not yet been incorporated into the body of law of four Member States , including Great Britain , which currently holds the presidency of the European Council and the Council of Ministers .
At international level , the IMO decisions have not been incorporated into internal law by a large majority of Member States .
We must , however , protest against this state of affairs , at least within the European Union . In this debate and tomorrow 's vote , when the rapporteur 's amendments are voted on , we must show that the Council and the Member States themselves cannot endorse and publish directives and then , at a national level , fail to incorporate them .
This is a very serious issue .
It is not about the safety of maritime transport per se ; rather , it is about the safety of the population of our planet . For that reason , we all need to show sensitivity to each other at all times .
Madam President , the House is certainly considering an important piece of legislation here on the maritime transport of dangerous goods .
I wish to begin by saying that I am naturally very pleased that , in its common position , the Council endorsed those amendments of Parliament which were accepted by the Commission at the first reading debate .
I must also say that the Commission shares the concerns underlying the second reading amendments that have been adopted by the Committee on Transport and Tourism .
Amendment No 2 , for instance , proposes reference to the version of the INF Code that has been in force since 1 January this year , instead of that in force on 1 January 1996 .
The Commission welcomes this useful proposal , which embraces the amendments to the Code adopted by the IMO Assembly last November .
The Commission can also accept Amendment No 4 , which states that changes to the annexes adopted through the committee procedure shall not weaken safety of maritime protection provisions .
I can reassure Members of this House that the Commission , which has the right of initiative under the committee procedure , would not submit any proposal which weakens its own initial legislation .
The Commission can understand , in principle , the concern behind Amendment No 1 , which aims to clarify the scope of the committee procedure , notably in the light of Amendment No 4 .
However , the Commission cannot accept this amendment for two reasons .
Firstly , it repudiates the express provision which reaffirms that ships in transit cannot be brought within the scope of this directive .
The text was added by the Council in its common position , and in the light of the pending proposal on EUROREP , accepted by the Commission .
Secondly , this amendment is , in any case , unnecessary because the existing common position text already states that amendments adopted through the committee procedure shall not alter the requirements of the directive .
This applies equally to any weakening or broadening of the scope of the directive .
Finally , the Commission cannot accept Amendment No 3 , which introduces notification requirements for vessels in transit off the coast of Member States .
As I said at the first reading , the provisions of the proposed EUROREP directive makes the amendment redundant and , for reasons of consistency and coherence , therefore , the Commission maintains its position .
I know that the rapporteur fully understands this position , since he set it out in his own report .
I would ask him , therefore , to consider again withdrawing his support for the amendment since I can assure him that the Commission shares his views .
We are consequently examining the options in order to ensure that discussions resume in Council , if necessary , on the basis of a modified version of the EUROREP proposal .
This is a view shared by Mr Ferber and Mr Kaklamanis .
We share the view expressed by them on this particular point .
To sum up : the Commission can accept Amendments Nos 2 and 4 but cannot accept Nos 1 and 3 .
I wish to thank the House , in particular Mr Novo Belenguer and the Committee on Transport and Tourism , for their consistent support for the proposal .

I would like to say to Mr Camisón Asensio and Mr Sarlis that there have been some significant delays in the transposition of this particular original directive but infringement proceedings are proceeding : there are four proceedings at present for nonconformity of national measures , and we look forward to an early solution , in the legal sense , dealing with these matters .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 11.30 a.m.
Statistical returns on carriage of goods by road
The next item is the report ( A4-0072 / 98 ) by Mr Bazin , on behalf of the Committee on Transport and Tourism , on the draft Council Regulation on statistical returns in respect of carriage of goods by road ( COM ( 97 ) 0443 - C4-0514 / 97-97 / 0233 ( CNS ) ) .
Madam President , I trust you will excuse Mr Bazin 's absence owing to the regional elections in France , and that you will appreciate that Mr Bazin has been granted the opportunity refused to Mr de Silguy to stand as a candidate for the beautiful region of Brittany .
We would all like to wish him the greatest success .
Statistics are essential for transport .
Therefore we have not only to collect the statistics but , more especially , we have to deal with them in a way that is consistent throughout the Community .
To be more exact , the Commission made a proposal whereby the statistics on road transport are brought more into line in the different Member States .
The Committee on Transport and Tourism submitted two amendments .
Or rather , Mr Bazin did so with our full support .
Therefore it is not too difficult for me to stand in for him here tonight .
Mr Bazin 's report is not just a technical report .
Because we are moving in the European Union towards a durable mobility we have to know exactly what our transporters are doing and where they go to and from in the Community .
This is going to be a more difficult task with the rivalry of the free internal market and , more specifically , this year with the arrival of free cabotage .
When we look at the statistics of road transport it will be more difficult to tell whether lorries with foreign licence plates - from countries other than the country to where they transport goods - are engaged in local transport or international transport .
Inevitably short-haul transport will , for the main part , take place by road .
Nowadays , more than three-quarters of Community transport is carried by road .
Transport is growing by about 7 % to 10 % per year .
That means that if we want to move to other modes of transport - as Members from all groups want - such as rail , inland waterway or short sea transport , we will still have to reckon with the fact that short-haul transport is being carried out by road .
Therefore , if we want to move from one modality of transport to another , we have to know exactly which transportation is intermodal and which is solely road transport .
We need a more precise system .
Commissioner , you know better than anyone else , since you deal with the social side of transport as well , that the reports we get from the Commission on the driving and rest hours are worse than we expected them to be .
We have just received the reports from 1993 / 94 which show that several Member States do not even have those statistics .
That is a great failing .
One of the Member States that did not supply its statistics is one of the founding members of the European Community .
Fifty years should be enough to bring them into line .
We count on the Commission to do its utmost to put these things in order .
In the meantime , realizing that most of the work is going to be done by the national statistical offices , thanks to the Committee on Budgets we have tabled an amendment which slightly lowers the amount of money available .
Madam President , let me begin by thanking Mr Bazin , who is himself absent , for the work he has put into this report .
The intention of the proposal is to round off the annual harmonized statistical data for the carriage of goods by road to ensure the availability of information for the monitoring and evaluation of the common policy .
The regions of origin and destination will be recorded in the same way for journeys between Member States as for those within them .
The legislation will also cover cabotage which will now be possible within the Union .
For this there will be a codification of regions of origin and destination and of the distance travelled .
Of course , there always have to be statistics to some extent .
Nevertheless , I think that each time this kind of proposal and this kind of issue comes up there is reason to question whether it is really necessary , since it involves new information having to be submitted , and therefore additional bureaucracy .
It is always companies , often small companies , which have to submit this information .
Far too much of this is already an unnecessary burden being placed on companies around the Union , which has resulted in the difficult situation in which enterprise currently finds itself .
However , there are two positive things in this context .
One is that no special European bureau of statistics is to be set up just for this business . Responsibility for this extra work will fall to the statistical services of the Member States .
The other is that the regulation expressly exempts small vehicles .
That means that vehicles with payloads of up to 3.5 tonnes or maximum permissible laden weights of up to 6 tonnes are excluded .
The reason for this is that these kinds of journeys are often local journeys for own-account transport .
Both these exceptions are positive .
Still , there is reason to question what would actually have happened if we had not got a regulation like this .
A constant criticism is increasingly being made of the EU , a criticism about bureaucracy and excessive information being required of companies .
I think we need to understand that every time a new proposal like the one we are to decide on here is put forward , however worthy the intention , it increases bureaucracy and paperwork in a Europe whose companies already have far too much of it .
Madam President , as the House will know , the relevant 1978 and 1989 directives enabled the Community to develop a set of basic statistics on the carriage of goods by road and they have proved very useful in framing and developing the common transport policy .
Several developments have taken place in Community policies , however , making it necessary for us to improve our system of compiling statistics on road transport .
That is particularly true of the changes relating to the liberalization of cabotage from 1 July 1998 to the development of the trans-European networks and to advances in environmental policy .
Against that background , as the House will be aware , this new regulation will establish a more up-to-date statistical system which is based on a list of variables geared to existing information needs , particularly in regional policy and environmental policy , on the collection and transmission to Eurostat of data on individual vehicles and journeys .
This will allow much more detailed analysis than in the past and it will facilitate the essential monitoring , fine-tuning and understanding of relationships between different policy outcomes .
The new regulation could obviously impose additional statistical reporting obligations on some transport businesses .
I would stress that Eurostat has made every effort to minimize any extra burdens by making provisions for the statistics to be compiled by sample surveys on a small proportion of road vehicles and for modern computerized techniques to be used for transmitting data wherever that reduces the administrative burden .
The similarity of the approach taken by Mr Bazin , the Committee on Transport and Tourism and the Commission happily means that I can readily accept both the amendments .
I therefore thank Mr Bazin and his colleagues for their support and for their great help in these efforts to develop changes which will make for greater transparency and more efficient operation of the statistical system .
I can readily accept Mr Wijsenbeek 's point that statistics are essential for transport and should be consistent .
Madam President , unfortunately the Commissioner , who is not responsible for transport as such but who is responsible for the social side of transport , has not made any helpful comment on my request that all those Member States who did not hand in their statistics on driving and resting hours - which I would say are the complement to the statistics on road transport as such , or which are part and parcel of it - will be improved , especially by those Member States who do not hand them in at all .
Madam President , to respond very briefly to the honourable Member , this particular point is not relevant to the Eurostat situation , it is a matter for a DG VII question .
Perhaps the matter can be taken up there and hopefully he will get a suitable response .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 11.30 a.m.
Injury prevention - rare diseases - pollution-related diseases - health protection - Alzheimer 's
The next item is the joint debate on the following reports and oral questions :
Report ( A4-0067 / 98 ) by Mr Trakatellis , on behalf of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Protection , on the proposal for a European Parliament and Council Decision adopting a programme of Community action from 1999 to 2003 on injury prevention in the context of the framework for action in the field of public health ( COM ( 97 ) 0178 - C4-0229 / 97-97 / 0132 ( COD ) ) ; -Report ( A4-0074 / 98 ) by Mr Viceconte , on behalf of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Protection , on the proposal for a European Parliament and Council Decision adopting a programme of Community action 1999-2003 on rare diseases in the context of the framework for action in the field of public health ( COM ( 97 ) 0225 - C40236 / 97-97 / 0146 ( COD ) ) ; -Report ( A4-0075 / 98 ) by Mr Cabrol , on behalf of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Protection , on the proposal for a European Parliament and Council Decision adopting a programme of Community action 1999-2003 on pollution-related diseases in the context of the framework for action in the field of public health ( COM ( 97 ) 0266 - C4-0276 / 97-97 / 0153 ( COD ) ) ; -Report ( A4-0022 / 98 ) by Mrs Flemming , on behalf of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Protection , on the second report from the Commission to the Council , the European Parliament , the Economic and Social Committee and the Committee of the Regions on the integration of health protection requirements in Community policies ( COM ( 96 ) 0407 - C4-0663 / 96 ) ; -Oral question by Mr Poggiolini , on behalf of the Group of the European People 's Party , to the Commission ( B4-0170 / 98 - O-0018 / 98 ) on the Community programme to combat Alzheimer 's disease and related syndromes ; -Oral question by the following Members : Gutiérrez Díaz , González Álvarez , Papayannakis and Ojala , on behalf of the Confederal Group of the United Left - Nordic Green Left , to the Commission ( B4-0171 / 98 - O-0027 / 98 ) on the Community programme of research into and prevention and treatment of Alzheimer 's disease ; -Oral question by Mr Kouchner and Mrs Lalumière , on behalf of the Group of the European Radical Alliance , to the Commission ( B4-0172 / 98 - O-0040 / 98 ) on combating Alzheimer 's disease ; -Oral question by Mr Cabrol , on behalf of the Group Union for Europe , to the Commission ( B4-0173 / 98 - O-0050 / 98 ) on Alzheimer 's disease ; -Oral question by the following Members : McKenna , Lannoye , Breyer and Tamino , on behalf of the Green Group in the European Parliament , to the Commission ( B4-0266 / 98 - O-0066 / 98 ) on Alzheimer 's disease .
Madam President , most of us have often been in danger of being injured or have actually been injured during our day-to-day activities or in our free time .
We therefore have a lot of experience to go on .
Unfortunately , such injuries happen all too frequently .
Indeed , together with suicides and self-inflicted injuries , they contribute significantly to our annual death rate .
This proposal is therefore very timely , and the programme for the prevention of and reduction in the number of deaths must be adopted .
Today in the European Union the injuries covered by the present programme are one of the most basic causes of death , damage to health and disablement .
They are mainly due to accidents in the home or during leisure time .
The most vulnerable are those between 1 and 34 years of age , and people over 75 .
The need to address the problem initially led the Community to create a scheme of research and information , the EHLASS scheme .
Recent statistics provided by the scheme point to an annual death rate from accidents of 83 000 with approximately 22 million people injured each year , 20 million of whom require medical assistance , and 2 million of whom need hospital treatment .
We must also point out that approximately 300 000 of those who are injured will be disadvantaged for the rest of their lives or will have health problems at some point .
The second category of injuries results from suicides , which must not be overlooked , since they account for the deaths of 43 000 people and for injuries to around 700 000 people each year .
The direct financial cost of treatment is ECU 7.7 billion , while the total cost of injuries amounts to ECU 23 billion , which does not include the cost resulting from deaths .
The need for a programme of prevention and epidemiological monitoring of injuries at a European Union level is all too evident .
It remains for us to examine whether the programme , as it has been formulated , is effective .
The Commission identified particular areas as spheres of action , such as accidents to children at school and suicides , with intentional self-inflicted injuries as a sub-category .
However , there is no reason to exclude other age groups , such as for example adults who injure themselves in the home or during their free time .
It would also be a good idea to include injuries caused by the actions of a third person and those arising from cases of people who attempt to injure themselves .
For this reason , it is proposed that a distinction be made between a ) intentional and unintentional injuries , with special reference to vulnerable categories , and b ) suicides and self-inflicted injuries .
Moreover , we must include in the vulnerable categories those women who , with their children , receive injuries as a result of violence .
In parallel , there must be action on behalf of those injured as a result of violence during sports events .
With an epidemiological study , injuries and suicides could be recorded and analysed statistically , over time , and according to age group and category . As a result , the causes will become clear and subsequent actions will be based upon the findings of the analyses .
The programme consequently focuses on the possibility of collating and processing all the relevant data .
Such a scheme , the EHLASS scheme , already exists and has yielded results , on the one hand pinpointing certain products which are implicated in accidents and , on the other , undertaking information and awareness campaigns .
Unfortunately the Commission did not incorporate this scheme into its proposal , although it would be very useful in achieving the goals of the programme .
For this reason I regard it as imperative that the EHLASS scheme be incorporated into the programme and that it form the basis for the development of actions with regard to both intentional and unintentional injuries . Moreover , the scheme should be expanded and coordinated with other networks that may ensue .
With regard to suicides and self-inflicted injuries , a different system of collating and processing information is needed , and intervention actions require a different approach .
The reason is that the causes of suicides and the necessary preventive measures are completely different from those of accidental injuries .
The only common features are the injuries , the deaths , the treatments and the financial burden .
The programme being created must address itself to the challenge posed by the problem .
The Commission is proposing only ECU 1.3 million for 1999 and I regard this as totally inadequate in relation to the aims of the programme .
For this reason it is proposed that the financial framework for 1999-2003 should comprise ECU 14 million .
We believe that this programme , as changed by our amendments , will play a fundamental role in protecting the health of the citizens of Europe , by significantly reducing the number of deaths and the financial losses caused by the injuries to which it refers .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , the action programme on rare diseases which we are here to debate is part of the Community action in the public health sector . This is a sector in which it is the EU 's duty to adopt preventative and protective measures in the interests of all its citizens , not only when fighting great scourges but also in cases of very small numbers of people affected by uncommon , or even rare , disease conditions .
In fact , it is in a context such as rare diseases that Community action becomes more necessary than ever .
In most Member States there are usually too few cases of rare diseases for them to be considered a priority from the health point of view , and they are often neglected .
The concept of " rare diseases ' covers more than 5 000 different diseases or conditions that do not have a common definition .
The problems of classification raise difficulties with regard to the recognition , identification , treatment and prevention of such diseases .
The five-year programme planned for 1999-2003 provides for a series of actions in three key sectors : information on rare diseases , favouring the establishment of a European database ; promotion and reinforcement of patient support groups ; and progress in the creation of response groups for clusters of rare diseases .
The financial allocation proposed by the Commission amounts to ECU 1.3 million for 1999 , while funding for the four subsequent years will be determined later , based on the financial prospects .
I would like to draw your attention to this point before continuing with the presentation of this programme .
There is doubt as to whether the Commission has any intention of adopting an effective action programme on rare diseases .
But how can we think of proposing actions and implementing projects if the minimum financial resources are not available ?
So it is better to devote ourselves to other initiatives and make better use of the resources available .
Although we need to do something specific to try to help a section of the EU population that is suffering and whose quality of life is compromised ( both patients and their families ) , we need to start from serious premises .
The proposed budget is meaningless .
By way of information , I recall that in the last three years the USA has allocated a good $ 3.2 million to the operation of the rare diseases database and France alone has spent 3 million francs in the first year of operation of its database on orphan drugs .
For all these reasons , the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Protection voted in favour of a financial allocation of ECU 14 million to implement the rare diseases programme , to be spread over five years , to enable the programme not to be purely symbolic .
In making a more thorough assessment of the action programme in question , one aspect of prime importance which must be taken into account is international cooperation : the coordination of Community activities with those of the competent national and international organizations allows the work to be rationalized , useless duplication to be avoided , and the time required to achieve the pre-established objectives to be reduced .
One further essential point of the programme relates to information .
The establishment of a Community database listing diseases , symptoms , causes and available treatments is fundamental .
One further aspect to which I would like to draw your attention is that of the definition of clusters , as indicated by the Committee in its proposal .
The definition is certainly not unambiguous . For the sake of greater clarity , I would specify that a so-called cluster can be defined as any irregular increase in the incidence of a rare disease and that , as such , it requires rapid control measures .
For that purpose , it is therefore advisable to promote the creation of a system of monitoring and controlling rare diseases , permitting a fast and effective reaction and enabling rare diseases to be identified , assessed and treated .
I would also like to add a couple of words about committee procedure .
Considering the peculiarity of the case , the consultative committee may have two representatives from each Member State , provided one of them belongs to a patient support group .
Finally , allow me to make one last comment on the need to coordinate and rationalize the arguments at Community level .
The Commission must undertake to coordinate the work on rare diseases currently being conducted by three Directorates-General : DG V , DG III and DG XII .
The action programme on rare diseases , regulations on orphan drugs and the research programme on rare diseases are closely linked and require a consistent overall approach .
The adoption of this programme is a step forward towards a better knowledge and understanding of rare diseases and enables sufferers to escape from the marginalization and isolation they find themselves in , offering them therapeutic , moral and psychological support .
Moreover , the commitment to research into rare diseases could also lead to specific discoveries to help with the treatment of some of the far more common diseases which have not yet been eradicated and affect large sections of the population .
In this case , the benefit to the whole of society would certainly not be questioned .
Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , this is a very important document from the Commission .
It is well written , serious , clear and concise and highlights the priorities which we also stressed in Amendments Nos 1 and 2 .
Unfortunately however its impact is limited because it only deals with the issue of respiratory illnesses linked to air pollution .
We fully understand the criteria which have led the Commission to choose diseases indisputably linked to obvious individual pollutants - those pollutants with the worst noxious effects and which are most easily prevented , and pollution where Community action is likely to complement insufficient action by Member States .
We have three main comments arising from this communication .
Firstly , we believe it is important to broaden the communication 's sphere of activity , and here I would refer you to our Amendments Nos 4 , 11 and 12 .
As regards air pollution , and without wishing to detract from the role of traffic-related pollutants , the noxious effects of tobacco must be emphasized both to the smoker and to his or her companions - in other words the passive smoking effect . A large part of the population does not fully appreciate the dangers involved .
In addition to air pollution we should also address the issue of noise pollution : from companies whose normal working activities are very loud ; from badly soundproofed buildings ; and also from excessively loud music from some night-clubs and the high volume levels of young people 's Walkmans . In addition , water pollution passes on infections and poisons ; food pollution causes infections and poisoning , as noted in Amendment No 16 ; homes are polluted thanks to asbestos or paints and especially lead - which can be highly poisonous , as can the smell of certain paints and glues .
We will not harp on about pollution of the upper layers of the atmosphere destroying the protective ozone layer and resulting in an increased risk of skin cancer , as observed in Australians of northern European origin .
My second comment concerns the type of action which the Commission aims to implement in order to reduce the extent of pollution-related diseases .
Naturally the Commission does not seek to combat pollutant emission directly since this phenomenon has been the subject of other directives on air , water and soil pollution , amongst others .
In the present case , the Commission intends to act in a very different way , in four main areas : persuading the Member States to find out about the nature of the pollutants ( and we would highlight our Amendments Nos 7 , 8 and 13 in this context ) ; compiling a register of pollutants ; identifying them and evaluating their often serious consequences on health ( both disease and allergies ) ; and collecting relevant and comparable data so as to avoid confusion between the different terms which may be used by the Member States to refer to the same product or the same illness - this is the line we take in Amendment No 3 .
Finally , the Commission would like every Member State to inform its citizens about the dangers of pollution , to ensure that people are clear about it .
We cover this in Amendments Nos 9 and 10 . It must be made clear to people that zero risk is not possible , that the dangers are not always those presented complacently by the media , but that certain personal habits - and I stress tobacco again - can be much more dangerous .
The Commission envisages the evaluation and monitoring of the recommended actions .
We fully support this proposal and would highlight Amendment No 6 in this respect .
Our third and last comment concerns the budgetary basis for these measures .
The current communication only allows for a budget of ECU 1.3 million for 1999 and does not provide any details of subsequent funding , although the Commission has been heard to promise ECU 1.3 million for the programme for the next five years , in other words a total of ECU 6.5 million .
We therefore oppose the amendments which would limit the duration of the programme , as we cannot imagine the Commission would allocate the same sum for three years as it would for five .
In any case , we consider this amount insufficient which is why we are emphasizing Amendment No 5 which provides for a larger sum .
It goes without saying that a much larger budget will be needed if we really wish to combat pollution-related diseases , even in terms of the actions presented by the Commission in this communication .
So , Madam President , we would ask all the Members of the European Parliament to vote in favour of these amendments which were approved by the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Protection .
. ( DE ) Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , there has already been in this House a report on the health protection requirements and a quite outstanding opinion was delivered by Parliament on the subject .
The Commission 's second report also appears to me to be excellent , so that as a result I found the task I was given to be very difficult .
In addition , there is the fact that in the area of health , in particular , the matter of breach of the subsidiarity principle constantly hovers over one 's head .
Permit me , despite these short remarks , to make a few critical points on this report by the Commission .
That agriculture makes a quite decisive contribution to the health of the population is undisputed .
Nevertheless , the Commission 's statements here remain general and , in my opinion , incomplete .
Related to this , of course , is nutrition .
The Commission 's statements on this do not correspond at all with the significance of this area in current health policy .
I should like to cordially request that in the next report , which will be available very soon , the Commission pays particular attention to this area .
Likewise I expect a statement from the Commission on the situation regarding vitamins and mineral products within the EU , before legislative measures are proposed here .
As long as we express ourselves in such a general way in terms of health , we can always expect everybody to be of one mind .
But as soon as we are specific , then the harmony rapidly disappears .
Let me illustrate this with point 10 of my report on the subject of tobacco .
We all know that tobacco is harmful to people 's health ; lung cancer , circulatory and heart diseases , cancer of the larynx , cancer of the tongue , cancer of the stomach and of the intestine are very frequently the scientifically proven consequence .
We all know that the nicotine from tobacco is addictive and we all want to protect young people from becoming involved with this drug .
Each of us has his own ideas as to how this can best be achieved .
It is only on how to reach this common goal that we are not at all in agreement .
Many believe that simply banning the advertising of tobacco will solve the problem .
Well , I share the opinion of those who believe that if a product is so dangerous that it should not be advertised , it would be much better not to produce it in the first place , nor buy it , nor sell it .
In no way should this product be financially supported and promoted year in year out , as happens in our case with the growing of tobacco .
I thus believe we should first submit a plan for a reform of the existing grant system , similar to that which the agriculture ministers have also already made a start on .
I consider it necessary to check whether it is possible to convert to other agricultural products and , thirdly , to check how and if the livelihood of many farmers and many thousands of families can nevertheless be secured .
I believe we should tackle the problem at its roots and in our case this is to be taken very literally .
There is still a whole series of other points which appear to me to be very important ; for example points 22 , 24 and 25 .
I consider it to be important that the Commission is still committed to a ban on growth promoting hormones in the fattening of animals .
I should be very grateful if the Commission could impose the same health requirements on all food imports as those placed on Community production .
I also believe that the Commission should commit itself to a very strict atomic liability law , again in the interests of the health of the population .
If we take adherence to the treaties seriously , then we must see to it that in all Community policies , as it is so beautifully expressed , a high level of health protection is guaranteed .
It is a big job , certainly a difficult job , which we should regard as a challenge !
Madam President , Mr Commissioner , and the very few but highly valued ladies and gentlemen present , almost two years have gone by since this House unanimously voted through its resolution on Alzheimer 's disease and related syndromes , urging the Commission to present a specific action programme for combating this terrible disease as soon as possible .
Unfortunately , there has been no follow-up .
There is no point in once more presenting one of this century 's real scourges which , as it affects the elderly , will grow in proportion to the increase in the very high life expectancy that fortunately characterizes our present-day society , as clearly illustrated in the Commission 's 1997 demographic report .
If current trends continue , changes in the European population over the next 30 years will mean that the number of people over 60 will increase by 50 % .
Alzheimer 's disease is an irreversible , incurable degeneration of the brain mainly affecting those over 65 , leading to a gradual mental decline until the sufferer loses all self-sufficiency , and leading on irremediably to death . So we cannot fail to be alarmed at what has become a great human , social and economic problem for all Member States , with no exceptions .
The figures are dramatic and disturbing : at the moment , there are a good five million people suffering from this terrible disease .
Considering that 80 % of patients live with their families , and in the vast majority of cases the greatest burden rests on the shoulders of the families - and therefore the women - in the EU today , a distressing number of citizens are subjected daily to indescribable emotional , psychological and financial suffering .
Keeping faith with the commitment undertaken for those who are in the front line today , on behalf of the Group of the European People 's Party , I once again call on the Commission to provide the Community with a specific programme for Alzheimer 's disease as a matter of urgency .
We therefore ask that initiative-holding institution to present a specific programme against Alzheimer 's disease , a separate programme from the public health programme in general and the relevant budget , proposing precise and specific objectives : a means to provide temporal continuity for the many projects presented every year by so many non-governmental organizations representing Alzheimer 's sufferers and their families , within the scope of the Commission actions .
With the ratification of the Treaty of Amsterdam and the new wording of Article 129 on public health , the Union has certainly given it a higher profile .
In the Fifth Framework Programme for Research and Technological Development for 1998-2002 , in the context of the thematic priority of quality of life and the management of living resources , specific reference is made to Alzheimer 's disease in the key action on the ageing of the population , which aims to promote the health and independence of the elderly .
To face such a challenge properly we need to try to propose remedies of all types .
So we welcome research .
We need to continue work in this sector , but we should not forget the social aspect of the problem , the more specific problem that thousands of families are combating every day .
We have a duty to answer those who are suffering today and those who , unfortunately , will be suffering tomorrow .
I am sure that , unfortunately , many of those present in this Chamber have known families affected by this terrible disease .
I would also like to say a couple of words about the Viceconte report .
On behalf of the Group of the European People 's Party , I would like to declare my full support for the Viceconte report on the 1992-2003 Community action programme on rare diseases .
We cannot fail to agree that the Community should have a similar means of trying to deal with these terrible diseases which , precisely because they are infrequent and therefore have a limited impact on society as a whole , with very low illness and death rates , will have considerable importance from the economic and particularly human point of view .
We need effective means for diagnosis and welfare .
Unfortunately however , the pharmaceutical industry for example has little interest in this sector , as it is not considered very profitable .
In fact , from a commercial point of view the pharmaceutical industry has no interest in committing to research costs , given the low number of people affected by these rare diseases .
They do not think there would be a market for drugs for rare diseases , so they do not conduct the research .
That is why Community intervention is essential , intervention with a high moral , social and human value .
Madam President , I think we must welcome the fact that we are debating such an important set of public health matters today in this Chamber , although it is perhaps a pity that it is during the evening session when fewer Members take part and there is less chance of other people listening .
Nevertheless , it is important .
Starting where Mr Poggiolini left off , I must congratulate Mr Viceconte on his report and thank him for including most of the amendments presented by the other groups .
Mr Marset Campos will speak later on and will have plenty to say about some of the proposals we made in the amendments which the rapporteur has very kindly accepted from us .
Anyway , in the short time allocated to me I do not want to say much more about Alzheimer 's disease than Mr Poggiolini has already said .
However , those of us who have seen this disease at close hand know how catastrophic it is for the patient ( who does not understand quite so much ) and , especially , what a tragedy it is for their family and carers .
So we agree with what has already been said here : we are convinced that there has to be an action programme , like in other areas such as cancer and so on .
The Viceconte report talks about rare diseases but unfortunately Alzheimer 's disease will be common by the year 2000 , with 8 million potential patients .
It will be very important for the various countries of the European Union to share their experience , and for specialist staff to be trained . It will also be very important to investigate the causes of the disease , study the risk factors and stress preventative aspects .
If there is a worthwhile aspect to the European Union 's work in the field of public health , it is that practically all its action programmes are directed towards prevention , to stop the disease developing .
So we stress that aspect , and also the need for help for non-governmental organizations and relatives who work closely with this type of patient .
Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , Alzheimer 's disease is a serious threat to the population of the European Union where the number of older people most affected by it is steadily on the increase .
According to statistics , 8 million people will be affected in the European Union in the year 2000 , which represents some 2 % of the population over 65 .
Aside from these figures , the significance of this illness should be measured in terms of the great suffering and serious consequences for the families involved , which are obliged to provide 24-hour care for those affected .
Another major concern about this disease is the lack of medical knowledge about its causes and treatment .
For this reason , Parliament has taken a first step by adopting a budget line specifically aimed at combating Alzheimer 's disease .
But we must go further , and in the framework of its future communication on public health the Commission should follow up our resolution with a specific programme against Alzheimer 's and support for the associations actively involved in fighting the disease .
These initiatives should be combined with those already undertaken by the World Health Organization and any other organizations working in this area .
The fight against this illness would also benefit from an exchange of data within the European Union and from coordination at Community level .
We would also do well to take this opportunity finally to create that indispensable European centre for epidemiology which we call for in every report on public health , and which is rebutted each time by the Council and the European Commission .
I see Mr Flynn is smiling , but it is true !
So I hope Parliament will support this request , which is so important in ensuring that Community actions on health yield the results we all want .
I do not think that the EU has taken Alzheimer 's disease seriously .
In 1997 it allocated under ECU 2 million to research in the disease .
Eight million people are affected with Alzheimer 's in the EU , so in effect the EU has spent less than 13 Belgian francs on each sufferer .
A properly resourced EU action programme , like Europe Against Cancer and Europe Against AIDS , is needed to raise awareness about the disease and coordinate activities against it .
Furthermore , national authorities should examine ways of improving their services , and attention needs to be paid to improving early detection so that victims can be informed early that they have Alzheimer 's and decide if they wish to be cared for at home or placed in residential care before acute dementia sets in .
Governments also need to understand that carers need more help and more staff need to be employed by health boards in Member States to provide carers with respite care , day care and other supports .
With more help of that kind , people could actually keep their affected loved ones at home with them longer if they wanted to .
This Parliament has to call for a number of things : recognition of Alzheimer 's disease as a major health scourge within the meaning of Article 129 of the Treaty ; establishment of an action programme to combat Alzheimer 's disease and related disorders within the priorities of the new Community public health programme ; recognition of the important role played by family care givers , Alzheimer 's Europe and their national member organizations ; and finally , the establishment of a European network and support for existing networks working with people with Alzheimer 's .
Madam President , I am very encouraged to see so many health issues on the agenda this evening .
It certainly gives me satisfaction that my promise to Parliament to present eight health programme proposals has now been fulfilled , and Parliament has been a very great help in delivering on the promise .
The three proposals for action before you complete the 1993 framework for action in the field of public health .
All eight health programmes for action in the field of public health have been endorsed by Parliament as priorities in considering what kind of public health policy the Community could develop under the Maastricht Treaty .
I hope they will receive your support .
Thanks to the hard work of the rapporteurs and the committee , the Health Council should be able to adopt common positions at its meeting on 30 April .
I wish to give the Commission 's response , starting with the programme on injury prevention .
Excellent work by Mr Trakatellis and the committee is evident in the very high quality and good sense of the amendments , which will add very considerably to the potential of the programme .
In total , 23 amendments are acceptable to the Commission , either in whole or in part .
The five amendments which are not acceptable to the Commission refer to comitology - that is : Amendment No 21 , which is not in accordance with the wording of the comitology decision ; to the consistency and complementarity of the Community actions - Amendments Nos 10 , 14 and 20 , which are not in line with the wording used in previous decisions on the other public health programmes ; and to an action outside the scope of Article 129 - Amendment No 27 .
I turn now to the proposal on rare diseases .
I am particularly pleased to see the progress that has been made on a rather neglected and forgotten side of human suffering .
Indeed , support for the programme is steadily increasing .
Mr Viceconte 's report shows that many Members of Parliament are convinced of the need for and usefulness of this programme .
For the purpose of the programme , rare diseases are defined as life-threatening or chronically debilitating diseases which are of such low prevalence that special combined efforts are called for .
In this area there is much that the Community can offer .
To make matters manageable , however , individual diseases will have to be aggregated to form a larger group sharing the same characteristics .
This provides the opportunity to undertake a wider range of interventions and to initiate coordinated actions with respect to patients who might otherwise be isolated .
The Commission can accept 16 of the 29 amendments , either in their entirety - Nos 3 , 5 and 22 ; or partially - Nos 1 , 2 , 7 , 8 and 9 , 12 , 16 , 17 , 23 , 25 , 26 , 27 and 28 .
The reasons for rejecting the remaining 13 amendments are as follows : 4 amendments are not acceptable for legal reasons , and they are Amendments Nos 6 , 10 , 20 and 21 .
Three amendments are unacceptably limiting : Nos 4 , 15 and 24 .
Three amendments are covered elsewhere : Nos 11 , 13 and 29 .
One amendment - No 18 - falls outside the scope of the programme .
Two amendments are unacceptable because of budgetary limitations : Nos 14 and 19 .
I should say a few words about the budget problem , which I know is an issue that Parliament feels very strongly about and has been referred to virtually by every single Member here this evening .
The Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Protection voted for ECU 14 million for the years 1999-2003 .
The financial perspectives as they currently stand , however , do not allow for such a sum .
Although the precise situation has still to be clarified - and I hope the budgetary authority will come to a definitive stand on this - there appears to be no room for a financial framework exceeding the ECU 1.3 million per year .
I am not hiding from you the fact that I am unhappy about the uncertainty over the future financial perspectives and the consequences that this has for the programme .
I can only hope that the situation will become clearer before a final decision is taken on the programme .
Let me turn to the programme on pollution-related diseases .
Mr Cabrol , the ever tireless rapporteur , I might add , has produced a valuable report on this subject , which brings together the main strands of competence of the committee .
Environment and health are indeed , as he says , inextricably linked , and action in this area by the Community is long overdue .
Turning to the 16 amendments , I would like to indicate that the Commission can accept five of them .
We can accept Amendment No 7 wholly and Amendments Nos 3 , 8 , 9 and 10 partially .
The amendments which are not acceptable to the Commission are as follows .
Amendment No 5 , which concerns the budget , for the reasons I have just outlined in relation to the programme as it affects rare diseases as well .
Amendments Nos 4 , 11 , 12 and 13 : these broaden the scope of the proposed action to an unacceptable degree .
Amendments Nos 1 and 2 cannot be accepted as they refer to the Amsterdam Treaty which is not as yet ratified , whereas Amendment No 6 is not consistent with the corresponding wording used in previous decisions on public health programmes .
Finally , Amendments Nos 14 , 15 and 16 have to be rejected because they are unacceptably limiting the scope of the programme to preparatory work only .
They would reduce the duration of the programme to three years , which would prevent us from achieving proper implementation and evaluation of the proposed actions .
Nevertheless the House can be assured that action started under a 5-year programme will be rolled-over to a new framework for public health and taken up in an appropriate way .
This was something specifically mentioned by Mr Cabrol .
I should explain why we pay more attention to respiratory disease and allergies .
Firstly , these diseases have significantly increased over the last few years .
Some Member States have acquired a lot of experience in preventative actions in these areas .
We propose to make this experience widely available .
We also propose to link up the most effective actions in the different Member States , notably through self-help and support groups for asthma and allergy sufferers .
This is not to say that other pollution-related diseases are not to be covered .
Parts I and II of this action programme address all pollution-related diseases , without exception .
However , specific actions on cancer , cardiovascular disease and communicable diseases which are linked with environmental factors are already covered by other programmes .
It would have been a duplication to address them here in our specific actions .
Let me turn to Mrs Flemming 's report on the integration of health protection requirements in Community policy .
I would like to thank you , Mrs Flemming , for your excellent and very comprehensive report and your very supportive comments as well .
The Maastricht Treaty obliges the Community to ensure that health protection requirements are an integral part of the Community 's policies .
The Commission has put in place a set of procedures to implement this requirement .
The annual report on health requirements shows the wide range of policies which are relevant to health and your report concentrates on the second report - the report covering 1995 .
The third report , for 1996 , has just been published .
It is not always evident how best to integrate health requirements in Community policies or to evaluate the health impact of a particular policy or action of the Member States on Community citizens .
Parliament 's report points to a number of directions that future work can usefully take - you mentioned those in your contribution - and contains a range of suggestions and proposals for efforts in this field which the Commission is willing to take on board .
I am now giving you that commitment to take them on board in detail and consider them for our next report .
As the Amsterdam Treaty will significantly widen the scope of the provisions on the health impact of policies , I would welcome an opportunity to continue the dialogue with Parliament on how best to ensure that health considerations are adequately taken on board in all areas of Community policy .
This will certainly be an issue at the heart of our discussions on future health policy .
Indeed I was encouraged to see that Parliament shares my intention to launch a debate on the future public health policy of the Community .
I hope to publish in the very near future a communication on this very subject .
I am confident that it will provide the basis for a proper exchange of views with the institutions and will be circulated to all interested parties in the field .
I should like to say a few words about Alzheimer 's disease since very many Members have spoken on this particular aspect .
The gravity of this terrible disease and its growing importance is still not fully appreciated by many policy-makers .
However , Parliament is the exception here .
You have shown through your initiatives in recent years to promote actions on Alzheimer 's disease that you are in touch with the serious concerns of European citizens in this particular area .
Study after study has shown that we should be bracing ourselves for a significant rise in the number of people suffering from this disease .
This was brought home very much today by Mr Poggiolini .
We need to act now to anticipate the consequences for our healthcare systems .
Thanks to the money provided by Parliament for action on Alzheimer 's disease the Commission is providing some targeted assistance for Member States and is helping to coordinate their activities in this area .
This was a matter brought up by Ms McKenna when she pointed out the need for better coordination in this area .
With regard to your demands to intensify research in this area , the political agreement on the common position relating to the Fifth Framework Programme for RTD attained at the Research Council on 12 February 1998 provides for precise , clearlydefined objectives and the first thematic programme entitled ' Improving the Quality of Life and the Management of Living Resources ' comprises a key action on the ageing population , including patients with chronic neurological disorders .
It must be appreciated that the scope for action is rather limited as prevention of Alzheimer 's disease is not possible and at Community-level there is no proper legal base in the Treaty to go beyond prevention and research .
That causes a lot of difficulties in planning a possible action programme .
But since 1995 the Commission has financed or cofinanced 58 different projects .
These projects enhanced the knowledge base , the exchange of information , the quality of life of Alzheimer 's sufferers and gave support to their informal carers .
I attach particular significance to what we can do by way of better assistance and training for carers of those people who are unfortunate enough to have this disease .
From these projects models of good practice have been developed .
I got the very strong message that the sharing of this good practice - the rapporteur made this point quite strongly - should be part-and-parcel of anything we do .
That is what we are hoping to develop .
Finally , as to a specific action programme on Alzheimer 's disease which has been mentioned by several Members - particularly by Ms McKenna - the forthcoming communication on the development of public health policy in the European Community will present us with an excellent opportunity to discuss the future place for such an action programme .
I will be coming forward with that communication in the very near future .
So we will soon have an opportunity - I think it should be fully exploited - to develop that point which has been forcibly made by so many Members this evening .
At the end of this debate , I have received seven motions for a resolution .
The vote on these resolutions will take place on Wednesday , that is , tomorrow .
Thank you Madam President , Commissioner and colleagues .
We have just heard a very useful contribution which I am sure we will all welcome and can build on .
Can I say first of all tonight that I am tempted to suggest that we do a study on the health effects of always working in darkness .
Given Mr Poggiolini 's comments earlier , perhaps we can make a plea to the services of this Parliament that we occasionally have a debate on health issues that takes place during the daytime rather than late at night .
Nevertheless we should welcome the fact that we have a joint debate of this nature taking place , and together with the debates we shall have on blood safety and on tobacco advertising over the next two plenary sessions , it will raise the profile of the European Union health portfolio quite considerably .
I know that this week there has been quite considerable media interest in these particular programmes .
Professor Trakatellis for example has commented on global television networks , and it will be very important for the public to know what is being done despite the empty Chamber tonight .
It is also timely that we have a joint debate of this sort for the reasons that the Commissioner was expressing during his comments , and I would like to dwell a little on why it is so timely .
It is precisely because the Commission is about to produce a communication on the future framework that will allow for action of the sort that he usefully introduced when , hopefully , Amsterdam is ratified , that we are able to develop these themes .
Parliament is playing its part - a committee hearing in October will seek to evaluate the programme so far and will then play its part in looking forward to a constructive interpretation of what will be the new Article 152 .
The irony tonight is of course that however fast Parliament moves the implementation of programmes on rare diseases and pollution diseases and accidents and injuries will not begin until the evaluation has taken place , which shows the slow pace of development of programmes since the Maastricht Treaty .
Many pressure groups working in this field will contend that their priorities have not yet been properly addressed at all , let alone evaluated .
Such an occasion as this is an opportunity to say that public health deserves a much higher priority in the EU within both the Commission and Member State governments as well as in the Parliament .
I know the Commissioner and his team want that but we must help him to convince his less enlightened colleagues of that need , not least at budget time .
I also know that Luxembourg is a splendid state but that when the majority of officials working on public health are physically distant from Brussels that is a tangible problem .
I hope the Commission will address its internal structures again .
The decision regarding multiple sites was of course taken by Member State governments and my purpose here is simply to indicate the consequences of such actions .
Those governments tend to take a minimalist position on the European role in public health and on the whole it has been far too negative and far too blinkered .
Most if not all of the Members here tonight are committed to developing that role and I pay tribute to a succession of rapporteurs who have tried to make a progressive contribution to the debate , including those here tonight .
That is not ideological .
It is an expression of many health professionals and non-governmental organizations who are crying out for commonsense solutions to common problems across the continent .
Many Members here are being invited , as I am , to conferences , some organized by presidents-in-office , full of experienced rational experts who want a European contribution to international problems which cannot be properly tackled at local or national levels .
Member States often cite the World Health Organization as the proper body for that and of course it has a crucial role , one where greater cooperation with the Commission should be encouraged as Members here have often done .
But that neglects the growing economic and social substance of the European Union , the unique opportunity it offers to channel relevant action on health protection and promotion for its citizens .
This is not just a market : it is a community .
Its people have rights and responsibilities .
There is a moral , social , legal and economic case and a commonsense case for good public health policies to be at its heart .
I believe the Commission appreciates that and will soon bring forward ambitious and practical proposals for the new framework .
They will be more horizontal in approach , offering greater added value , and will provide opportunities for the EU and its Member States to work together far more effectively on health issues in the broader sense within the confines of the Treaty .
With specific reference to tonight 's proposals , firstly Mr Viceconte has produced a welcome contribution to the growing debate on the needs of people suffering from rare diseases set against the background of other preparations , for example on orphan drugs , plus the development of research principles and priorities .
My colleague Mrs Marinucci will be commenting in greater detail on the specific provisions of the report .
But in each of the three programmes tonight we shall need to wrestle with the need to resource their contents properly and sustainably .
I hear what the Commissioner says .
We need to be realistic , the money must come from somewhere , it must provide useful added value to national schemes and be accountably utilized .
But the other side of the coin is that if we were to have another small European programme where too great a proportion is spent on administration assessment and the very people it seeks to help are put off participating by the lack of cost effectiveness in making bids or building networks , many voluntary organizations could not spare the time or resources to prepare those proposals and would simply opt out .
The rare diseases programme is aimed by definition at smaller groups , even at family level , often faced by vast bureaucracies for whom those sorts of expenditures constitute little more than a heavy lunch .
That is why it is worth fighting for more through this Parliament and also worth including consumer or patient expertise in the committees assessing the programme development .
Those amendments apply also to the excellent reports by Professors Cabrol and Trakatellis respectively and I do not intend to duplicate the comments on the budgets hereafter .
The Cabrol report incisively identifies ailments beyond respiratory conditions which might usefully come within the remit of the programme to tackle pollution-related diseases .
Taken together with other environmental actions which this House is pursuing this report represents a literal breath of fresh air for health policies and it deserves our full support .
I wish to turn to the proposals on accidents and injuries which I believe could offer the furthest-reaching impact on the lives of ordinary citizens .
Whether taking part in sports or just going about normal life , the number of European citizens injured , disabled or even killed in accidents is quite staggering and is recorded in detail in the report .
In that context the Commission proposal is wholly justified and the improvements put forward by Mr Trakatellis represent an excellent contribution worthy of complete support .
In particular the need to strengthen the EHLASS system of research and information sharing is fundamental and exemplifies the need for the internal Commission coherence to which I alluded earlier .
Last year I experienced its operation directly , having broken my hand in Brussels .
Perhaps at my age I should have known better than to play cricket and avoided the risk .
I may have represented a strange statistical blip on the survey carried out in my local hospital , but many doctors approached me later and said that they found the information from these surveys more than useful .
I have received other information on the results of publication of this proposal which suggests that there will be many unexpected benefits from this programme in industrial applications .
I like the scope and the potential day-to-day impact of the programme and the report , and I wholeheartedly commend them , with the predictable caveat on budgets .
Given the often erratic nature of care and treatment in Member States regarding Alzheimer 's disease , the growing numbers and proportion of ageing citizens of Europe , and the evidence that increasing longevity does not always bring increasing quality of life , it is absolutely understandable that we should bring forward and demand urgent action on Alzheimer 's disease .
What must also be sought is an agreed prioritization of the activities which has resonance within the professional , scientific and social communities .
We all have ardent advocates of various priorities knocking at doors with special needs .
We and the Commission must be able to justify a sustainable development of health policy priorities within a very clear framework to avoid accusations of emotional attachment and vested interest .
That justification is self-evident for Alzheimer 's and now that the eight initial programmes are under way , if far from in place , it is appropriate to turn towards the future .
Great challenges are ahead .
This very week a major conference in the United States is expressing fears about the inability of developed and developing societies alike to combat and prevent the resurgence of diseases thought to be beaten .
Fears of blood and food safety arise almost daily .
Questions of diet and life style and environment and medical science itself will demand significant European responses , which is why it is important that we make coherent and consistent progress and is why the scrutiny provided by reports such as that by Mrs Flemming on the integration of health policies across the range of EU competence is so important and so revealing .
Its stress on coherent development and integration is essential and is exemplified by my concluding plea for support tonight .
Its recommendations on the long-term future of reform of agricultural policies , comprising almost half the budget , and in particular the aim to remove subsidies for tobacco production over the next decade , should be strongly supported by this House .
This is not the night to rehearse arguments on the literal ills of smoking .
That will come soon , as will major debates on reforms of our agricultural structures .
The world will demand that and our citizens will expect us to fulfil our role as their protectors for a consistent removal of health threats and risks .
By rejecting all four amendments to Mrs Flemming 's helpful report as adopted in committee this House can take a small step forward tomorrow and anticipate much larger strides in the months and years to come .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , the significance of health policy in Europe is increasing .
This is stipulated by the Treaty of Amsterdam , and that is a good thing , because for too long the European Community has only concerned itself with the free movement of goods in the single market and too little with other aspects , which are , however , closely associated with this .
The question of subsidiarity is often raised , particularly when the European Union wants to intervene itself and should not just take the health policy in other areas into consideration .
I believe that with the three programmes which we have before us for discussion today , the question of subsidiarity does not arise at all in at least two , because with rare diseases it is clear that , if in a Member State there are only ten people affected , it is not possible to introduce a sensible programme .
If in the entire EU there are well over 100 people affected by the same disease , then it is worthwhile doing something and I believe that the added value of the European dimension is obvious here .
I shall concentrate on diseases caused by environmental factors .
We all know that this is a serious problem and that many illnesses are associated with a high level of harmful emissions .
I have some critical questions relating to whether the present programme is capable of tackling this problem adequately .
I believe , and that is why we in the Group of the European People 's Party have tabled amendments , that we must make disease caused by environmental factors a focus of a new health policy in the European Union and that we cannot only deal with it in such a small programme .
Therefore , we believe that we must now undertake preparatory work for a really major programme .
In this way a really strong framework can be produced , which also comprises all diseases caused by environmental factors .
In this way , there can no longer be any distinction made between , for example , environment related diseases of the respiratory system and environment related cancers .
These must all come under one umbrella .
Therefore , we should approve the corresponding amendments tabled by the Group of the European People 's Party .
It is important however that we do not simply carry out research and collect data ; conclusions must be drawn .
We did that as a Parliament for example in the Auto-Oil Programme and we request the Commission to adopt our corresponding tabled amendments .
Smoking is also an environmental problem - at least passive smoking - and therefore I should again like to support Mrs Flemming 's report .
It must distress you deeply , Commissioner Flynn . Mrs Flemming makes such a wonderful proposal in point 10 , namely that we finally cease subsidising tobacco , that reform is needed there , and you cannot say anything about it , because your colleagues will not let you !
Please carry on the fight for the removal of the tobacco subsidies : you have our support !
Madam President , I would like to make a few institutional points on the future .
In 1984 , when I first entered this House , I asked for a sub-committee on health protection to be set up .
I believe this is essential today .
I would like to say , jokingly , that without health we cannot even build the Parliament buildings : so we ought to think of ourselves for a moment .
I would also like to say , and here I agree with Mrs Flemming , that the directive on the freedom of movement of doctors , on reciprocal recognition , of which I was also a supporter , has failed .
We need to review this directive .
Older doctors find it difficult to move , so we need to think of investing in doctors currently in training , as the rapporteur says , trying to get them to travel in the various countries .
I would also like to draw attention to doctor numbers : in the EU there is currently an excess of doctors , an enormous flood , often holding university posts rather than dealing with the needs of patients .
I therefore think it advisable to study this problem , because we need not just medical graduates but trained doctors , and I believe a knowledge of the 15 countries could lead to high levels of competitiveness .
Finally , I would like to recommend an examination of this Green Paper on health .
Please also note that the problem of the elderly needs to be brought clearly to Parliament 's attention , by means of a study on the increase in the ageing rate and the fall in growth .
In ten years ' time , it will be the EU 's greatest problem .
We would do better to remember that today !
Madam President , my colleagues Mr Cars and Mr Lindqvist will comment on the Alzheimer issue , and I would like to say a few things about the Cabrol report .
I agree with the rapporteur , Mr Cabrol , that the action programme on pollution-related diseases has too many limitations .
We think more attention should be paid to diseases caused by noise pollution , contaminated food , tobacco and polluted water .
We fully agree with Mrs Flemming about tobacco manufacturing .
We hope the Commissioner can raise the ECU 1.3 million set aside for this programme for the period 1999-2003 to ECU 14 million .
I think I managed to detect some willingness in him , but we shall have to wait and see .
In conclusion , we submitted an amendment which deals with registration points for lodging environmental health complaints .
Such registration points already exist in the Netherlands and Belgium .
The advantage of such a registration point is that it can help to detect health problems earlier .
We do not have a new institution in mind , but we would like to encourage registration networks on a national level .
This will cost no extra money , which is why we do not understand why the Commissioner opposes Amendment No 13 by the Group of the European Liberal , Democrat and Reform Party .
We hope the honourable Members will vote for Amendment No 13 tomorrow , because it would be a good addition to the action programme .
Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , first of all I want to say that we are absolutely convinced that the reports presented by Mr Trakatellis , Mr Viceconte , Mr Cabrol and Mrs Flemming are appropriate .
Our group , the Confederal Group of the European United Left / Nordic Green Left is going to support them .
My fellow group-member , Laura González Álvarez , said just a moment ago that we are pleased that our amendments have been included in these reports .
I would like to give a few examples and then draw some general conclusions .
We have seen that it is important to stress the need for a scientific information infrastructure , a database , a surveillance system , and - since it is essential to be able to combat these rare diseases - an information distribution network , with the involvement of the relatives , NGOs and bodies which help these patients , so that progress can be made towards better cooperation within society .
It is also important to be committed to research , teaching and training in these matters . Finally , that means we also need to increase the financial budget in order to address all these needs .
That is the specific basis of our comments : it is not possible to address these questions with the inadequate budgetary resources currently available , which calls into question the economic model we are constructing in Europe .
We need a different model , an outlook based more on solidarity .
We cannot have it both ways .
We need to modify our existing model .
Secondly , we need common instruments .
It is incomprehensible that we are not implementing the surveillance network , a sound epidemiological system , and also the common instruments required for effective action .
Lastly , I also want to point out the need for health services to share common aspects .
Madam President , despite the limited number of Members present and the late hour , I think everyone is aware of the importance of this debate and the fact that the health problem is assuming ever greater political importance for the EU , although still not enough as regards the problems raised today .
Certainly , from the point of view of competence , the EU should try to coordinate the overall policy and , by adopting initiatives , promote systems that ensure prevention above all . Today 's reports are headed in that direction .
That there is a link between the various public health issues is shown by the fact that , in today 's debate on general health protection , we are dealing with a programme concerning pollution-related diseases and rare diseases .
In connection with the latter , I would like to point out - for , like the Greens , we are in favour of all the proposals presented - the need for a high level of protection with regard to rare diseases . One way or another we also need to gain a thorough knowledge of them for , unfortunately , as shown by the report , the definition of a rare disease varies .
We have examples of this , such as Alzheimer 's disease . Until recently it was considered a rare disease ; today , unfortunately , on account of the increase in the average age as well , it is becoming a common disease .
At present , Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease , linked with BSE , is considered a rare disease , but unfortunately it could become common in the future , owing to mistaken choices having been made in terms of prevention .
It is therefore important for us to have a prevention policy on rare diseases , a joint common study , because the small countries cannot have an adequate knowledge of these diseases , and because we also need public intervention , public research , in the field of drugs required to resolve related problems .
Madam President , popular wisdom says , ' Better late than never ' .
The European Commission , which from 1986 to 1996 allowed contaminated cattle and contaminated flour to circulate freely , is now concerned with the health of Europeans .
It is as if grace is still possible even amongst the worst of men .
Today we are debating texts on pollution-related diseases , injuries , Alzheimer 's disease and rare diseases .
We could have added emerging or re-emerging diseases , considering that free circulation is bringing back tuberculosis , malaria and viral diseases such as the Ebola disease .
The Commission is intervening because Article 129 of the European Treaties assigns it the responsibility of ensuring a high level of health protection .
Doubtless the thirty individuals who suffer from atypical Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease would think Article 129 somewhat ironic .
Turning specifically to Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease - and my colleague spoke about it earlier - this is at present a rare disease but there is a risk that it will become less so , as others have done .
Leprosy is still rare in our countries , but perhaps free circulation will make it more common .
Moreover , the increase in life expectancy also makes it more likely that diseases such as Alzheimer 's will become more common .
We have been told it was not possible to increase funding and , taking into account the budgetary rationing policy , our committee proposes to bring it up to ECU 14 million .
Everyone would agree , even the draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on Budgets , who by the way gave the same report on two different subjects , which surely shows that there were certain difficulties during compilation .
Turning to pollution-related diseases , Mr Cabrol was right to point out that people are only interested in air pollution .
This is the green neurosis - a fixation on nitrogen oxide , sulphur dioxide and the greenhouse effect .
Haroun Tazieff , who is now dead , devoted part of his career to showing that , scientifically , all of that was witchcraft .
But there are much more serious issues if we consider food allergies .
On this subject , no one ever talks about the right to information raised by Mr Trakatellis , because no one knows if the soya contained in yoghurts is natural or the product of genetic manipulation .
There is no traceability , or if there is it comes at a high price . Here too the Commission bears its share of the responsibility .
The same applies to water pollution and BSE pollution .
Furthermore , Mr Trakatellis talked to us earlier about suicides among farmers , coalminers , steel workers and textile workers . Who is responsible for these suicides , Commissioner Flynn ?
Part of the prevention may be to guard against ultraliberalism .
Any lack of progress in pharmaceutical research on emerging diseases may be down to budgetary restrictions , or to the foolishness of cure-all medications which reduce the profit margins of laboratories .
As laboratories today are not able to discover molecules , and since it takes ten years for a newly discovered molecule to appear on the pharmacy shelf , it may be that by 2010 we will not have the desired medication to combat the rare diseases which may have spread in the meantime .
Madam President , I will finish now .
With 40 million Europeans in poverty who cannot manage to take care of themselves we may have a very serious clinical indication of the disease of euro-federalism .
Madam President , the EU 's attention and commitment to the health of its male and female citizens is continuing to grow , just as its competence on health has grown from Maastricht to Amsterdam , even if many Member States refuse today to transfer competence in the field of health care to the EU , and may continue to do so for a long time .
So for the time being we are still talking about prevention , but that is something .
We need to look at maintaining our physical and mental wellbeing in order to save suffering and costs ( not only in terms of human lives ) and it cannot be denied that prevention within the 15 Member States provides a real added value .
Although this is true in general , it is all the more so when we deal with issues such as those being considered in this debate on health : rare diseases which , by definition , reach a critical mass more amenable to analysis if monitoring , control , knowledge and research activities are conducted over a wider area than that of the individual states ; or pollution-related diseases , a phenomenon that knows no boundaries and which we can only combat with coordinated joint measures at super-national level .
It is a pity to have to repeat it , but unfortunately it is true that with regard to the problem of rare diseases , Europe has so far been way behind .
Some people say we should not always make comparisons with the United States , which are precisely that - United States - and therefore governed by federal regulations , with a federal institutional organization , a single currency , and so on .
It is a fact that the greatest economic power in the world has so far not supported and driven the action of its Member States in a field where a substitution of the private sector is hard to imagine , despite the fact that it has become increasingly clear that it is precisely the rarity of these diseases - diseases which are rare but seriously disabling and often fatal - that made it impossible to provide the know-how , the information and the scientific and economic means necessary to provide an adequate answer .
When we talk about rare diseases , we are referring to more than 5 000 diseases with a prevalence of 10 in 5 000 in the entire Community population .
Owing to their rarity , there is a delay in diagnosis , which means waiting for 1 to 5 , or even up to 6 years .
Think of the sick , of sick children and their families , families who have managed to fill the gap and deal with the institutional delay by setting up an extraordinary network of support groups , set up on the initiative of parents and relatives of victims of these diseases , who have often accumulated a whole wealth of knowledge based on their experiences and on the exchange of information .
We therefore need to accept the draft Commission proposal on the adoption of a 1999-2003 Community action programme , which I hope - and I ask the Commissioner for confirmation of this - will be followed by a measure on orphan drugs as a natural corollary to this .
However , to ensure that this programme does not remain at the level of good intentions , we need adequate financing , as rightly requested by the rapporteur , Mr Viceconte , whom I wish to congratulate on his excellent work .
Although economizing on health is always serious , in this case , at a time when the EU should , on its own initiative , be stimulating , coordinating and supporting the task of the Member States , allocating a symbolic , ridiculous sum would be a joke .
The Commissioner has already expressed his regret and illustrated the existing objective difficulties , but I hope he will accept Parliament 's support , for as a budget authority it has the right and the duty to adopt measures so that the programmes we are approving can really have the intended results .
Allow me to say a few words on the Flemming report .
I have to say I am not happy with paragraph 10 .
I totally agree with the need to reduce tobacco use in order to reduce or even eliminate the harm caused by smoking , but I do not agree on the inclusion in a health report of a provision that belongs in other programmes , relating to agriculture .
For example I believe , as I have said in other circumstances , that we need to analyse the serious harm caused by excessive beer consumption - a custom in several EU countries - which is seriously harmful to health and involves great risks even for citizens who do not drink but who may be attacked or suffer the consequences of beer alcoholism .
I would consider it very serious , nevertheless , if a proposal to reduce support for hops were included in a health measure .
Madam President , four important reports are up for debate .
Three of them concern programmes to prevent accidents , rare diseases and pollution-related diseases and the fourth is about the health aspects of EU policies .
I regard the latter two reports as the most important .
All pollution-related diseases must be included , so that people clearly see causes and connections .
Asthma and allergies are on the increase , especially among the young .
It is important to prevent and avoid disease .
I have two questions . One is whether we should really deal with issues like early warning systems at the EU level .
The other is whether we should really set up information databases at the European level .
I think not . I think it would be better to do this at the national level instead .
The most important thing is to describe the health effects of the EU 's own programmes and measures , and to permit Member States who wish to do so to keep their environmental requirements if they are tougher than those of the EU .
I think it is good to have variety in the different systems .
Madam President , as I have very little time , I will direct my remarks to the Cabrol report .
We are all aware from numerous recent scientific publications that pollution-related diseases are constantly on the increase .
A report published less than two years ago by the European Environment Agency and WHO-Europe concluded that there was an increase in not only respiratory illnesses , but a whole series of other diseases .
Here I am thinking in particular of diseases linked to food contamination , such as zoonosis diseases , salmonella and infectious enteritis .
The fact that these diseases are on the increase is very worrying .
That is why I regret , like the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Protection , that the Commission will not extend the programme 's field of action beyond allergies and respiratory illnesses , because many problems linked to the environment would warrant equally close attention .
Even if the relationship between cause and effect is not very obvious I think we cannot remain indifferent to phenomena as serious as the increase in sterility which is clearly manifested in some countries , mine included .
Studies confirm that sterility is on the increase amongst young people , which places a heavy burden on health expenditure since sterility results in recourse to in vitro fertilization .
We are relentlessly pursuing technology despite all the evidence , and we must stop it at all costs .
It would be infinitely better to take preventative action .
And I believe that thanks to its size and to the means generally available to its Member States , the European Union is better able to tackle this task than our individual countries .
Madam President , Commissioner , allow me to start by making a general comment .
If we want our Union to be a political union - and I am sure that is what the people of Europe want - let us strengthen our internal policies .
To attain that longed-for European Union , we need to overcome the current weakness of the common policies other than EMU and CAP .
And we need to overcome that weakness by means of the budgets , the political will of the Council , debates such as this evening 's , and pressure from the Commission , which is what I am respectfully but firmly requesting from you , Commissioner .
There is no better example of this weakness in our internal policies than our health policies .
For that reason , and because health has officially been an area of EU competence ever since the Treaty on European Union ( without detriment to the principle of subsidiarity ) , we welcome the Commission 's very timely initiatives , which complete the eight areas for action mentioned in its own 1983 definition . We also welcome the very well-aimed reports being discussed here tonight .
We think the amendments improve the Commission 's initiatives .
In some cases this is because of the high incidence of , for example , the injuries or illnesses caused by pollution , or Alzheimer 's disease . In other cases , in contrast , it is because some diseases are so rare that they are below the threshold where their research , statistical study and so on become socially profitable .
So , these are some examples of what the joint work of the Commission and Parliament should be , in the search for a final objective .
There are serious differences .
There is the difference in timescales , for one thing .
We would say that such relatively modest programmes of this type should be funded for five years , never for one year .
Are the financial perspectives going to start from scratch ?
Surely like that they will be committed right from the start ?
So let us specify five-year programmes .
For another thing , there are quantitative differences in the budgets .
I think the Commission is reducing the general budgets to less than half by planning one-year budgets , by means of reducing the objectives .
All I will say is that the city council of any large European city devotes more budgetary resources to programmes like this than the Commission does .
So , by accepting and standing up for adequate budgets for these deserving and timely programmes , we are strengthening health policy . In so doing , we are reinforcing internal policy and fulfilling that historic mission being requested of the Commission and Parliament - to build the political union , the European Union .
Madam President , I would like to raise a problem that has already been mentioned .
When we are talking about protecting the health of our citizens , with particular reference to the quality of foodstuffs and agriculture in general , we need to overcome the schizophrenia which sometimes exists within the Community Institutions , between the actions of the economic committees on the one hand and the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development and the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Protection on the other . This is because greater cooperation and better coordination of actions at these different levels may also produce a better protection not just of production but also of citizens ' health .
In this connection , it seems to me that the Flemming report endeavours to find this balance .
Other speeches we have heard do not seem to have the same sensitivity .
I am referring in particular to the speech made by the official spokesman of the Group of the Party of European Socialists . A month ago , on behalf of his group , he proposed the liberalization of soft drugs , and this evening he has suggested suspending aid for tobacco producers .
This seems to me to be a more typical example of schizophrenia .
I believe that by approving the amendment to paragraph 10 ( proposed by myself and colleagues in the Group of the European People 's Party ) , we will find this balance even better . I am sure the rapporteur will accept this amendment as a positive contribution to a statement already made in her report .
I have to say that , personally , I would also prefer paragraph 12 to be withdrawn , because it is clearly contradictory to what was approved by the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development .
We will be able to come back to these issues soon .
For example , I would have preferred advertising to be prohibited , but with the Member States nevertheless retaining the possibility of exercising discipline over the sponsorship of major sports events .
To conclude , it seems to me that we should find a better way of working , in the interests of producers and for the protection of consumer health .
Madam President , with regard to Alzheimer 's disease I am especially pleased that Parliament has been able , even in a small way , to play a role with regard to this major health scourge .
Adopting a new budget line meant that specific funding was provided to combat this disease .
But this can only be regarded as a first step in the fight against this disease .
The commitment in the Amsterdam Treaty to preventing human illness and disease goes even further than the present Treaty and is therefore to be welcomed .
The way in which the Community responds to Alzheimer 's disease will be a further test of this new commitment .
I urge the Council of Ministers and the Commission not to let us down in this regard .
I would like to ask the Commission specifically to state what action , if any , is envisaged for research under the Fifth Framework Programme to fight Alzheimer 's disease .
I have two final points .
Firstly , we in the UPE Group are calling for a specific five-year EU action programme to combat this disease , backed-up with adequate resources .
Secondly , the Commission must coordinate future and past research results relating to the disease and be prepared to coordinate with the World Health Organization associations and organizations active in this sector , including families and carers .
Madam President , what Parliament wants to achieve with its resolution on dementia is to involve the European Union more , including financially , in the fight against Alzheimer 's disease and other dementia diseases .
As Parliament maintains , it is important that the EU 's efforts can be aimed at all forms of dementia including , for example , vascular dementia and frontal lobe dementia .
Finding cures for dementia diseases is the main task of research , but until this happens research must also seek to develop methods to enable those suffering from dementia to retain as much as possible of their normal functions for as long as possible .
Other tasks include developing methods for relatives and carers to relate to those suffering from dementia so that for all concerned existence is given life and meaning .
Madam President , let me make four comments during my one minute .
Firstly , the example of BSE shows how quickly rare diseases can develop into catastrophes .
Secondly , one can see from the arrogance of the Commission how quickly it can foster that kind of development , because we received notice that research on BSE had to wait until it was considered appropriate to put together a programme for rare diseases .
Thirdly , when it is a question of rare diseases , industry is not interested , because one to one million is not worthwhile for a medicine .
Fourthly , consequently , we urgently need a programme at European level , which researches these rare diseases and gets to grips with them , thus limiting the possible impact , namely an epidemic , as we have seen in the case of BSE .
Madam President , I would like to focus attention on Mrs Flemming 's report on a uniform approach to health protection as part of Community policy .
The report is basically on the right track in calling for better coordination and closer ties in health policy as part of the EU 's other policies .
The Amsterdam Treaty , as has been said here , will give more weight to questions of public health than at present .
This aspect of that Treaty should be exploited , so that it will have a genuine influence on promoting health in the Member States in a broader sense .
In that way we would have to adopt a more systematic and far more integrated strategy than now , one that is comprehensive and all-embracing .
The health question should permeate all Community policy .
There is a clear relationship between health and equality .
We know that the socially excluded and less well-off become ill more often than the well-heeled and better educated .
This is obviously also a question of education , one that is linked to diet and living habits , but still more a question of economics .
Europe is ageing .
What effects this will have on different policies , and how we are going to allocate financial resources in the area of health care , are vital questions for the future , not just for the European Union , but particularly for the Member States individually .
The EU should be able to prioritize those factors that are essentially European .
How to achieve the best added value component for the national effort : that should be the European policy .
There should be a clear view on what is important and what is less so .
So although I understand how important the programmes concerned with specific diseases are , I would like to stress how vital it also is for the Commission in the future , in the formulation of its public health programme , to promote health at national level by means of a structured health policy ; in other words , by addressing questions of social policy , such as how efficient agriculture is , how different pesticides are used , which is to say , should more ecological prudence be applied ?
And how are traffic policy , employment , social exclusion and the rest dealt with ?
These , I believe , are important structural matters , all of which are relevant to the question of health policy .
Madam President , I wish to make a few remarks and address a few questions to the Commissioner with regard to the Trakatellis report .
My guilt at not hearing Mr Trakatellis is slightly mollified by the fact that he is not here to hear me .
I will go straight into the core of what my questions are .
As I understand it , we have a proposal which may both rescue and prolong the EHLASS project and incorporate it into the injury prevention programme .
That would mean an end to some duplication of resources between two of the directorates and it would put a greater onus on the Member States to contribute 50 % , instead of 20 % of the cost of this project .
My questions to the Commission - and I know he will answer them in his usual genial way - really relate to how this funding package will work .
I very much welcome the proposal , because if we can guarantee the life of EHLASS for another five years , for the duration of the injury prevention programme , that will be an extremely good thing .
I feel that we will then have a database of the kind we need for the reporting of home and leisure accidents .
The problem is that there is really no indication of exactly where the ECU 7 million involved is coming from .
Is it to come from the two directorates ?
Is it to be from one rather than the other ?
Have the Member States been canvassed as to the extent to which they are prepared to make the contribution of 50 % which is needed ?
It would be nice to have answers to those questions , because one of the problems is that , given the current base for EHLASS has already ended , neither the injury prevention scheme nor the legal framework for consumer policy , on which I would like to see this based , will actually begin until 1999 .
In those circumstances , one wonders how we can launch this integrated scheme in 1998 .
There was some objection from some of the Member States , notably Germany and , to a lesser extent , France , to the introduction of the EHLASS scheme in the first instance .
I had the job two years ago of monitoring how this scheme was operating for the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Protection , and I came to the conclusion that it was a worthwhile scheme and we should continue with it .
We can only continue with it on the basis of a sound calculation about funding and a clear indication of where the responsibilities lie .
I can think of no better hands to put it in than Commissioner Flynn 's , but I would like answers to these questions .
Madam President , I would like to confine my remarks to Alzheimer 's disease .
We know , and we have heard here this evening , that many thousands of our citizens suffer from this disease and related syndrome throughout the European Union .
The Commission should come forward now with the European-wide action programme on Alzheimer 's disease .
The Commission has already produced much-needed initiatives against cancer , pollution-related diseases , rare diseases , AIDS and smoking , on the basis of existing public health competencies .
Unfortunately on Alzheimer 's disease it does no more than finance research and this is just not good enough .
We need the research but you must go further , Mr Commissioner .
You should draw up a European-wide action programme against Alzheimer 's disease .
This programme would include strategies for intensifying research into the causes of the disease , for identification of risk factors , for prevention and treatment and for encouraging specific training of health and geriatric care staff .
It should also aim to change negative public perceptions of the disease .
You should make sure that you use all the budget that is set aside each year already under the existing programme .
An Alzheimer 's action programme would be of enormous benefit to the many thousands of Europeans suffering from this disease .
Not only are the interests of the patients afforded insufficient attention but also the carers of these patients are in many cases totally ignored .
My own experience in Ireland is that the real needs of the many thousands of people , mainly women , who care for our 25 000 or so sufferers of Alzheimer 's disease , are neglected .
It is disgraceful for instance that they are meanstested for the carers allowance .
I would like to see this situation immediately eased and I have made representations to the relevant minister in this regard .
Finally , small programmes and small initiatives can be very useful .
I have recently seen a programme in a hospital in Dublin , Blanchardstown , where pet dogs are taken in to meet these patients and that has a fantastic therapeutic effect .
We should encourage this sort of therapeutic action throughout Europe .
Thank you Madam President .
Could I just very briefly sum up because I really went through many of the points that have been raised in some detail in my first contribution .
I know I took some time with it , but it was in the hope that I would give a general overview of what we thought of the three programmes and also of Mrs Flemming 's report and the question about Alzheimer 's .
I have to say that one has to be very encouraged by the quality of the debate in the House this evening on this very important topic of public health .
Even though many have referred to the lateness of the hour and the small attendance in the House it certainly has not reduced the quality of the contributions we have heard and the earnestness with which they have been made .
Certainly there is a very strong commitment in the House to the subjects under discussion by those who have remained here .
I have little to add by way of substance on the various reports and on the oral questions , but I have taken note of the various matters and of what I would regard as the underlying messages which have come through in the various interventions .
They have been similar in many ways but they are worth taking note of because we have to consider them very carefully in the next important period , when we will be considering the next framework insofar as public health matters are concerned .
A lot of the interventions focused on taking a very serious view of and putting a very high priority on the provisions of public health which were set out both in the Maastricht and in the Amsterdam Treaties , and I would like to think that perhaps in the next framework we could take a rather wide interpretation of what is involved in the Amsterdam Treaty in preparing our new framework .
I take particular note of what Mr Needle said , that a new framework certainly needs to be put in place but that it is going to cost money .
When the eight programmes were given the envelope of money , the money was all gone .
The first three or four programmes really mopped up all the money and left virtually nothing for the three hugely important programmes we are talking about now .
But I am not put off by that , because even though the amount of money available is small and even though it is only for the year and on a yearly basis , we should make a start and get on with it , so that when the financial perspectives are being considered again we can show that we had the right attitude , that the programmes were substantial , and that the fact that the money was not there means that if we get it at a later date we can take the actions that we talked about .
I shall say more about that in a moment .
You endorsed the view that the European Community and the institutions can endow a real value added to what is being done in the Member States , and really that is what we are talking about here .
We know the Member States have the prime responsibility insofar as health provision and care are concerned , but what we should do is to focus on issues with a Community-wide basis that citizens are particularly concerned about , so that we can coordinate the best actions and exercises in the Member States and give the lead in that regard .
That can be the added value we can get from these programmes , even though they are small in terms of money now .
Maybe that can be changed by good intention and good practice in what we do insofar as the framework is concerned .
The House has indicated very genuine and encouraging support for the eight public health promotion programmes that we have .
We developed those under Article 128 of the Maastricht Treaty .
All the members who spoke - and indeed I myself - share the feeling that the current restrictions on budget do not allow the Community to do all that it could and should do .
Let us be clear about that .
You want to see more done .
That is a view the Commission shares .
There are a lot of things that can and should be attempted .
Perhaps we should set out the possibilities in the next framework programme as to what we should do , then put it to the Member States - set out what the Parliament and the Commission agree should be funded in the best interests of the citizens , then go for the money from the budgetary authority .
Let us hope that the budgetary perspective beyond 2000 will share that view with us , because your view is going to be shared and is going to be brought home very clearly in the communication that I have promised the House on the next framework .
I will be setting out what I think should be done with your cooperation in the areas you have highlighted this evening .
We will see what happens then .
Most of the members point to the importance of the next framework on public health and the need we can see there to expand the horizons substantially beyond those of the current package of programmes .
I would like to go down that road with your support .
You have made it quite clear to me that you expect quite a lot of the Commission .
I am going to take note of that .
When we come back to talk about the elements that we would like to see included and the kind of money we are talking about , there will be support here for that too .
We spend a lot of money on a lot of things here in the Union .
In fact , when one talks about marketing a certain product of recent times , more money can be found overnight here to do a promotional exercise for one product than can be given to the whole of the programmes for five years .
It does not make sense .
I can quite readily sympathize with Mrs Flemming when she makes the point , which she also made in her report , about the difficulty in satisfying herself as to the need to support dangerous products and give subsidies to them .
What she is talking about is the tobacco grown within the Union .
I have always found there was a contradiction there and I have made that point on more than one occasion .
The Union can provide almost ECU 800 million per year to support a product that is of virtually no value insofar as marketing is concerned and , at the same time , causes immense damage to public health .
All we are looking for here is a small amount of money to help to promote schemes and programmes that will greatly aid and enhance what people might be able to do to improve their own health .
I believe that the precautionary principle is a matter of public health and that we should pursue it in that way .
I notice that there has been a lot of talk about the whole question of Alzheimer 's .
Everybody said how important it was .
I have to say that this is supported by the Commissioner and by the Commission .
The ageing population is going to bring about a huge change because this is a disease for which there is no cure yet .
I hear some talk when I visit America about possibilities in the future of developing some medication .
But , as things stand at the moment , there is nothing .
We are restricted , as I said , insofar as the Treaty is concerned , to prevention .
I take particular note that you are anxious to see the action plan , which was talked about here a few years ago , pursued .
Perhaps we could dwell more positively on the whole question of training of carers , and maybe , as Mrs Malone very wisely said , on changing the negative attitude that exists in many of the Member States as regards this particular disease .
I have made the point that I will bring this forward in the communication in the context of the new framework .
I recognize that the House is prepared to give the money to it .
The point was brought home very forcibly by Mr Poggiolini , when he said that the demographic trends are there , we know about longer life expectancy and we know that people are faced with the threat - and it is an increasing threat - that more and more people are going to suffer from Alzheimer 's .
Until some remedy is found , then we should be able to focus on a particular illness like that and give a lead .
We can share the best practice and perhaps help out the carers and the organizations responsible .
I will be making that point and it will be for the two institutions to agree as to what we should be doing in the new programme .
Mr Whitehead raised some particular points about EHLASS and , as is his wont , he always focuses on a particular point of very great relevance , and he did so on this occasion as well .
The key point made by him on the funding was : will it work and is there an agreement to make it work ?
DG V , my directorate , will be taking over ECU 7.5 million from DG XXIV to cover the inclusion of EHLASS within the public health programmes .
So that is where the money is coming from , and that arrangement will be put in place .
The money is secure from our point of view .
As far as the contribution is concerned , at the Consumer Affairs Council , Mrs Bonino , my colleague , indicated a reduction to 65 % this year and 50 % afterwards in an effort to try to spread the benefits of the scheme .
I also wish to say that the vast majority of the Member States have , on the occasions when it was put to them , expressed a clear will to continue the operation of the system in a more developed form and also displayed quite a lot of goodwill of taking on a larger share of the cost .
That commitment is there and was expressed by a number of the Member States when the question was put to them .
So there seems to be no objection raised against such a solution .
I feel positive as far as that is concerned .
I think that both Mr Whitehead and I would wish to see it develop in that way .
There have been many useful points made .
I agree with what Mrs Myller said about having a much more holistic approach to the whole question of public health .
That is what we will attempt to do in the new framework and we look forward to being able to discuss that with you .
Mr Hyland was anxious about the Fifth Programme .
Yes , there is some reference in a generalized way insofar as the fifth research programme is concerned .
Many of the other points are all worth referring to . But I could summarize it all by saying that public health , as enshrined in the Treaty and widened in the concept of application insofar as the Amsterdam Treaty is concerned , is a matter of great concern to the House .
It is of considerable concern to me and to the Commission .
We would now seek to go forward with our eight programmes , irrespective of the small amount of money available to start them , and to put down the objectives we would like to see achieved , even if we had a lot of money , and then seek to try to finance them under the new financial perspectives and go ahead and do something positive in support of public health in the Union .
I think we have had an excellent debate .
However , if you are in agreement , I have one last speech .
Madam President , I have a question for Commissioner Flynn . If he had applied the logic which he has now revealed in his speech , and which became particularly clear in his last sentence , to the treatment of BSE and that which fell under his responsibility , would we not have been spared much of the scandal created by BSE ?
Madam President , I just wish to say in response to that profound statement that before the problem arose it had been contemplated in one of our proposals , even in advance of the BSE problem .
If we could have had the Community network of surveillance and control which was proposed , and is still not finally settled , then we might have been more advanced .
I would still hope that a Community network of surveillance and control would be agreed as a good way forward to settling the matters you have referred to .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 11.30 a.m.
( The sitting was closed at 11.28 p.m. )
Approval of the Minutes
The Minutes of Tuesday , 10 March 1998 have been distributed .
Are there any comments ?
Good morning , Mr President .
I am sure you will be kind enough to let me make a remark .
As I am sure we are all aware , today is a sad and ignominious day for all those people in the world who believe in democracy .
General Augusto Pinochet , who was responsible for one of the most brutal dictatorships ever known , and for the death and disappearance of thousands of people , both from his own country and of European origin , is today attempting to become a life senator .
The democrats in that country are protesting loudly at that regrettable state of affairs .
I believe this Parliament should do so too , especially in view of the motion we adopted during topical and urgent debate during our last part-session , which says in paragraph 1 : " disapproves strongly of General Pinochet 's intention to take office as life senator ' .
Mr President , that would be a worthy gesture , and I request it of you before the House .
Mr Carnero González , the very applause of this House amounts to a second ratification of that motion , which expresses a view shared by all honest men and women .
So I do not think there is any need for rhetoric .
Mr President , on page 26 of the Minutes , where it refers to Question Time , it says , " Parliament considered a number of questions to the Commission ' . It fails to mention that , because Question Time started 35 minutes later than stated in the agenda , the Chair apologized to the Members and the Commission representatives .
Mr President , I should like the Minutes to record that the first words from the Chair were an apology for that delay .
Thank you , Mr Gutiérrez Díaz .
The fact that you apologized will be added to the Minutes .
Mr President , this is the first time I have taken this opportunity to raise a problem .
I know this may not be the right place , but I am doing it anyway .
Last year again , thousands of birds were driven onto land on the Danish coast because of oil slicks in the North Sea .
I know there is a directive on the way and that we are prepared to do something about this , but we must ensure we move the process on .
Action is required .
Three or four times a year , the Danish coast is littered with birds covered in oil because our ships discharge oil in our waters .
This cannot go on .
I would ask you to refer the matter to the Commission and the Council and ask them to get this process moving .
Thank you very much , Mr Sindal .
( The Minutes were approved )
Mr President , I would like to point out that we have submitted over one hundred signatures in support of the urgent need for an exchange of views on criminality and I can understand why there will be no discussion on the topic this week .
I should also like to thank you for your letter to the Belgian authorities suggesting that the police presence in the area be reinforced visibly and that a police bureau with an emergency number be set up in the immediate vicinity of the institutions .
I would like to emphasize that security in Brussels is not exclusively concern of the PPE .
Any one of us here could be affected in the next few days .
Mr Rübig , I have already told you twice in writing that it is not a question of the number of signatures . It is not a subject for topical and urgent debate because it does not affect human rights outside the Union .
There are some very serious human rights issues in the world , and that is what our topical and urgent debates are for , not for dealing with our own matters in Parliament .
So no matter how many people have signed the documents , I cannot accept them .
Assistance to the applicant countries in central and eastern Europe - Accession partnerships
The next item is the joint debate on the following reports :
A4-0081 / 98 by Mr Oostlander , on behalf of the Committee on Foreign Affairs , Security and Defence Policy , on the proposal for a Council Regulation ( EC , Euratom ) on assistance to the applicant countries in central and eastern Europe in the framework of the pre-accession strategy ( COM ( 97 ) 0634 - C4-0010 / 98-97 / 0351 ( CNS ) ) ; -A4-0087 / 98 by Mr Oostlander , on behalf of the Committee on Foreign Affairs , Security and Defence Policy , on the proposals for Council Decisions on the principles , priorities , intermediate objectives and conditions contained in the Accession Partnerships ( COM ( 98 ) 0053 - C4-0130 / 98 ) .
Mr President , many inside and outside this Parliament are rightly interested in the reports on enlargement .
I would like to stress that we here in Parliament see enlargement as an extremely important issue , an enormous challenge , the realization of a dream you might say . We therefore would like to guarantee that it progresses in the best possible way .
This means that we want to make sure that over the coming years - and it might be quite a few years before the entire enlargement process has been completed - the European Union institutions , which have to lead and steer this entire process in the right direction , stay together in every respect vis-a-vis their policy .
We want to ensure that at the end of the process , political opinions will have been continuously synchronized and as a matter of course , so that there will be no accidents , and so that the entire enlargement , and the accession of each individual applicant country , can take place smoothly .
Mr President , we have judged the texts , both the proposal for a regulation and the individual partnership agreements with this intention .
We have some comments which follow on from what we have said previously in other resolutions .
Firstly , we were a little surprised that , after the previous discussion , the political criteria which were rightly given priority in Copenhagen , were not given the prominence we might have hoped for , either in the regulation or in the individual partnership agreements .
That is why we have ensured that our opinion on this point comes clearly to the fore in the amendments to the draft regulation .
We wish to give the political criteria sufficient prominence , the more so because , since Amsterdam , a number of clauses have been in force which apply to the Member States themselves . These state that if the Member States are found violating constitutional aspects , which in fact make them members of the European Union , they may eventually be suspended .
So I think that we have to make it very clear to the applicant countries that the European Union is not a congregation of rich countries , but rather a congregation of constitutional democracies ; that this is what it is all about .
Moreover , this is an extremely practical view , because how a country develops depends on the quality of its constitution and how its democracy is functioning .
We have never really had to discuss this amongst ourselves because we were all constitutional democracies .
The countries which joined us were either constitutional states already , or had recently become one .
I believe that living under a dictatorship for 50 or 70 years must affect people 's intuition , particularly if the dictatorship they suffered under was a severe one .
Mr President , this is why we are tabling our amendments to the regulation on this point .
Yet we also said in the regulation that this is such an important issue and that Parliament wants to be heard when this regulation , the framework for the entire accession , is significantly amended .
This strikes me as a very normal and reasonable request , and we reiterated it with regard to the individual partnerships .
We experienced some disappointment in this , too , in that the primacy of the constitution is not presented clearly in respect of the partnerships .
We think that in the case of the objectives which have been identified for the short term , a few technical easily realizable targets to repair the constitutional state can be implemented .
They do not have to be postponed to the medium term , for example , issues like the respect for the constitution , the independence of the legal courts , equal access to public services , the rights of the opposition , and the role of the opposition .
These could have all been decided here yesterday .
There is no need to turn these into medium- to long-term targets .
But in some partnership agreements points like these have , strangely enough , been mentioned with regard to the medium term .
I believe in fact that the whole of Parliament would like to give this a more prominent position .
We are also in favour of developing clear strategies on human rights and the rights of minorities .
These are issues which you will have to get right both in the short , medium and long term .
Mr President , in the partnerships we also suggest seriously that Parliament should be guaranteed a say when principles , priorities and general conditions are substantially amended .
We therefore ask the Commission and the Council to promise that in this area we will be able to use our opinions to influence a procedure which befits the dignity of this Parliament .
Mr President , Mr President of the Council , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , as Mr Oostlander has already suggested , we have in mind various objectives which need to be achieved in the various accession partnerships .
The first objective , already mentioned by Mr Oostlander , is to ensure a precise , thorough and very specific adherence to the Copenhagen criteria , to which I would add the decisions taken and the resolutions passed in this House - not least those dealt with in September .
Although we did not alter the Copenhagen criteria , we did add some very important , specific environmental and social issues among others .
Secondly , there is undoubtedly the issue - one which was a key element in the committee 's discussions - of the exercise of our parliamentary rights .
And here I use the term " rights ' not simply in the purely legal sense , but rather in the sense that we , as representatives of the European people , have a right not only to involve ourselves in these affairs , but also to decide which countries can accede and when .
Thirdly , - and this is an aspect which my group , headed by Gary Titley , has repeatedly introduced into the debate - there is the question of setting the tone , and doing so without delay .
That is why we were so inflexible on certain issues : it was important to show the applicant countries that , following last December 's decision , we do not intend to become embroiled in long debates on points of order and on formal and administrative matters , but rather that we want to take a decision quickly .
Finding a common position from which to deal with these matters was certainly difficult and the subject of long and extensive debate .
However difficult things sometimes became with some of Mr Oostlander 's motions , I do believe that we have now found a common position and established a common framework .
In addition , it also looks as though - and I assume that this will be confirmed today - the Council and the Commission , which are perhaps understandably a little shy when it comes to Parliament having its say , will be able nevertheless to approve our procedure .
Speaking from my position - and I have also found myself on the other side , where things look a little different - the following is important : these accession strategies must help us to avoid the tensions and overcome the divisions which exist in Europe in terms of the economy .
Although some countries are making an effort , in no way can the alignment process be said to be fast or effective enough .
Now to the social sector . This is very important for us , since social tensions do exist , and there is a social model for Europe with different nuances and emphases .
We do not want to abandon this social model for Europe .
We want to make sure that the other countries too can and do implement our social standards and basic social rights .
This is particularly true , let me be quite open about this , for the border areas .
We need stronger cross-border cooperation , particularly to encourage those people who live in the border areas , and whose concerns are perhaps not altogether unjustified , to speak out clearly in support of enlargement towards the East .
Of course , it is also a question of democracy . In that respect Mr Oostlander is perfectly right .
Our group in particular has always defended democracy , freedom and human rights in all situations .
That includes Slovakia where we are currently experiencing particular problems .
We are not blind in one eye either as regards Slovakia or any other country .
We must give Meciar an urgent warning that he is acting against the interests of his people .
Even if he is observing the constitution , in political terms his actions are unacceptable .
I hope that this contradiction can be overcome .
Quite clearly , as regards these accession partnerships we want to give out a clear signal again today . Our will to enlarge the European Union towards the East , including Cyprus of course , remains unbroken !
We stand by it ! We do not want delays .
What we do want is thorough and detailed preparation - the foundations for that have already been laid , and the views of this House supplement these foundations nicely - so that enlargement to the East can proceed quickly , but on well prepared foundations .
Mr President , I wish to welcome the President-in-Office to Parliament .
As he knows , this morning 's debate is the culmination of a three-month discussion between all three institutions , and we wait with interest to see what statement he makes on how Parliament should be consulted on the matters raised in the Oostlander report .
He , I know , will have drawn the same conclusion as I did from the second Oostlander report , which is that Parliament is capable of delivering a coherent and complex opinion in a six-week period of time .
It seems to me , if I might say so to the President-in-Office , that consultation without delay is no more than the courtesy which the executive of this Union , Commission and Council , should pay to the legislature of this Union , this Parliament and its sister parliaments in the Member States .
An opportunity for proper debate is all we ask before our quasi-imperial Council takes its decision .
So please do not tell me that , in the event of a political or economic collapse in one of the applicant states , it would be desirable or , indeed , politically possible to ignore the views of this Parliament .
Please do not tell me either that old lie that were we to refer this matter back for three weeks it would frighten the applicant states .
The applicant states are adult Europeans like us .
They know what is going on .
They , even more than us , value democracy and parliamentary democracy in their institutions .
I want to see in the statement from the President-in-Office an offer of the substance of consultation , even if he is unable to use that difficult word .
I want to hear about a proper procedure , a proper timescale and a proper discussion of Parliament 's views before the Council votes .
If the Council wishes to avoid the inconvenience of a three-week referral back , it must allow the Presidency to commit itself to that serious procedure and to do so here and now .
So , please , Mr President-in-Office , I do not want to hear phrases like ' the Presidency wishes ' .
The Presidency has telephones ; you know how to use them ; use them before we vote .
Parliament would neither forgive nor forget if we were subjected to a form of institutional treachery at the start of a 15-year process which has to be robust .
I too believe that , at the moment , the voice of the European Parliament is fundamental in this process of expansion , in this pre-accession partnership .
I believe that the economic progress of the countries applying to join the EU has been talked about for too long , while , and here I agree with the rapporteur , some political aspects have been pushed into the background .
I believe it is necessary to return to the more political aspects .
We need to ensure that we help these countries effectively achieve conditions supporting the rule of law .
We need to ensure effective respect for minorities and correct legal systems based on code books and on serious training for magistrates and lawyers who will be able to ensure observance of the law , obviously guaranteeing defence and protecting the minorities .
We need to recall , as the Oostlander report has done , that we cannot accept that the new EU , which will include these countries , will have room for the death penalty : that is not possible .
We also consider it essential for political progress and improvements to be made alongside economic progress .
The voice of the European Parliament is therefore essential at this time of accession , of integration , of the expansion of the EU and that is why we are asking you , Mr President , to ensure that our voice is taken into due account before the Council and the Commission .
Mr President , the first thing I would like to assure this House is that European Liberals wish in every way to facilitate and speed up the enlargement process which is now being introduced , with the aim of a healed and united Europe .
We Liberals would also like to give a clear signal that all the countries of Europe , big and small , Christian and Muslim , which wish to do so , and which fulfil the Copenhagen criteria , are welcome to join the European Union .
We want the EU to show how to reconcile differences and how democracies working together through voting can solve their problems and become a force in the world .
More than other parties the Liberals have supported the Commission 's proposed negotiating plan .
It is not our understanding that this proposal is aimed at delaying membership of the EU for any country which is making vigorous efforts to fulfil the Copenhagen criteria and to implement amendments of laws which correspond to the EU 's acquis communautaire .
We are therefore worried by rumours to the effect that the Commission has now started digging trenches between the 5 + 1 countries and the other applicant countries , trenches which supposedly include , among other things , the fact that the acquis screening will be different for those in the first group and the other applicant countries .
The meaning of the decision in Luxembourg was , as we understand it , that countries which make a special effort should be able to catch up , in other words , it should be possible for them to catch up with the first group .
My question to Commissioner van den Broek is this : are the rumours true that the Commission has started digging trenches to widen the gap between the 5 + 1 and the other applicant countries ?
I started by saying that we do not intend to delay the negotiations .
This does not mean that we think Parliament should now be removed from the enlargement process until the time when we have to take a final decision on what has been negotiated - to approve or not approve new members .
Just as we consider it necessary for the parliaments of the applicant countries to be involved in the enlargement process and to participate actively in it - my own experience from Sweden when we negotiated our membership demonstrated the importance of that - , we also consider it a matter of course that this Parliament should participate in the various stages of the negotiations , not as a negotiating party , but as a party whose task is to monitor and give opinions and thereby help to create understanding for this extremely important process .
I can assure you that the European Liberals fully support the enlargement process which is now starting , and that we want to see quick and speedy results .
Mr President , Mr President of the Council , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the challenge set us by the enlargement of the European Union lies in determining whether or not we can shape the process in a spirit of partnership and without tensions .
It requires changes on both sides .
Whilst the EU itself has introduced the necessary reforms in a somewhat faltering and half-hearted manner , the reforms it is demanding of the applicant countries are complex and farreaching and involve a full calendar of legislative and administrative amendments .
However , both sides must play their part in ensuring that the economic and political integration of the countries of Eastern Europe results in a high level of social and economic benefits for all the countries involved .
Enlargement should not be limited to economic integration alone . It must also play a part in consolidating democracy in the newly independent countries and achieving greater social justice for the people living in them .
The first thing that we have to do is put our own house in order and really accelerate our own internal reforms .
The first step towards achieving this - as other members of this House have already clearly underlined - should be the mandatory involvement of Parliament in the enlargement process .
This would also mean that the reform would be structured in a spirit of partnership and that the burden would fall on both sets of shoulders , for we know that the failure of enlargement would not only undermine the economic and democratic development of Eastern Europe , but that it would also do serious damage to the image of the Union as a model of peaceful , economic and political integration .
For this reason , our task , the task of the Council , the Commission and Parliament , is not to allow enlargement to deteriorate and become a one-way street , but to ensure that it is a political success .
Mr President , we are about to start the negotiations on the accession of the new states to the European Union .
At last , the revolution of 1989 has been acted on politically , and the isolation of a number of former Warsaw Pact countries seems at an end .
This places a huge challenge before both the new accession states and the present Member States .
The reasoning that countries such as the Czech Republic , Poland and Hungary are the supplicants , and should therefore meet all the requirements formulated by the European Union , does not do enough justice to the position of equality between these new accession states and the European Union countries .
We will have to solve this problem jointly , and this means that neither should we be merely the supplicants , nor should we expect the new Member States to be merely the supplicants .
No , we will have to come to a solution for the economic problems together , in mutual consultation .
This is equally true with respect to preparing the new Member States for the acquis communautaire and for the environmental policy which is beginning to take shape within the European Union .
We will have to find the necessary time and dedication to do so , and this will not be possible unless everything is done by the Union to make it possible .
Mr Oostlander , and I would like to compliment him on this , has , of course , pointed to a number of important aspects , such as the existence of fundamental human rights , and the continued development of political democracy .
The idea of the rule of law will also have to be developed further .
We will have to keep track of the issue of minorities .
Only in this way will we be able to accept each other mutually , and achieve enlargement of the European Union .
Mr President , everyone is aware of the importance of the decisions we are adopting today to prepare for the accession of the new Member States .
The economic dimension of the measure may be criticized , but certainly not the political validity of this Marshall plan for the central European countries .
Having said that , I believe we should have reservations about the legislative strategy proposed by the Commission , even if it risks being accepted by the Council .
The regulation we will have to vote on , and to a greater extent the proposed decisions relating to each of the applicant countries , are as general as possible .
The risks of deviation in the management of measures or of inefficacy are very high .
The echo of the grave criticisms made by the Committee on Foreign Affairs to the Commissioner competent in measures in Bosnia , and today responsible for relations with the applicant countries , is still too recent to be fully reassuring .
But the most scandalous thing is the fact that Parliament has been reduced to a figurehead role and is , de facto and de jure , lacking in any means of directing and controlling a process which , with all the good will in the world , will be anything but easy , both for the applicant countries and for the Member States .
In my opinion , the Union should henceforth work on two parallel scenarios : that of the strictly Community regional policy and that of the regional policy extended to a continent of more than 420 million inhabitants .
How can we expect to define a reliable framework for the agricultural policy or social measures in a Union extended to the applicant countries ?
The Commission has promised us the wording of the new measures on structural intervention by 18 March .
Will we be faced with a real reform or with the usual hot packs and cosmetic treatment the Commission has accustomed us to ?
Will the implications of the forthcoming accession of applicant countries be taken into account ?
Mr President , I should like first of all to say that I am grateful to Mr Oostlander and his colleagues for their work on the accession partnerships framework regulation .
I very much agree with Mr Oostlander 's opening remarks that whatever happens in this morning 's session , enlargement should not be held back by any decisions that may be taken .
Before addressing the details I would like to place these partnerships in context .
Last summer in its Agenda 2000 proposals the Commission recommended that the Union should establish accession partnerships with the ten applicant countries from central Europe .
These partnerships will lie at the heart of our relationships with the countries concerned .
They will provide firstly an agenda for the candidate countries , outlining what more they need to do to prepare for accession .
Secondly , they will provide a framework within which they can plan the Union 's assistance and ensure that it is targeted where it is most needed .
They are in many ways the key to ensuring that the candidates are genuinely ready for full European Union membership which involves both obligations and benefits .
We need to launch the partnerships as soon as possible .
If we delay the end result will be to delay the enlargement process itself .
I know this would be contrary to the wishes of an overwhelming majority in this House and , I believe , among the peoples of Europe .
All of us want to see the early and successful enlargement of the Union which can finally end the cruel and artificial division of our continent which has lingered far too long .
The Presidency , working closely with the Commission and Parliament , is determined to get the enlargement process off to an effective start .
Tomorrow Heads of State and of Government will be in London for the inaugural meeting of the European Conference .
That is an occasion which will underline the inclusive nature of the enlargement process .
We do not see enlargement in terms of waves or of countries that are in or countries that are out .
Our goal is to see each candidate country joining the Union as soon as it is ready and to offer all the help we can along the way .
That will be the message of the events in Brussels on 30 and 31 March , culminating in the opening of intergovernmental conferences with six candidate countries .
I hope in the course of this plenary that Parliament will be able to give its opinion on the proposed framework regulation .
This would send a clear and positive signal to the central European countries before they go to London for the inaugural meeting of the European Conference tomorrow .
This would allow us to meet the deadline which was set in Luxembourg in December and would leave no doubt in anybody 's mind that the three institutions of the European Union are working together to successfully achieve a process of enlargement .
I am confident that this is possible .
I understand that there have been some concerns in this House that the European Parliament might not be sufficiently involved in the enlargement process .
I am also a parliamentarian in a national parliament and I appreciate the desire of this Parliament to play a full and proper part in the process .
It is the intention of the presidency that this should happen .
We see enlargement as a process involving on the European Union side all three institutions .
In any case , the European Parliament will have a final say on any accession treaty which is agreed by existing Member States .
Parliament needs to be involved throughout , not simply at the end , including on the accession partnerships .
That is why Robin Cook , the British Foreign Secretary and President-in-Office of the European Union , wrote to you on Monday to make the Council 's position clear .
We want Parliament to be fully involved and to have an opportunity to express its views .
I am confident that the arrangements outlined by Robin Cook will work well and give all here a sense of real involvement in the enlargement process .
Members of Parliament this morning will want me to be specific in respect of a number of points which have been part of discussions which have taken place in recent days and some of which have involved me and some of my colleagues .
I want to be specific in relation to three points .
Firstly , in line with Article 235 , the European Parliament will be consulted when the framework regulation for the accession partnerships is to be modified .
Proposals for modifications to the principles , priorities and objectives for these partnerships will be sent to Parliament for information .
Secondly , the Presidency is committed to giving the European Parliament an appropriate opportunity to express its views so that they are available to the Council when the Council takes a decision .
Thirdly , taking into account the exceptional importance of the enlargement process for the Union , the Presidency of the Council and the Commission will provide oral or written information to the European Parliament on the major aspects and developments concerning the partnerships and the accession negotiations .
In practice this could be done in two ways : firstly , by providing regular information to the relevant European Parliament committees and JPCs and , secondly , by having a regular briefing of an agreed and designated number of Members of the European Parliament who would be selected by that Parliament .
This is a statement which should attract the support of Members of this Parliament who want to assist and to help the enlargement process and want to make a positive contribution to that process .
I can assure Parliament that the Presidency is fully committed to the enlargement process and that the presidency believes in an open and inclusive approach .
The commitments I have given are reasonable and can provide an effective way for views to be heard , to be taken into account before decisions are made .
I hope that this approach is acceptable to Parliament .
Thank you for the opportunity to say a few words .
Mr President , can I start by congratulating Mr Oostlander on his report , and by expressing my thanks to everyone who has contributed to it .
The Commission also believes that today marks an important moment , when Parliament is giving its opinion on a very significant part of the accession strategy , a pillar on the road to membership for the eleven applicant countries . They eagerly look forward to the official launch of the enlargement process , which will take place on 30 March .
As you will know , the same group of nations will meet next Thursday with the Union , during the first European Conference .
I listened with great approval to the words of the Presidency , because the Commission also believes that the European Parliament must be involved as closely as possible in this whole process towards the accession of new Member States .
At an earlier date the European Commission , building on the experience from earlier enlargement processes , already committed itself , where possible , to inform Parliament as closely , as comprehensively and as early as possible , both on the preparation process and on the state of discussions with countries with which we are actively negotiating .
I am extremely pleased to note that after an intensive and valuable discussion there appears to be broad consensus on the procedures which are to be followed in relation to this .
Naturally , there is absolutely no difference of opinion on the European Parliament 's right of consultation with regard to the basic regulation .
But in addition to where it concerns possible proposals for modification in the priorities , principles and conditional nature of the partnerships which the European Commission might like to make , I am also extremely pleased that when they are proposed to the Council , they will get to Parliament at the same time . As far as we have been able to gather from the Presidency , the Council believes and also promises that Parliament will be given a reasonable amount of time to express clearly its opinions on the matter - or this is how the Commission sees it - to see subsequently how , in close consultation with the Council , these amendments might or might not be incorporated into the final resolutions .
I think this clearly reflects that the Council , the Commission and Parliament agree on the importance of the transparency of this process .
I would like to repeat what Mr Oostlander said on the subject , namely that it is a process which will stretch over many years , and in which not only this Parliament , but a future Parliament , the next Commission and the next Council would wish to be extremely closely involved .
It is a good thing that agreements are made about this today which will remain actively in force for the longer term , because , as Mr Oostlander quite rightly remarked , at the end of the negotiations there will also be a moment when we will have to see whether the time is truly ripe to offer full integration to the new Member States who meet the conditions and who have successfully completed the negotiations .
I would like to take the opportunity to make a few comments about the second Oostlander report , and in particular about the remark he made concerning priorities such as they were included in the drafts , which also reached this Parliament .
I would particularly like to underline that political conditions must obviously be given priority .
It is my modest view that this conditionality has been articulated sufficiently clearly both in Article 1 and Article 5 of the basic regulation .
But I would also like to draw your attention to the reality .
We have had discussions together about the political shortcomings , if I may call them that , of a number of candidate countries . The dialogue we opened with these countries on that matter , as well as what has been included on this in the present priorities , reflect in my view the vital importance of ensuring that the countries which wish to join , qualify first and foremost as democratic nations , nations which respect the principles of the rule of law , human rights , and above all the protection of the rights of minorities .
There should be no difference of opinion on this .
In instances where these basic principles are violated , the Commission will not propose even opening negotiations with such a country .
Parliament was also assured of this at an earlier date .
In conclusion , Mr Oostlander made a comment about the issue of the short term and medium term .
Is it not the case that , particularly in regard to political shortcomings , we should aim for the short term ? That goes without saying , Mr President .
But what has been included in the partnership agreements under the short term priority are matters which we feel confident about , which we believe can indeed be realized in the short term , say within a year , and of which we believe that they can actually have some effect . The matters pertaining to the medium term , on the other hand , are matters which will need more time so that we can perfect them .
This is the background to the distinction made between the short and medium term .
I would like to thank everyone once again for their input into this debate and the support they have pledged for to an early fruition of these partnerships .
We hope that , on the basis of the legal foundation which is being accepted today , the Council will be able to accept the priorities , conditions and principles of these partnerships soon , or in any case next week , so that the partnerships can be completed by the time the official enlargement process is launched on 30 March .
Mr President , we have listened with great pleasure to what has been said . I wish to believe , and I have no reason to doubt , that everything will be implemented in the way that has been described .
In his excellent report Mr Oostlander requested the participation of the European Parliament throughout the entire accession procedure . This has been accepted by everybody .
My impression is that the objections that have been expressed from time to time are the result of two concerns . Firstly , the legal framework , as covered by the legal basis provided for in this procedure , does not allow for consultation .
Consequently , another method should have been found .
Secondly , there is a possibility of delay , given that Parliament should have had a certain amount of time in which to formulate its positions and its opinions .
My impression is that , from the debate as it is now unfolding and to which I shall subsequently return from the point of view of the Committee on Budgets , both issues have been resolved . The reason for this is that , from what was said by the President of the Council and from what Commissioner Van den Broek to some extent confirmed , if we have consultation with all the characteristics of consultation but without calling it consultation , I think there is no point in our further analysing this issue .
At this point , Mr President , I wished to say , as an aside , that there is a general tendency to exclude Parliament in such procedures and I would refer specifically here to Mr Colajanni 's report on the subject of MEDA .
I would hope that there too a procedure can be adopted which will permit the intervention of Parliament and its participation in the entire debate , so that we can remain informed throughout the procedure , since , having started out by endorsing the principles , we must also endorse the results .
The second issue over which there is concern is the issue of delay .
I think that has been resolved .
We can implement different systems , some of which have been mentioned by the President of the Council .
I will draw your attention to a system that we are following in the Committee on Budgets . This is the system of the permanent rapporteur , who is in permanent contact with the competent services of the Council and the Commission .
Consequently , the competent committee is ready at any time to present a report , so as to avoid delays and procrastination .
I think that six weeks is enough to cover the problem . The issue , as it remains , is to ensure that what was said takes shape and becomes a specific and clear commitment of the Council and the Commission alike .
I believe , Mr President , that we should focus on the issue of commitment since , as we confine ourselves to oral assurances which subsequently take a different shape due to pressure from other members of the Council or other reasons , I very much fear that we will take the wrong decision if we endorse them .
There must therefore be a clear , specific and committed answer from the Council which must take the responsibility to convert what was said into action . Only in this way will Parliament be able to play the role which everyone agrees it must play .
With regard to the specific issue of the Committee on Budgets , we have made certain amendments to Articles 3 and 5 which refer to the responsibilities of Parliament to the budget .
I wish to remind you that Parliament is one of the two components of the Budget principle , with special responsibility for expenditure .
It is therefore in the interest of the Commission and the Council of Ministers alike to have Parliament involved at a financial level throughout the entire proceedings .
It has been established that many delays and unnecessary debates are avoided when Parliament , exercising its responsibility by means of the Committee on Budgets , is involved in this issue from the outset .
Mr President , I wish to ask the competent persons in the Commission and in the Council to bear this in mind when they formulate their final proposal which , as I have already said , will hopefully be committed to the framework we have referred to , in other words consultation , which is not consultation in name only but substantial and full consultation between Parliament and the remaining two bodies of the European Union .
Mr President , the most important political point being discussed here today is the role the European Parliament will or will not be able to play in this entire process .
I listened very carefully to Mr Henderson 's speech , and I must say I am not satisfied , as it was the explicit wish of the Committee on Foreign Affairs , Security and Defence Policy that Parliament would also be officially consulted if there were any modifications to the principles and short and medium term objectives .
We are offered information , not official right of consultation .
Yet that is what we had asked for .
On the subject of Bulgaria , I have two comments to make .
The national programme for regional development has not been finalized in Bulgaria , so it is impossible to demand that the regional structures required for this should be set up before the end of 1998 .
Secondly , we ask very expressly that Bulgaria be deleted from the negative list with regard to the visa arrangements .
Mr President , as the time allotted to me is very short I will just say the following .
Firstly , as regards the Baltic republics , despite their small size it has to be borne in mind that these three republics , and they alone of all the applicants , were occupied by the Soviet Union and considered part of it , as opposed to other central and eastern European countries which at least enjoyed formal independence .
Secondly , security and peace in Europe , which is our main task , depends on finding a fruitful modus vivendi with Russia .
This will be enhanced by the Baltic countries joining the Union .
It will not in my opinion be enhanced by any NATO enlargement .
Lastly , I hope that all three Baltic countries will be able to join the Union at the same time .
Mr President , it is a pleasure to present the report on Hungary , particularly in light of what has already been said .
Thank heavens , in the end , our discussions focused more on security and politics than on economics , because ultimately security and politics are the guiding force .
Whether or not an economic upturn really is a possibility hinges on security .
Hungary is in the fortunate position of already having made great progress in this respect .
The documents I had to go through in the course of my duties as co-rapporteur revealed that since as early as 1982 , when Hungary was still operating under a one-party system , its legislation has been structured in such a way that Hungary really can become a member of this European Union .
As a result we do not have the same problems in terms of the acquis communautaire which certain other countries unfortunately do .
Secondly , Hungary has a long-standing tradition of democracy .
I was present at the first sitting of the Hungarian parliament .
I took a good look at the parliamentarians , and I must tell you that they were just as good , or just as bad , as we are .
They already had a long-standing tradition of democracy .
Governments have since changed without problems .
The parliament in Hungary does not include one single representative of the radical parties , either on the right , or on the left , and so it really is the case , since we set great store by democracy in this House , that Hungary deserves to be accepted into this Union as quickly as possible , above all because this Union is first and foremost a community with a duty to offer all its peoples security , because economic prosperity is dependent on security .
Mr President , what Mr Oostlander has said on the general process of expansion of the EU applies to a greater extent to Latvia .
This is a great dream that may become a reality : a country where , until a few years ago , the red flag of the Soviet Union flew , will soon see the blue flag flying with the 12 stars of Europe .
It is a country that has made enormous progress recently : it has achieved a balance , it has reduced inflation , and it has almost completed the privatization process .
Two major problems remain : the problem of the Russian-speaking minority and the subsequent naturalization process - the so-called non-citizens still account for 30 % of the population ; and the problem of the judicial and administrative system .
Allow me to say here that what the Commission has written on the division between short- and medium-term objectives is not true .
It is a general problem , as Mr Oostlander said , for all the countries , but it is not true of Latvia .
We should be careful not to press too hard on the accelerator on several issues wrongly regarded as short-term that should be regarded as mediumterm .
, co-rapporteur for Lithuania . ( DA ) - Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , when a Dane looks at the Baltic , it is clear how the sea is increasingly binding the Baltic states into a Baltic Area Corporation .
All this is a network which in reality is trimming and leading the political work , not least to pull the three Baltic states into a European partnership in the European Union .
Every day , we read in the newspapers and hear on the radio that new routes are being proposed for both passenger and freight traffic , and this is a practical expression for the rapprochement which also carries the political perspectives and aims for all three Baltic states , Lithuania , Estonia and Latvia .
As Danes , we also usually see the three Baltic states as part of Scandinavia in some way .
We also work together in the special Baltic council , and we in Denmark are looking forward to Lithuania taking over the presidency .
All this is in accordance with Lithuania 's hard , determined work to put itself economically and politically and in terms of life as a whole in an integrated European partnership and hence also in the EU .
This is heartily welcomed on all sides of politics in Denmark .
No matter who takes over the government in Denmark after the elections being held today , we will be supporting these efforts .
The same clear will is apparent everywhere .
I also hope that the European Parliament will give a clear signal here today , so that the peoples and not just the elite of the new Member States really understand and realize that the EU is clearly saying welcome to the new members .
I hope they are not in any doubt about that for a second , for the new states are anxious for clear decisions .
Mr President , in preparing the accession partnership for Poland , I support the short- and medium-term priorities proposed by the Commission .
I would like to make a couple of observations about them . As regards the restructuring of the steel sector , the Commission should pay greater attention to mining ; the two go together .
The Commission refers to the administrative reform whereby the number of voyvodships is to be reduced from 40 to approximately 10 .
This is particularly important so that PHARE funds can be used and so that greater transparency is achieved in relation to where these funds are going .
It is quite right that attention should be focused on freedom of the press , the restructuring of the civil service and the fight against crime and corruption .
These are all important issues which need to be addressed in Poland .
One important point is missing , Commissioner . There is absolutely no mention of social policy .
We all know that this is an area where something needs to be done in Poland .
I do not just mean social networks . We also need measures specifically designed to deal with women 's and family issues .
In conclusion , I should like to make a general observation about the procedure , which really does give cause for criticism , despite the explanations you have given .
It is our view that the whole procedure should not be blocked , but it would have been better if you had let democracy prevail .
After all , that is what we are expecting from the applicant countries .
We have even made it an accession criteria .
Perhaps we should start by putting our own house in order .
Mr President , I would like to make three points .
As has often been said , I believe that enlargement has to be followed by deepening and , unfortunately , the attitude of the other institutions towards this whole business is not exactly positive .
This Parliament has not been formally consulted about the content of the accession partnerships , which means we are debating a political opinion with no legally binding power .
So we must uphold this criticism , over and above certain intentions expressed during this sitting by the President-inOffice of the Council .
Secondly , many of the accession partnerships consider questions of democratic principles and respect for human rights to be matters for the medium term .
That is absolutely unacceptable to this Parliament . We have always insisted that all the criteria are important , starting with the first condition established by the Copenhagen European Council , which relates to these essential matters .
I now come to my third comment on the Czech Republic . As we all know , that country has suffered a major political crisis .
That is quite normal in a democracy , but it can certainly give rise to a delay in fulfilling the accession criteria when the time comes . Stressing what has already been said , we have no hesitation in pointing out two basic facts .
Firstly , the gypsy minority should be integrated in the short term rather than the medium term . There are still no clear measures , and we can and should demand them immediately .
The other thing to mention is press freedom and the reform of the judiciary . These matters should be included in the agreement .
Mr President , I believe that the main political problem we have to face is that of Parliament 's request to carry out its role fully and the requirement that the rapporteurs for each country conduct their roles fully during the course of the accession negotiations .
This is the fundamental question and the Presidency of the Council has often reiterated the word " information ' .
Information is a premise to count , to have an effect , but it is only a premise .
We will have to see in practice how the European Parliament can have an effect and to what extent the opinions of the European Parliament will have to be taken into account .
I am somewhat perplexed , however , over the replies made by Commissioner van den Broek to the objections to the division into short- and medium-term made by Mr Oostlander .
It seems to me that this division between short- and medium-term is still somewhat vague and imprecise .
Finally , I believe there is a problem of financing , of aid for the countries applying for accession and I believe it is necessary to grant this financing , taking into account the different capacity of each individual country to make use of it .
With regard to Slovenia , it seems to me that this country is preparing itself seriously and so all the conditions are present for important and serious negotiations to commence .
Mr President , as rapporteur for Slovakia I agree with the Commission 's approach for the proposed partnership agreements with Slovakia .
It seems to me that the Commission has chosen the right priorities for the short and medium term .
We are having a separate debate in Parliament tomorrow on the actual situation in Slovakia .
This actual situation will obviously also be reflected in the judgement of our relations with the country .
Slovakia 's political problems continue to be a priority , and dominate other questions which are of importance in the accession process of this country .
We hope that we will see some progress this year , or at least after the elections in Slovakia , but we will have to wait and see .
At the moment the country does not have a president .
The current situation is therefore not very encouraging .
The Meciar problem has been doing a hop , skip and jump of late .
I think that this issue will have to be given the necessary prominence over the coming months during the negotiations and during the Commission 's contacts with Slovakia . We hope that the Commission will do so through dialogue and partnership , because ultimately what matters is not the interests of the present government , but the interests of the people of Slovakia .
I would like to put a very straightforward and specific question to Commissioner van den Broek .
The question concerned whether the acquis screening was the same for the 5 + 1 and for the other applicant countries .
I would be grateful , Mr President , if you would ask Commissioner van den Broek to answer my question .
Of course I would like to reply , but perhaps it would be better if I did so in my response at the end of this debate .
Mr President , I want to express my support for the Oostlander report and its approval today because I think it is important in politics to give the proper messages at the right time , and the European Conference is just about to start .
Parliament should give a positive message today about enlargement and its own role . I should point out that Parliament succeeded in amending the initial Commission proposal , and gave the Council the opportunity to talk about a joint enlargement process , and an overall process with criteria to include everybody - in other words , breaking the distinction between the 5 + 1 and the rest .
I also want to point out that , following the same line , I think we must act positively with respect to the strengthened accession process . I do not think we should see our role as a defensive one , like a critic or a Cato .
We have to support and accompany those countries which are conquering democracy , consolidating their economies and learning how to coexist . We have to act positively .
Some of the speeches I have heard today sound as if we are setting ourselves up as a sort of grand jury where these countries are concerned .
I believe we should be giving a positive message .
On the subject of Parliament 's role , I wanted to ask the President-in-Office of the Council and the Commissioner to tell us the precise status of the letters from Mr Cook and from the President of the Commission , Mr Santer , to the President of Parliament , who will have to appear before the European Conference tomorrow .
What I mean is this : as I understand it , these letters and the proposal made by the President-in-Office of the Council have the status of what the British call " constitutional convention ' , in other words , a proposal for constitutional agreement corresponding to what we in this Parliament and the Union know as interinstitutional agreements .
I understand that if this agreement is ratified by the Council and the Commission , we have to accept it .
It has to be done with the due solemnity accorded to any declaration made in this Chamber .
And that should be the standard conduct and behaviour of us all , because I do not think it makes much sense for us to limit our action to a complaint , at a time when Parliament is making a positive contribution to the process of enlargement .
If there has been a response , then that response should have an official status , and in future it should be the standard procedure for such a thought-provoking and complex process .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , it is my belief that the Oostlander report represents an important contribution by the European Parliament to progressing the enlargement process in a constructive manner .
We see enlargement as one of the major tasks in the years ahead and the European Parliament will undoubtedly want to make decisive contributions .
It is also important to stress that we are not only concerned with the economic criteria and that we do not see enlargement as a purely economic phenomenon .
In fact , we are far more concerned with the implementation of the political Copenhagen criteria , namely , democracy and human rights , and with clarifying from the outset in this first round of the enlargement process that the European Union has a political dimension as well as an economic one .
Those leading the negotiations can count on the European Parliament in this respect .
This is a significant point as , ultimately , we in Parliament have to ratify the decisions .
I am grateful to the Commissioner and to the President of the Council for the various clarifications they have given here , firstly in relation to the European Parliament 's role in the process within the framework of the partnerships , but also on the enlargement process as a whole .
I am assuming that the Presidency 's commitment is such that it will also be brought to bear in the Council .
I shall support it on the assumption that it will then be approved accordingly by the Council as otherwise there would be a crisis of credibility between the two institutions .
I am also sure , Mr President of the Council , Commissioner , that both the Council and the Commission will discuss the outcome of Parliament 's resolutions as appropriate . In fact , it might be a good idea if this were to be announced formally .
In addition , I have another question to put , Mr President of the Council .
What exactly is meant by an " appropriate opportunity ' ?
Does it , for example , mean that the European Parliament will have a maximum of six weeks in which to discuss this information , or , as the Commissioner has said , will we be given sufficient time ?
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , bringing the applicant countries of central and eastern Europe up to the political and economic standards of the EU is essential if , in the long term , we are to allow these states to join the EU without at the same time damaging the legitimate interests of the Member States .
The accession partnerships with the applicant countries are the most important tool in ensuring that this is achieved in the most efficient manner possible for all concerned .
Unfortunately , the Commission and the Council have once again taken a different view of the arguments put forward by Parliament on the form of the accession partnerships and as a result have rated several important factors differently to the European Parliament .
I cannot understand why the accession partnerships have not been structured in such a way that they could deal in greater detail with the particular needs of the individual countries involved .
It is quite obvious that for a number of economic , political and geographical reasons , the problems of Slovenia differ from those of Latvia , for example .
In any case I regard a greater involvement of Parliament as vital .
It would appear that criteria which have been recognized as important and essential for the accession partnerships are temporarily being disregarded , or that the feasibility of farreaching and complex measures is being viewed differently .
I believe it is a common matter of concern in the House that this should be changed and that Parliament 's position should be taken into account .
Mr President , the enlargement of the European Union is a historic process .
These accession partnerships are the very cornerstone of the inclusive enlargement process which Parliament has called for .
Given their importance , it is vital that we all move together .
The three institutions have to cooperate with each other .
I welcome the statements made by the Council and the Commission on this subject .
We must also work in partnership with the applicant countries .
Mr Cars is absolutely right ; we should be working in partnership with all 26 national parliaments .
So important is this process that we must not allow ourselves to indulge in other bouts of institutional junkieism or go off onto self-serving ego trips during this debate .
Speaking in a personal capacity , I have been delighted in the last few weeks to discover that the British Conservative Party is now the champion of the rights of the European Parliament , although I regret that this has been to the detriment of their former commitment to enlargement of the European Union .
No doubt this is part of Mr Hague 's reforms .
We have heard some discussion of delay - delay by a few weeks .
My response to that is to remind Parliament of the words of William Shakespeare in Julius Caesar that : ' There is a tide in the affairs of men which , taken at the flood , leads on to fortune ' .
This is one of those times .
Or , to put it as the late , great Elvis Presley would have put it , ' It 's now or never , ... tomorrow will be too late ' .
I would urge just one thing of the Council and the Commission : the biggest problem the accession countries have is the ability of their civil service , their administrative systems and their legal systems to cope with the acquis communautaire .
I would urge that we put maximum emphasis on those aspects of the accession partnerships so that they will be ready to join us as soon as is possible .
Let me remind you of what I have said .
Now is the time , tomorrow is too late .
Mr President , financial assistance to the applicant states to help advance the process of enlargement is clearly needed .
It is right , however , that Parliament should emphasize that the development of democracy and respect for the rule of law is a priority and that steps will be taken if any applicant country displays manifest shortcomings in this respect .
Moreover , it is right that this Parliament should be consulted in advance concerning the principles and conditions for the partnerships which are to be established by the Union with each applicant .
After all , the European Parliament has the final say in whether an applicant country joins or not .
In widening the European Union rather than deepening it and in making it more democratic and diversified rather than more bureaucratic and centralized lies the best way forward for all the people of Europe .
The people want sensible cooperation and not dogmatic federalism .
Mr President , I do not believe that anyone in this Parliament wants , or is able to , delay the great rendezvous that we are all awaiting , that of enlargement .
Nor can anyone , or does anyone want to , indeed nor should they , take this enlargement hostage in the cause of institutional battles .
This is not our intention .
We are extremely pleased with the rapid adoption of the framework regulation and the decision taken by a qualified majority on this basis , regarding the principles and priorities , the medium term objectives and conditions relating to each individual partner .
And we are delighted by the Council 's and the Commission 's declaration of this morning , as discussed by Mr Enrique Barón Crespo .
Nevertheless , we must not let ourselves be deceived regarding the political significance of the issues and the debates which have been held here over the past month .
They are of tremendous political significance overall with respect to our role as an institution .
The European Parliament does not wish , indeed is not asking , to negotiate the enlargements instead of the Council and the Commission .
On the other hand , in terms of the political significance of a request for transparency , a request for clarity , a request for information , even consultation if necessary , on these basic questions regarding the future of our Union , we are clear . In this respect , Parliament does have a role to play and we must support all initiatives to this end .
Let me draw the Council 's attention to this : make no mistake regarding the significance of the speeches and dialogues that you are entering into with us .
It is a question of clarity of European construction for the applicant countries .
It is also a question of the importance of the enlargement process to our citizens , for in the absence of transparency our citizens will not understand the work which we have embarked upon .
In conclusion , Mr President , let me take this opportunity to remind you of our commitment to the conclusions - all of the conclusions - of the Luxembourg European Council .
In this , I emphasize the following dimensions : firstly , the institutional precondition , of course .
On this undertaking , we await proposals regarding method and timetable , given the urgency .
Secondly , we attach great importance to the European Conference .
We are delighted that it commences tomorrow .
We believe its content is very important , in particular foreign , security and defence policy .
There is an urgency for the partnership and for democracy in general .
Mr President , the objective of the many initiatives intended to form the basis of the enlargement strategy is that of ensuring that the applicant countries satisfy the political and economic conditions laid down by the European Council of Copenhagen .
This will make it possible to establish the bases for negotiations on a fundamental principle for the enlargement process , the opposition to any logic that leaves the countries concerned loopholes or exceptions in respect of the political obligations established .
We know that , in the effort to provide greater impetus for this stage of approximation , the accession partnerships and the planning and assessment system constitute the basis of the entire accession strategy and that the assistance provided by the EU should fall into a new framework , an accession partnership with each applicant country .
It seems advisable for the Commission to introduce into the new accession strategy the so-called conditionality clause .
Granting pre-accession aid should be subject each year to the level of achievement of objectives and fulfilment of the commitments assumed and the state of progress of the national accession programme .
The countries of central and eastern Europe should rigorously observe the commitments assumed with regard to democracy and human rights , the protection of minorities , the adoption of the Community acquis , on pain of suspension of the partnership .
Finally , I would like to point out the gravity ...
( The President cut off the speaker )
Mr President , I would like to make two points in relation to this debate .
We are on the eve of an important development in Europe , the enlargement process , which will undoubtedly occupy us - as Mr Spencer has quite rightly pointed out - for the next ten or fifteen years or possibly even longer since it will not end with the current eleven applicants .
There will always be several countries queueing up to get into the European Union .
It is absolutely vital that the European Parliament , as the directly elected representative of the peoples of Europe , has a continuous and regulated involvement in this process , rather than appearing to give the process free rein initially but ultimately making a pronouncement about whether the outcome is acceptable .
I therefore share the view that Parliament should be involved during the lead-in phase and during the accession agreements .
On the other hand , I should like to prevent the European Parliament giving the wrong signal .
We should not be slamming doors in the faces of the candidates even before the enlargement process has started .
Therefore , I hope that we will be able to reach a compromise in this matter .
( The President cut off the speaker )
Mr President , you have been very generous in the time you have allocated to the President-in-Office .
Can I take up one or two points which have been made in the discussion ?
Firstly , there was a query about the status of the letter from Mr Cook to you , Mr President , and also about the status of the remarks which I previously made this morning ; this was raised by Mr Barón and also by Mr Brok .
The letter from Mr Cook was a background Presidency paper .


The position which I outlined this morning in my previous contribution is a Presidency statement which has the backing of the Council and therefore has the authority of the Council .
I hope that helps colleagues to give further consideration to some of the points of substance which I have tried to make in my earlier contribution .
A point was raised by Mme Berès about timing and that is an important point .
As to the question of how long Parliament should have to be able to express its view , it would be wrong for us to tie ourselves down to a specific time on every occasion .
Maybe it would be helpful if I were to explain that my interpretation of appropriate time would be the kind of time that allows the normal processes between one plenary and another , between one Council and another Council within the institutional framework which is four , five or six weeks .
I do not see it being longer than six weeks .
It might often be shorter than that and there may be occasions when there are very urgent matters which have to be dealt with in a period very much shorter than four weeks .
In the normal run of business it would be that kind of period of four , five or maybe six weeks and I hope that is helpful .
The third point which has been made by a number of contributors this morning is the general question of involving the people of Europe .
Let me make it clear that the Presidency and the Council are absolutely committed to the process of enlargement .
Not everything will be plain sailing .
Enlargement has a large up-side , with the potential of great gains in security and great gains in economic prospects , but there are things that need to be dealt with by the Union in the period leading to that and some of them will involve difficult decisions .
It is important that we take public opinion along with us so that the public are fully informed and are aware of the issues at stake in that process .
That is why I believe it is very important that the European Parliament is given a role to be able to express a view , to involve the public in a dialogue and also to take issues to the public .
It is important that Parliament has that opportunity , to be able to express those views which should be expressed before the Council takes a decision on the matters that are before us .
I thank you , Mr President , for again giving me the opportunity to try to clarify some of those points and I hope that there will be assurances given to Parliament which will enable Parliament to give an opinion to allow the process of enlargement to proceed in a speedy and effective way .
Mr President , on a point of order .
Under Rule 60 I am required later this morning , as chairman of the relevant committee , to recommend to this House whether or not we refer back .
This is the last opportunity I therefore have on behalf of the House to ask the Presidency to make one final point clear .
I thank him for the progress we have made during this morning 's debate , particularly over timing and the clarification of the position of the Council .
I ask him to take one last step towards us .
I have given him a text , which was circulated to him yesterday , which makes the position clear : after the plenary vote , the Council and the Commission will take the earliest opportunity to consider Parliament 's views .
At the moment all you are saying is that we have the chance to express Parliament 's views .
Mr President-in-Office , we have that opportunity all the time .
We want a confirmation from you that you and the Commission , as Mr Van den Broek suggested , will consider our views , because that is the way to secure public support , which you rightly referred to , through a parliamentary channel , for what we are trying to do on enlargement .
If he could give me that assurance now , we will have no unpleasantness later in the day .
Mr President , I am very happy to indicate that it is the intention of the Presidency that the views of Parliament will be considered by the Council before a decision is made .
There would be no purpose in having consultation ...
... and hearing the views unless they were going to be taken into account .
Of course they will be taken into account .
Mr President , the National Alliance will vote in favour of this report , while making the reservations we have expressed many times in this Chamber with regard to the problem of enlargement to some countries which still do not seem to be fully in favour of an accession to the spirit of the European political union .
I would like to recall how , a few days ago , the Slovenian Ambassador to Rome took an absolutely incredible position with regard to goods confiscated from Italians and victims of dolines .
I believe it is important and correct to expand the European Union to include other countries , but this union should not be established before achieving the political union which is the only premise that will permit peace and progress in our countries .
And so we vote with reservations , to show that the National Alliance is obviously in favour of Europe and enlargement , but against a purely economic union based on the particular interests of the great capitals or some countries of the Union .
Mr President , can I add to this positivity that the Commission on its part is evidently not only prepared , but it will also take steps to study , together with the Council , all of the views Parliament has expressed .
I am merely re-emphasizing something which is already obvious in order to benefit transparency .
I believe that with this , all procedural aspects will have been discussed extensively , as there is a far-reaching level of agreement .
May I confine myself then to responding to one single question which was asked more specifically , firstly by Mr Cars , who wonders whether the all-inclusiveness of the enlargement process is left sufficiently intact during the procedure which we think we will follow at the so-called screening .
It is precisely in order to do justice to this all-inclusiveness , to which so much attention was paid in Luxembourg , that I have decided to open the start of the screening with all eleven countries together . After that the process will naturally have to be continued in groups , and then country by country .
Why these two groups ?
Because the evaluation of the acquis for the group which is going to negotiate is intended to identify which matters require negotiations . For those who are still preparing for the negotiations , this evaluation is intended to hasten the catching-up process , so that they will be able to meet the conditions for entering negotiations as soon as possible .
In addition , we will have to look at each individual negotiating country to see to what extent this can be done with all six together , or separately .
I can imagine that soon this will soon have to be on a bilateral basis , because the issues which will be the subject of the negotiations will differ per country .
I will briefly return to the comments which were made about the short and medium term , because I have a feeling that we did not make that quite clear .
Practical experience will tell , I would say , but the prime reason for setting the short or medium term was not to indicate the urgency of the problems identified .
The distinction between short and medium term is primarily made on the basis of what we can actually expect to achieve in the short term , and what on the other hand will need more time to be achieved .
We have tried to explain this is in these partnerships when defining the priorities .
I would also like to assure Mr Titley - as a matter of fact , we have done so during earlier exchanges - that the entire aspect of enhancing the administrative and legal capacity of government bodies in the applicant countries is given a high priority everywhere .
You cannot suddenly place this in the short term , for the simple reason that it usually concerns processes which are so wide that you have to talk in terms of several years , although that does not mean to say you should not start immediately .
That is why a reorientation of PHARE has taken place , in which everything which has to do with institution building and enhancing administration comes under the category of 30 % of the PHARE resources , which has been given as a rough target figure to be spent on this .
It will thus get all the attention it deserves .
Those were a few comments I wanted to make in response to the questions which were asked .
Mr President , this point about the short and medium term was in fact the key point .
The strange thing is that the Commissioner is now saying that it is to do with our expectations of when something might be achieved .
In other words , when we speak of the independence of the legal courts , respect for the rule of law and equal access to public services , which have been mentioned in some cases in relation to the medium term , this means that the Commission does not believe that the country concerned is prepared to achieve this independence , this access and so on , in the short term .
This is a completely different position , then ; the issue is no longer the complexity of the process , but your assessment of the willingness of a country to behave normally in the short term .
This surely cannot be the intention of this classification into short and medium term , Mr President ?
Mr President , by short term we mean those things which can be achieved in 1998 .
I am not saying that particular sections of the political constellation or shortcomings in the field of democracy , human rights and so on , might not still be improved this year .
It is difficult to draw the exact line , but I hope that we have indicated clearly that short and medium term does not mean giving an evaluation of the urgency of things which must be done , but the assessment of the time needed to correct these matters in their entirety .
Thank you very much , Commissioner .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place at 11.30 a.m.
Situation in Kosovo
The next item is the Council statement on the situation in Kosovo .
Mr President , I wish to begin by thanking those who have tabled this resolution today for this debate , because they have given this Assembly an opportunity to express the very deep concern that , I am sure , we all share at the serious violence which has taken place in Kosovo over the last two weeks .
I know that concern is shared by all the European Union Member States .
Police operations around the villages of Drenica and Prekaz in the last week appear to have left at least 80 people dead .
The authorities in Belgrade claim this was legitimate anti-terrorist action by the police .
But there appears to have been no judicial process before the killings and , tragically , according to local press reports , many of the dead were women , children and the elderly .
Belgrade cannot pass off such repressive acts as purely an internal affair .
Human rights abuses are a matter for all of us , and the European Union has a particular responsibility to reduce tension in the region before it causes instability in neighbouring countries .
It is essential that the international response to the crisis is a united and coherent one .
We know to our cost from the early days of the Bosnian war that international divisions undermine our efforts .
The Presidency has sought to provide a firm and clear voice on behalf of the European Union Member States .
What have we done ?
Firstly , we issued an agreed statement on 2 March condemning unreservedly the use of violence by either side and calling on both sides to resolve the situation through a full and constructive dialogue .
Secondly , Robin Cook visited Belgrade on 5 March , on behalf of the Presidency , to make clear to President Milosevic the disquiet felt within the European Union .
Thirdly , Mr Cook hosted a meeting of Contact Group countries in London on 9 March .
The Group agreed a tough action plan , aimed at stabilizing the security situation in Kosovo , including immediate measures against the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia ; a clear list of the steps we expect President Milosevic to take within ten days to stop the violence and start a meaningful political dialogue ; and a commitment to review the situation on 25 March and , if necessary , adopt further measures .
My colleague , Mr Tony Lloyd , is currently visiting the region as a Presidency envoy .
In Belgrade he will carry the message of resolve of the European Union and the Contact Group countries .
Elsewhere , his prime aim will be to listen to what neighbouring countries have to say about the regional security implications of the situation in Kosovo and to discuss what can be done to satisfy these concerns .
Fifthly , over the next few days , we shall be actively discussing with our partners and others what more can be done to bring home the message to President Milosevic that he must change course .
There are a number of opportunities for this : the European Conference with the associated states on 12 March - tomorrow - provides an obvious opportunity .
The EU Foreign Ministers ' informal meeting in Edinburgh on 14 and 15 March is a further opportunity , and today the views of Parliament will be particularly timely .
People ask what the European Union 's position is .
Let me try to make that clear as well .
We do not support separatism or independence in Kosovo but we insist that Belgrade grants real autonomy .
It is ironic that the Kosovo Albanians enjoyed greater autonomy under previous regimes than under President Milosevic 's government .
Getting the authorities in Belgrade , and the leadership of the Kosovo Albanian community , to start a meaningful dialogue about the differences between them is the only chance of reaching a peaceful settlement .
The tragedy is that recent military activity in Kosovo may have served merely to undermine the moderates on both sides and increase support for terrorism .
Clearly a halt to all police operations in Kosovo is a prerequisite for dialogue .
That is why the European Union and the rest of the international community must do all we can to keep the pressure on President Milosevic and keep the pot in Kosovo from boiling over .
I understand from the news media this morning that a statement has been made by the Serbian Government in response to measures taken earlier this week .
I cannot at this time respond to that statement because I have not yet received the full text .
However , I can give a commitment that we will study and fully assess to what extent that statement meets the concerns and worries raised by the Contact Group last Monday .
I hope those remarks are a basis on which a debate will take place this morning on this terribly serious and , in many ways , deteriorating situation in Kosovo .
May I join the Presidency in saying how much we are alerted by the explosive situation in Kosovo .
I had the privilege to attend the contact group in London which was very skilfully presided over by Foreign Secretary Cook , and where we feel that a number of clear signals have been given to President Milosevic in order to persuade him to take initiatives for a dialogue and a peaceful solution clearly setting the parameters of what we can and cannot support .
It was very clear from that meeting that it cannot be taken for granted that President Milosevic is going to act in the direction that is necessary to prevent an explosion in Kosovo , with all the disastrous human effects and other transborder effects and destabilization effects that a lack of solution could produce .
That is why it was very wise that Foreign Secretary Cook proposed to reconvene the contact group - which will probably meet in Washington on 25 March - and also to put Kosovo on the agenda of the informal foreign ministers ' meeting which is being held on Friday and Saturday next .
The European Commission is preparing its regular report on regional developments in the Balkans and it stands to reason that under the present circumstances one cannot expect that the Commission would recommend to the Council the restoration of the autonomous trade measures for the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia or would go further in recommending the incorporation of the FRY into the PHARE programme or starting the negotiations demanding a mandate for negotiations on a trade and cooperation agreement .
We are also studying at the moment the conclusions that were drawn in the contact group regarding other economic and financial measures to step up the pressure on the FRY in order to bring them to constructive initiatives .
I need scarcely repeat , following the Presidency , that the European Commission shares the greatest possible concern as regards what is happening there .
We cannot consider the situation in Kosovo without remembering how it all started in 1991 .
We must take into account that more far-reaching measures may become necessary if a disaster is to be prevented .
The European Commission wishes very much that in the first place the European Union and its allies will have the courage to take the necessary measures which may prove inevitable in the near future .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , Mr President of the Council , Commissioner , naturally everything you have said merits our full support .
Nevertheless , I should like to preface my short speech with a few critical observations .
Commissioner , at first I gave you my full support in your differences with Mr Oostlander - I am not sure whether that was clear - but I still must question whether the European Union as a whole was prepared for what is now happening in Kosovo .
This is not the first time we have discussed Kosovo .
On one occasion , following a visit from the Delegation for relations with South-east Europe chaired by Mrs Pack , this House described Kosovo as a powder keg waiting to explode .
The European Union took little action .
There was neither any pressure exerted to open a European Union office in the area , nor was a special envoy appointed as we officially requested .
Mr President of the Council , Commissioner , I am ashamed when I turn on the television as I did this morning and see the American representative , the special envoy , in Pristina , but no special envoy from Europe .
Yes , the British Foreign Minister went to Belgrade , yes there is now a representative there , but why - knowing that it is the most dangerous potential flashpoint in Europe , knowing that it could develop into a conflagration at any time - did the European Union fail to do more in the past ?
I know that it is not an easy matter since we have no proper contact on the Yugoslavian or Serbian side .
Nevertheless , the Americans are on the spot with their special envoy again and all Europe , and all the world , can see just who is tackling the problem on the spot - not the European Union but the United States !
I do not seek to lay the blame with anyone in particular , but we must acknowledge our failures .
We have been negligent . Once again we have neglected a part of Europe .
Why is it so important for Europe to deal with this problem ?
Firstly because , quite clearly , fundamental human rights are at stake !
Consequently , we must tell Mr Milosevic in no uncertain terms that we cannot accept his claims that this is a purely internal problem .
No , the protection of a minority , or to be more precise in this case , the majority of the people in the region is a matter which goes far beyond national borders .
Perhaps there is something else , perhaps we have failed to make it clear enough to Rugova and his people that we are simply advocating autonomy within Yugoslavia .
What is currently happening , the fact that Mr Rugova and others are calling ever more vociferously for independence and for a change in the borders , is also unacceptable to us .
We need of course to get our message across not only to Milosevic , but also to Rugova and the Albanians .
But it may be too late at least to change the mood . Fired by frustration , the call for independence are growing stronger and stronger .
I fully support the measures , Commissioner .
We must show that we are trying to quell the fire and that we are helping those , in Macedonia in particular , who are especially affected .
I come now to the second reason why it is so important , why a conflagration could develop : Albania is unstable for unfortunately there are in Albania , too , forces - in particular those led by ex-President Berisha - who are now agitating , who are now stirring things up , who are now trying to pour oil onto this fire thus forcing Fatus Nano , the Prime Minister , who was initially very restrained , to take a more extreme position .
Thirdly , and not for the first time of course , the situation looks like a clash between Christian Europe and Islam .
Once again this argument rears its head .
On Friday I had a detailed conversation with Siljdzic , the Prime Minister of Bosnia Herzogovena , in which that very point came up . This situation is , therefore , particularly dangerous and we have to do something about it .
I agree with you that we must apply political pressure , and economic pressure where necessary , although I do not see blanket sanctions as our strongest weapon .
Nonetheless , I am in complete agreement with the actions of the contact group .
We should consider whether a situation might arise in which we would send in forces of order - such action would naturally depend on the agreement of both sides - at least to calm the situation .
Milosevic must realize that , if the worst comes to the worst and he chooses violence , there is the possibility of military intervention as well .
If we are to avoid military intervention and if we are to force Milosevic to do as the President of the Council suggests , he must be convinced of this .
Mr President , I would like to lend my support to everything that has been said , but also to point out once again that , unfortunately , we missed our chance to set our preconditions in advance and to back them to the hilt .
I would like to see the European Union advocate autonomy for Kosovo , but prevent any changes being made to the borders in the region .
That would lead to another conflagration .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I agree with almost everything Mr Swoboda has said .
I should like to start by pointing out that the international community now finds itself faced with a task whose solution it has put off for nine years , and put off quite consciously .
I raised the Kosovo problem in this House in January 1991 and have raised it again on many occasions since and urged that something be done about it .
At the time , in this forum , the President-in-Office of the Council , who is now a Commissioner and for whom I have great respect , accused me of naivety because I said that what had happened in Kosovo was the beginning of the end for Yugoslavia . Nobody saw it , nobody wanted to see it .
Nobody wanted to admit what was happening and everybody simply turned a blind eye .
It was not even included on the agenda in Dayton .
It should have been added to the agenda .
Yugoslavia should not have been recognized without Milosevic being required to make some progress towards finding a political solution to the problem .
Our foreign policy exists , quite literally , from hand to mouth .
It never takes preventive action .
It is always short of breath and lacking in a proper strategy or vision .
Eight years of peaceful , passive resistance by the Albanians have not persuaded us to come to their aid .
For years the Serbs have been torturing Albanian men and women and arrests have been commonplace .
A parallel school and university system operating underground offers young people but few prospects .
It has taken television pictures of bloody demonstrations to shake up the international community .
I welcome the united stance announced today by the Council .
It is also good that the contact group is finally dealing with Kosovo , even if the results are feeble and the threat of an arms embargo , for example , is quite laughable .
An arms embargo is hardly an effective weapon against a well-armed nation with its own arms industry !
The presence of the OSCE on the spot is essential ; financial and economic sanctions are necessary .
Unfortunately , these are the only means at our disposal .
Serbia refuses to tolerate any involvement in its supposedly " internal ' affairs in Kosovo .
It has declared the resolutions passed by the contact group null and void since it is a self-appointed group .
This is the price we must pay in the West for years of looking the other way .
If Milosevic does not soon start a serious search for a political solution with Rugova and others within the framework of international mediation , an escalation of the violence will be unavoidable .
After nine years of this apartheid regime , the Albanians have had enough .
There is nothing to stop the Albanians in Macedonia , in Albania and in Montenegro joining forces .
The conflagration would exceed the scale of the Bosnian war .
Milosevic alone is responsible for the internationalization of the crisis .
A tough response is all he understands , so our stance against him must be a united and tough one .
As a last resort there is always Mr Swoboda 's option . If all else fails we must help with military or police intervention those being tortured and murdered .
Mr President , the European Union once again finds itself facing a crisis in the former Yugoslavia , which was foreseeable long ago , and once again it has been caught off guard and probably a day after the fair , as has already been said .
Therefore , if we now think with hindsight of what should have happened and what should have been avoided a priori , in order to prevent developments in the former Yugoslavia from following their dramatic course , we are contributing very little to the subject , although what is happening today is not totally unrelated to what went on before .
Indeed , it is not unrelated to the astonishing ignorance shown by the West with regard to the complex historical reality of an extremely difficult region , nor to the ineptness and partiality with which it reacted to much of the tragedy in Yugoslavia .
Once again we are called upon to face a fait accompli , but this time the danger of a new conflagration is becoming very concrete and very visible and we must be able to see this in all its dimensions .
Kosovo is a region with great historical significance for Serbs and Albanians alike , and historical memories are not effaced simply by international intervention .
On the other hand , it is inhabited by an overwhelming majority of Albanians who themselves were forced to move there because of other interventions at that time .
The Yugoslavia of Tito granted them an autonomy which , unfortunately , has since been dispensed with .
It is self-evident that no one can deny the right to speak one 's own language , the right to education and free expression , and human rights as we perceive them .
These must be reinstated at the earliest possible opportunity with an immediate undertaking by Belgrade and with the cooperation of the representatives of the Albanian minority .
A new conflagration in this region would spark a chain reaction which risks spreading the crisis to the South , on the very eve of the ambitious enlargement towards the East that has been decided upon by the Union .
Therefore any initiative aimed at avoiding new conflicts and at coming to an understanding with the moderate leaders of the Albanians of Kosovo is more than welcome . The European Union has a lot to do , as has already been said .
We must also consider the efforts being made by five countries in the region : Greece , Turkey , Bulgaria , Rumania and the FYROM , as well as the careful and judicious stance adopted by the Albanian government .
The implementation of the Rougova-Milosevic agreement is imperative , but it is even more imperative not to repeat the mistakes of the past , by carrying out another fruitless intervention with the United States taking on the lead role .
Belgrade must understand that closer ties with the European Union cannot come about through violence and that an internal dispute which places the peace of a wider region in danger is much less internal than it claims .
It goes without saying that we unequivocally condemn violence and bloody repression .
However , something more is needed : specific political actions such as all those we are asking for in our common position , many of which have been mentioned in this House . Moreover , there must be a more fundamental attempt to understand the problem and its historical background reaching back well before 1991 , reaching back centuries .
Mr President , all aspects which in Bosnia led to war crimes , crimes against humanity and genocide are present in Kosovo .
Once again the Western governments ' prime objective appears to be to remain uninvolved .
Military intervention , after all , is an electoral risk .
To the governments in the US and Europe , the risk of internal unpopularity weighs more heavily than the risk of new atrocities in the former Yugoslavia .
Have they not learnt from Bosnia that detachment amidst these kind of massacres automatically means co-responsibility ?
Have any lessons been learnt from what happened in Bosnia ?
Certainly , as far as Bosnia is concerned , Europe does not have the monopoly on error of judgement .
The Security Council made a mistake when , at the insistence of Russia , it did not extend the mandate of the preventative force in Macedonia .
The American promise to ease the sanctions against Serbia was the wrong signal , as was the comment made by the US negotiator , Gelbard , to the effect that Milosevic was dealing with terrorists in Kosovo , and it was as big a blunder as the remark made by James Baker in 1991 saying that , above all else , Yugoslavia should remain one country .
On Monday , the contact group decided to take a few half-baked and weak measures .
Clearly the most important lesson from Bosnia has still not been learnt .
This lesson was that in the former Yugoslavia violence can only be stemmed with military force .
Political pressure and economic sanctions do not work .
The only language Milosevic understands is the credible threat of military intervention by the US and other NATO member countries .
Milosevic will circumvent a possible UN arms embargo just effectively as the existing economic sanctions .
The only effective instrument is the threat of force : a preventative presence of international troops in the region , in this case Macedonia and northern Albania .
The response of the European Union to the crisis in Kosovo is one of shameful hypocrisy .
In the Treaty of Amsterdam the fifteen heads of states and governments promised solemnly to make peace-keeping one of the Union 's responsibilities .
This promise was , as it turns out , not worth the paper it was written on .
In the European Parliament , we have so often called for an effective European security policy . However , here in Parliament the knees of the Socialists and Christian Democrats appear to be as weak as those of the Council of Ministers , now that it no longer comes down to words but to action
I note with bitterness that the two large groups have rejected every reference in the joint resolution to the possibility of military threats .
Even my group 's plea to extend the mandate of the peace force in Macedonia was rejected .
Instead of this the PSE and PPE resolution contains an appeal to President Milosevic to allow journalists into Kosovo .
The European Parliament is using journalists as a threat .
That will really impress everyone in Kosovo .
In conclusion , Mr President , the resolution proposed by the two large groups today is the weakest this Parliament has ever devoted to the situation in Kosovo .
In the shape it currently takes , it is totally unacceptable to my group .
Remove your blinkers , ladies and gentlemen .
The conflict in Kosovo is a bigger threat to international peace than the conflict in Bosnia ever was .
Now is the time to draw lessons from the disaster in Bosnia .
Those who deny the lesson , make themselves equally responsible for the consequences .
Mr President , the developments taking place in Kosovo are giving birth to enormous dangers and to a more general situation of unrest throughout the Balkans , which will not leave Bulgaria , Albania , the FYROM and even Greece untouched .
From this viewpoint the militaristic voices that are being heard in this Chamber are , in my opinion , unacceptable .
We very much fear that we are witnessing the further disintegration of Yugoslavia .
At some point we must draw our conclusions from the policy of the large powers in the Balkans , and we must assume the responsibilities which are appropriate to the dramatic developments taking place against the peoples of the former Yugoslavia .
The rights that the Albanian minority in Kosovo must enjoy , as every minority in the context of existing states and borders , must be respected and safeguarded .
If , however , the European Parliament wishes to honour its role , it must insist on its position , which is opposed to any change of the borders in the Balkans .
It must also demand that all countries , Balkan or otherwise , respect and do not violate existing borders .
It must totally oppose the use of violence , or the threat of the use of violence , and it must denounce the threatened new embargo against Serbia - the people have suffered enough from the various embargos . It must declare that it is prepared to participate positively in establishing sincere and open dialogue between the Serbian authorities and the leaders of the Albanian minority in Kosovo .
Mr President , obviously we cannot claim that the outburst of violence came unexpectedly .
If there was one conflict and one outburst of violence which was heralded years ago , it was the one in Kosovo , and it proves once and for all that in practice we , the European Union , are nowhere when it concerns extending realistic conflict prevention .
Secondly , we obviously cannot claim that the solution to the conflict will be simple either .
It is clear - and I agree with my colleagues who pointed this out - that the present legal status which was forced upon Kosovo is totally unacceptable and that it must therefore be rejected by the Union quite unambiguously .
On the other hand , and we should be honest , well before 1989 the Albanian leaders already wanted much more than proper cultural and political autonomy .
They wanted independence , and this is the basis of the conflict .
In connection with that point , I would like to mention that on 30 March 1993 the then President of Yugoslavia made interesting proposals to the Committee on Foreign Affairs , Security and Defence Policy , referring to the need to carry through territorial demarcation in Kosovo with much more authority .
He was sidelined by Milosevic , but neither did he find a response in Parliament .
Thus , a unilateral approach , as far as that is concerned , is out of the question .
What is happening now is totally unacceptable , of course , in any state which calls itself a constitutional state .
It is terrible to have to note the focused manner in which whole families , including children , were massacred in those places where it was suspected they had some involvement in the armed resistance .
That is totally unacceptable .
I share the view of the Members who say that what has come out of the contact group is regrettable and that it is too weak .
I also agree with Mr de Vries that the joint resolution lacks teeth .
But I do think it contains some interesting points .
Firstly , the pressure on Belgrade must be stepped up . In addition , in case no results come out of the negotiations - because dialogue is obviously not enough , there should be actual negotiations - then sanctions must be tightened , and some quick responses must be implemented .
On that subject I would like the Presidency to tell me how they are going to monitor this in order to take extremely effective action on a daily basis in this situation .
Secondly , I think that it is of the utmost importance that the UN troops stay in Macedonia .
We had a provision to this effect in our text .
Thirdly , we need a temporary ban on the deportation by EU countries of asylum seekers from this region .
There are places where this is happening .
If we are serious in this matter , then I believe we will make much more progress .
Mr President , I will speak on a personal note .
To tell the truth , after the chairman , Mr de Vries ' speech , I do not have much to add to his excellent analysis .
In our beautiful language , Mr President , there is a phrase " they have sown the wind and they shall reap the whirlwind ' .
I do not know how to translate it , but it is true that we have sown a lot of wind , by avoiding the inclusion of Kosovo in the Dayton agreements . This would have been possible , had it not been for the hypocrisy driving the contact group , the EU and unfortunately today even Parliament .
Had it not been for that hypocrisy , we might not have reached this point , since everyone knew that Kosovo was a dynamite store .
Today , Parliament is not even capable of using the word " sanctions ' once , in two pages of text .
It seems to me that this is a clear message to Milosevic to continue in his belief that it is right to analyse those who will refuse to vote on this wording later , although there may only be a few of them .
Mr President , with regard to the Kosovo crisis , European diplomacy must demonstrate that it is capable of acting with as much pertinence and efficiency as it did in the Iraqi crisis .
It is a crisis which could degenerate dangerously , but which can still probably be controlled if European diplomacy is able to show the same judgement and determination that has been shown by the precise actions of France and Germany .
It must show its ability to take all the factors into consideration , in particular the fact that Kosovo is the Serbs ' Paris and yet is today populated by up to 90 % Albanians .
It must bear in mind that the disintegration of Yugoslavia began with questions regarding the wide autonomy which Kosovo enjoyed within the former federation .
Since then , the conflict has continued to brew .
Today , the corresponding hardening of attitude of both the Albanian separatists and the Serb authorities is moving the crisis into a new and extremely worrying dimension , with an increase in tension .
The international community must therefore intensify its activity , even if it does not have the same basis on which to act as in Bosnia , whose independence it recognized .
But in the case of a stepping up in the conflict , the risks of globalization are such that the Kosovo issue can no longer be considered a purely internal issue . This is especially true with regard to Macedonia where a quarter of the population is Albanian and particularly since Albania is becoming increasingly nervous .
Even if the most adequate way of expressing the international community 's will is currently through the six countries of the contact group - since it is essential that we stick together - the action of European diplomacy within this body must be decisive in order to avoid the sudden turnarounds on the part of some of its members or the refusal of any globalization on the part of others .
It is fortunate that yesterday 's meeting of the contact group in London echoed the call for a negotiated solution already heralded by Paris and Bonn . This should lead to a special intermediary status somewhere between that of independence and the current situation , neither of which are adequate options .
It is also a question of finding the means for effective pressure , to the right extent , to convince both sides not to feed the intensification of the conflict .
It is therefore essential , Mr President , to step up the measures concerning positive incentives , considering in particular the different ways of reintegrating Belgrade into the international community .
This is the path that was upheld in London under the influence of the Europeans , who must retain this leadership .
It is the right path . It must be followed with consistency and determination .
I have received eight motions for resolutions , pursuant to Rule 37 ( 2 ) of the Rules of Procedure .
Mr President , I would merely like to say that I largely agree with what has been said this morning , that an active position is being urged regarding a situation which can by no means be considered surprising or new .
At the same time I believe that it would be good for us within the European Union not to practise self-pity , in the sense that we are not doing anything .
I would like to say to Mrs Pack in particular that the Kosovo issue is constantly on the agenda of the General Affairs Council , that it is being talked about constantly in the context of the OECD , that former Prime Minister González has been asked again to mediate , but that we do need cooperation from Belgrade for this .
In case dialogue is not started very soon , we certainly agree that mediation by Mr González should be pushed to the top of the agenda .
Personally , I do believe this dialogue will come about in the short term .
More pressure will be needed .
On 15 February the Commission sent a fact finding mission to Kosovo to find out what else could be done .
Tony Lloyd will go there soon and Mr Cook was there last week .
I myself will be going to Pristina and Skopje .
It really cannot be said that Europe is holding itself aloof .
But what it will come down to is how much pressure the international community is prepared to apply when Milosevic - and it all depends on him - does not take the right initiatives .
That will be the crux of the matter .
As far as that is concerned , Iraq has given us some experience .
We will end this debate here and continue it at 3.00 p.m.
We shall now proceed to the vote .
Votes
Mr President , I rise under Rule 60 in order to observe that the Commission has indicated that it will accept none of Parliament 's amendments .
I regret that .
However , the Commission has not been the problem in this interinstitutional triangle that we have been exploring for three months .
The problem has been the attitude of the Council .
I am pleased to say that in the debate this morning the President-in-Office was able to offer us , on behalf of the Council , sufficient guarantees of what is , in effect , the structure of a consultation process that I am not going to recommend that we refer back to committee .
We have received from him assurances and we noted every single word that he delivered this morning , which offered sufficient undertakings as to timing and to Council consideration of our views to satisfy me , as chairman of the Committee on Foreign Affairs , that we have in essence an interinstitutional agreement that we can make work in a pragmatic way .
I should like to pay tribute to the President-in-Office and Commissioner Van den Broek and therefore not to recommend to Parliament that this matter should be referred back to committee .
( Applause )
( Parliament adopted the legislative resolution )
Mr President , as you are aware , you and I were elected on the same day in June 1984 .
I have always taken it upon myself to remove any burden from your great shoulders .
I wish to advise you , therefore , that my presence is not only in the House today but it will be voting also .
That is most generous , Mr Falconer .
Mr President , seven political groups came to an agreement to present a joint resolution with which to close the very interesting discussion we had here on Monday on the occasion of International Women 's Day .
My group regrets the fact that once an agreement had been reached on a joint resolution , two political groups thought it necessary to table amendments restoring passages to the joint resolution which had been removed .
We could have done the same , as a number of the paragraphs not adopted in our resolution related to other important issues for women in the Community .
I feel that whoever is not in agreement with the joint resolution , although they had agreed - along with the rest of us - not to present any amendments , must remove their signature from this joint resolution .
In protest , my group has decided not to vote for any amendments , even if the content of some of them have our full sympathy .
But we must uphold the rules and as a sign of protest we will not vote for these amendments .
You may disagree but it is the absolute right of groups to submit amendments even to compromise resolutions .
( Parliament adopted the joint resolution ) Report ( A4-0065 / 98 ) by Mr Cornelissen , on behalf of the Committee on Transport and Tourism , on the communication from the Commission to the Council , the European Parliament , the Economic and Social Committee and the Committee of the Regions " Promoting road safety in the EU - the programme for 1997-2001 ' ( COM ( 97 ) 0131 - C4-0180 / 97 ) - Before the roll-call vote on recital O :
Mr President , I would like you to take note that under the new rules by the Bureau I am present but I am not participating in this vote .
I would point out to Members that the note sent round by the Quaestors stated : ' A Member who does not wish to take part in a roll-call vote may arrange to have his attendance at the sitting noted prior to the vote . ' That does not mean immediately prior to every vote .
It means at the start of the session .
You informed me at the start of the session that you were here .
I have noted that you are here .
If you do not take part in votes we assume it was on a point of principle that you are not taking part .
Mr President , would it not be simpler if rather than Members rising to advise you of their presence , that they do as I do and simply hand in a note to the sittings service ?
Mr President , I rise to make a point of order pursuant to Rule 127 ( 2 ) , which deals precisely with points of order .
Just now an extremely serious incident occurred , which significantly disrupted the vote on Mr Cornelissen 's report .
Mr Crowley made it known that he wanted the floor on a point of order .
You deliberately refused to give it to him .
I thus rose , along with my colleague Mr Claudio Azzolini , co-chairman of the Union for Europe Group , to request that you apply the Rules and allow Mr Crowley to say what he wanted .
Quite clearly , you did not allow him to speak , which is a blatant violation of the Rules of Procedure for , in a Parliament , every member who requests the floor on a point of order must be allowed to do so and our Rules are strict since they stipulate that " a request to raise a point of order shall take precedence over all other requests to speak ' .
You have not therefore respected the Rules .
I am convinced that if someone had stood up from that side of the Chamber ...
( Loud applause ) you would not have failed to give him the floor ....
( The President cut off the speaker )
Mr President , I rise to make a point of order under Rule 127 .
The point of order I wanted to make - even though the issue is no longer relevant - is that in your interpretation of the rules , a Member need only announce his attendance and not participate at the start of a vote .
Under my reading of the rules , which were adopted by the Bureau without consultation with Parliament , I am entitled , as a Member , to stand up at every roll-call vote and state that I am present but I am not participating in the vote .
That is the rule as adopted by the Bureau without any consultation with Parliament on those rules .
Secondly , Rule 19 governs order and the conduct of the House .
However , Rule 127 states that the President must make a decision on whether or not he will accept the point of order , and that he may wait for up to 24 hours before he makes that decision .
You did not do that when I called for my original point of order .
Therefore you are in error as regards the Rules .
It is highly insulting and arrogant of you to be treating the House in this manner !
( Loud applause )
Brian , we have been good friends in the Committee on Legal Affairs and Citizens ' Rights for four years .
I admire the work you do and I hope you will perhaps reflect on your last sentence .
I would just make it clear that the rule distributed by the Quaestors says : ' A Member who does not wish to take part in a roll-call vote may arrange to have his attendance at the sitting noted prior to the vote ' .
Not prior to every individual vote but prior to the vote .
I gave you that interpretation .
I answered your point of order .
I was not going to have a procedural debate with you in the middle of a vote .
We were discussing the Cornelissen report which is an extremely important one .
Mr President , I would not impugn anyone in what I have to say .
I feel the House was out of control for several minutes .
That is not an acceptable situation .
I would like you to reconsider your reinterpretation of the rule issued by the Quaestors .
That is what is causing the difficulties .
I would like to suggest that recorded votes during that disturbance should not count in the Bureau 's bureaucratic system .
How does one know when the votes are on ?
I am sorry .
I take your first point .
I am always happy to reflect but on the second point of course they will count .
Mr President , what we are witnessing , I am sorry to say , is the result of the arrogant attitude you took a short while ago .
I would like to recall , Mr President , in addition to everything else recalled so far , that Article 19 requires the President , first and foremost , to ensure observance of the Rules of Procedure .
A President of a sitting is not superior to the Rules of Procedure : he is in a position to ensure observance of the Rules of Procedure , and the Rules of Procedure require the President to grant all Members the right to speak in reference to the Rules of Procedure , particularly when the chairman of a large group asks to speak .
You have not ensured observance of the Rules of Procedure and continue to hold an attitude which , excuse me for saying so , is arrogant and certainly does not contribute towards helping us to relax during this sitting .
I do not speak or read Italian , as you know , but the sessional services have told me that in Italian it is clearly ' may ' as well .
Mr President , I am sure with the overwhelming majority of this House I want to say that we have great respect for the way in which you chair this plenary and the integrity with which you do it .
( Applause ) At the last plenary session it was agreed that the whole issue of these administrative regulations agreed by the Bureau would be discussed after three months .
That is to go ahead .
The Bureau and the Conference of Presidents confirmed that there were issues that needed to be looked at .
What we saw earlier was people , once again , trying to make political capital out of that decision .
We would like you - and I am sure my group would endorse this entirely - to get on with the votes .
The Bureau will look at this issue as it has decided .
( Applause )
Mr President , my point of order relates to the use you made of the word ' Rules ' .
I have always maintained , in previous points of order when this first came up , that if it was a change of Rules - and it must be a Rule if it has political ramifications which cash-for-votes certainly has - it has to go to the Committee on the Rules of Procedure , the Verification of Credentials and Immunities and then be discussed by this House .
You referred to the Rules from the Quaestors .
You have given away the case that I have supported all along .
This is a change in the Rules which has political ramifications !
It should go to the Rules Committee and come before this House in the normal way .
Mrs Ewing , I know you are an eminent lawyer but I have to say that if you look at Rule 5 of the Rules of Procedure it states : ' The Bureau shall lay down rules governing the payment of expenses and allowances to Members . ' There is more than one form of rules : there are the Rules of Procedure of the House and there are other rules .
Mr President , on a point of order .
I was trying to catch your eye during the rumpus . The reason was I could not hear what you were saying , what votes were taking place , and that was a very confusing situation .
I would respectfully submit that it would have been better to stop the voting a little earlier to restore calm in case colleagues voted the wrong way not knowing what the vote was .
On other occasions , perhaps we could let matters simmer down before we resume voting .
I have some sympathy for that comment .
My only hesitation is that I do not like giving in to mob rule .
Mr President , I personally have a great deal of admiration for your skill and talents .
I regret that you did not respond to the person who appealed to the Rules .
This does not lessen my appreciation for your work , but I do think you should have let those people speak who appealed to the Rules .
Secondly , like Mrs Green I want to say that I would like to appeal to everyone .
We agreed to implement the rules for three months , and in the meantime to keep monitoring it .
I appeal to all Members of this Parliament to respect the decisions for a period of three months .
After these three months we will see to what extent they will need to be modified , if at all .
A lot of Members are still indicating they wish to speak .
In the light of the previous position and comments that have been made , I am going to take everyone who wants to speak .
I just wish to point out that the rule about roll-call votes still applies .
Mr President , you referred to a paragraph of a rule and you said that the Presidency has the discretionary power - among other things - to regulate compensation for Members and you linked that with the issue now under discussion .
If you are present , you vote or you do not vote . If you do not take part in the vote you do not get an allowance .
I want to say that if this paragraph exists , your interpretation of it is wrong .
Under no circumstances can the Presidency turn Members into mercenaries through its interpretation of this paragraph .
You will get an allowance if you vote for or if you vote against . If you do neither one nor the other , you do not get an allowance .
This is unacceptable and I wonder why you , Mr President , a young man with a lot of experience , referred to such a rule which transforms us shamefully into mercenaries .
I will vote or I will not vote through self-interest , since whether I receive an allowance or not will depend on it .
It is unacceptable , Mr President .
Thank you , but it is not my rule , it is the rule of the Bureau .
Mr President , I support your policy on this matter , but it was my group which clearly pointed out that this system as it is presently implemented by the Bureau is not right .
It was my group which pointed out that it should be reviewed .
It is being looked into at the moment .
It is not right for two Members to try to keep delaying this House before every vote .
It is time the Bureau reviewed its all too bureaucratic rules .
But it is also time this House went back to work and you maintained order in this sitting .
Mr President , on a point of order .
I wish to say , firstly , that we should leave this discussion to another time , because it should be debated .
There is a huge amount of business to vote on .
We just need an assurance that the Chair will respect people wanting to raise a point of order .
I am not in favour of people like Alex Falconer jumping up and down every time there is a roll-call vote .
Let us leave this discussion to another time and just move on to the vote .
I would be delighted to do so , but the aforementioned Mr Falconer has the floor .
Mr President , I rise on two simple points .
One is in reply to the allegation made by Mr Pasty that you treat this side of the House differently than you are treating that side of the House .
I am sure that your secretariat and others will have noted that I too asked for a point of order immediately after Brian Crowley was refused his .
Therefore Mr Pasty you should withdraw that allegation .
The second point I would like to make is that we cannot continue with an interpretation made by one President and a different interpretation made by another President .
We have a simple note from the Quaestors ; surely the Quaestors should stand up and give their interpretation of their note to clarify the situation .
Mr President , you decided to continue with the vote although there was considerable noise in this room .
Since this vote , which contained some roll-call votes , relates to a sensitive area and since it was preceded by numerous discussions , because of the noise neither yourself as President nor the translation could be heard .
I would therefore request that you admit Mr Kellett-Bowman 's motion and start the vote again .
It was impossible to hear which vote you called and what the result of the vote was .
I take your point and , in that context , I apologize to Mr Cornelissen .
His report has fallen an innocent victim of this .
But I am afraid I cannot start the vote again .
Mr President , in your reply to Mr Pasty , you said that you expected leaders of groups to conduct themselves with more dignity .
These are your very words , I noted them down .
I would like to know , Mr President , if you feel that a group leader lacks dignity when he supports a member of his group who makes known a desire to speak on a point of order ?
Just to prove that the chair has some humility - although sections of the House do not believe it - I was responding slightly in anger there , and I would like to apologize to Mr Pasty for that statement .
What I would like to ask you most urgently is : can we please carry on with the votes ?
Let us finish this report , and let us just leave everything else .
I agree with you but numerous Members have said that when the Chair sees someone wishing to make a point of order , he has to take that point of order .
We have to have some clarity .
Members cannot have it both ways .
When they want to move on , they do not want the Chair to take points of order .
Mr President , on a point of order .
We should all recognize in this House that one of the most difficult responsibilities that any of us can face in our Parliament is to chair the sittings of the European Parliament .
We all know that there can sometimes be differences of opinion as to the interpretation of the rules .
Those differences of opinion are legitimate and they should be discussed but there is a proper time and a proper place to discuss such matters .
I would like to appeal to all colleagues present not to abuse their rights under the Rules to draw this plenary into a debate which debases the dignity of the entire institution .
Secondly , the place to discuss it first of all is in the Bureau .
That is where the decision was taken .
After three months of implementing the reforms that have been agreed , the Bureau has said it will look again at the practice .
We all know that members of the Bureau are amongst the more experienced Members of our House and I am sure they will take their responsibility very seriously .
Let me echo the comments made by Mrs Green and by Mr Martens .
Let no-one be under any illusion .
This House needs internal reform .
One of the elements in the speech of President Klestil just now was to remind us of public opinion .
Ladies and gentlemen , we are all under the sanction of public opinion and those colleagues who wish to ignore public opinion will pay the price and will make our House pay that price and it is not worth that price .
( Applause )
Mr President , I refer not to the Rules of Procedure , but to the democracy that should guide the work of our Parliament .
If my colleague had spoken first , we would have saved 25 minutes and we would have given ourselves and our work a better image .
I would also like to tell my English colleague that he insulted me in the corridor because , along with other colleagues , I asked for us to observe the right held by the speaker who wanted to speak . He behaved incorrectly himself and on behalf of his country and if this is the spirit of the European Parliament , we may as well go home .
I would just make it clear that I gave the floor to Mr Crowley .
I did not give it to him on his second attempt to take the floor .
Mr President , on a point of order .
I would like you to put to the vote whether we now proceed to the next business and get on with the vote .
Mr President , I will also give an oral vote against the Council budget , against the Commission proposal and against the Oostlander report .
These three texts set up an elaborate network of multi-faceted , neocolonialist bonds for those countries concerned , the countries of central and eastern Europe .
This is taking place in the interests of multinational companies , in order to penetrate into these areas by means of neocolonialist methods , to exploit their natural wealth and human resources and to create further imperialistic zones for further domination and expansion throughout the region .
The political and financial mafias which currently rule these countries are guilty accomplices in this , and I want to say that Parliament , in voting for this report , will become a kind of moral accessory to the subjugation and exploitation of these countries , which cannot be allowed to happen .
It will create future upheavals and undesirable situations and Parliament must keep its distance .
, in writing . ( DA ) The June Movement supports the admission of all the new applicant states which meet the basic requirements in terms of democracy , the rule of law , human rights and minority rights and has not therefore voted against the Oostlander reports .
But we cannot vote in favour of them either , because we do not agree with the form of admission procedure which has been passed .
This is because , firstly , the applicant states have been divided into A and B leagues , and secondly , the applicant states have been presented with a number of stringent requirements and conditions for membership which they themselves are not really in a position to negotiate on .
Their only choice is between joining the EU on our terms or remaining outside .
The Amsterdam Treaty laid down a large number of criteria for membership which will make it even harder to join the EU , and which will therefore delay the enlargement process .
We cannot have a deepening without at the same time having a widening .
If we want a European partnership in which all countries are involved on an equal footing , the basis for that partnership must be open to negotiation .
In the June Movement , we believe that it would be better for the future of Europe if we invited the applicant states to a joint discussion where we could create the framework for a European partnership together .
The current negotiations on enlargement do not mean that we ask the applicant states how they propose to work together with us .
The negotiations are simply about finding out whether the applicant states , and not least we ourselves , are ready for the Community law which we have enacted to be incorporated into the applicant states ' legislation .
Any EU law is by definition the best possible .
There can be no discussion about that .
Any exceptions and special considerations can only be temporary , and that is mostly for our own sake .
In the June Movement , we believe that the countries of Europe differ too widely to be able to use the EU 's total harmonization method , under which legislation would be the same everywhere .
Our vision of a European partnership is not a European state , but a flexible , democratic and free partnership in which all countries are equal and can influence their own legislation .
We have abstained from voting for the Oostlander reports because we do not want to put a brake on the enlargement process , but we seriously disagree with the admission procedure which has been set up .
We have voted in favour of this report .
Several of the paragraphs in the report concern strengthening the European Parliament 's right to information regarding the development of accession partnerships .
We think that is appropriate .
Since it is the European Parliament which ultimately takes the decision on the question of approval of new members of the EU , it is also appropriate that Parliament should have full information about the development of the accession process .
However , we would like to emphasize that the final decision should always lie with the people in each of the countries which wants to join the EU .
Therefore , a referendum on membership of the EU is to be recommended for all the states which could be in line for membership .
, in writing . ( DA ) - The Danish Social Democrats have today voted in favour of the Oostlander report .
This is because we support the whole enlargement project , which we believe is one of the most important steps which the European Community has taken in our time .
It must be the aim of all Europeans to ensure peace and stability in our part of the world .
We are facing a great challenge , which is to see the countries of central and eastern Europe with full democracy , which will enable fast , smooth enlargement .
It is essential that Parliament supports the increase in the partnership principle which will assist the individual candidate states in working towards accession to the European Union .
The framework which has been laid down for the EU 's assistance to applicant countries in their preparations for joining the EU is the main tool we have to ensure that the future Member States fall in line with the EU .
Through admission partnerships , the EU will support the development of law-based , effective administrative systems which are essential if society is to operate properly .
It is important for us to point out that the efforts should not merely concentrate on adjustments to the single market , but that support for environmental and labour market legislation should be equally as great .
One problem has been that Parliament has not had much time to come up with a statement on the Council 's regulation : we have had just two months to deal with this very important subject .
But we must not use this as a reason to delay the process of working towards admitting the countries of central and eastern Europe into the European Union .
With the partnership principle , we have sent a very important message to the applicant countries , namely that they are all welcome in the European Union .
Even if not all of them are ready to join at the same time , it is important to show them that they are all involved in the process .
The partnership is also a good contract between the individual applicant countries and the EU , as the countries of central and eastern Europe can look forward to being included in the Union once they meet the terms of the agreements .
There is actually very little to say on the Oostlander reports .
Their objective is limited to calling for a systematic consultation of the European Parliament on all phases of the formulation and implementation of the partnerships for accession of each and every one of the eastern and central European countries .
There is nothing new then : we are once more confronted with the usual insatiable bulimia of the Committee on Foreign Affairs , Security and Defence Policy , which expects to be consulted and reconsulted permanently on all subjects which touch directly or indirectly on issues relating to foreign policy .
In this case , consulting the European Parliament would have the overall effect of weighing down the already complex process anticipated in the framework regulation and of increasing the delays even more , if the process of each individual partnership has to be systematically reviewed .
Furthermore , the motion for a resolution submitted to us seems to err in its interpretation , since in points 3 and 4 it considers that the medium term priorities to have been postponed .
In actual fact , the Council has explicitly stated that the medium term priorities must be implemented as from 1998 .
It is only their results that will not be fully attained until the medium term , although this will in any case be before accession .
Although the Oostlander reports are touchy on the issue of permanent consultation of the European Parliament , they are however careful not to tackle the root issues which the European Conference is going to have to deal with .
There is no comment on the break-up threatened by the simultaneous application of two contradictory policies : how do we enlarge whilst introducing a single currency and whilst maintaining old institutions with an integrationist vocation whose lives have been extended without the will to reform them in any meaningful way ?
Nor is there any comment on the persistent ambiguity regarding relations with Turkey .
Turkey will be absent from the Conference even though this method was largely conceived with it in mind . This is a Turkey whose " European vocation ' we want to recognize , that is , depending on your point of view , the country 's vocation to become a member of the European Union or not .
There are no doubts raised regarding Cyprus , although accession of the island would make the " green line ' dividing the two communities an " outer border of the Union ' .
There is no confusion mentioned regarding the vocation or not of an enlarged European Union to assure the security of the Baltic states , in particular Estonia , in the face of Russia which will remain outside the Union .
But what does it matter ?
The machine is in motion .
This is enough .
We are happy .
The continual building site is an aim in itself .
Perhaps later on , questions will be raised as to the nature and objectives of this new European construction and its geographical limits .
Oostlander report ( A4-0087 / 98 )
With the debate and the vote on the Oostlander report today , 11 March 1998 , on the eve of the European Summit and , more importantly , before the official opening of the accession procedure on 30 March , the European Parliament is sending out a very important message .
The European Parliament is underscoring and supporting its political choice to enlarge the European Union by incorporating the countries of eastern Europe , and this will guarantee growth and stability in Europe and the rest of the world .
The long and difficult course of this historic venture is , by definition , parallel and bound up with the deepening , strengthening and reinforcing of the present European Union .
The accession procedure is a unified procedure and begins at the same time , and from the same starting point , for all ten applicant countries of eastern Europe , that is of central , northern and southeastern Europe .
All ten applicant countries have thrown themselves with determination into the long and hard struggle for rapprochement , each along its own particular path .
We have ten-plus-one ; or rather one-plus-ten .
Cyprus is certainly a completely separate case , with absolute priority as a European Union debt to history .
The European Parliament has , and indeed fundamentally exercises , an equally valued institutional role with responsibility and transparency .
The participation of the European Parliament is a guarantee of the preservation and observance of the decisions and criteria of Copenhagen , in accordance with the requirements of the Treaty of Amsterdam , in the context of the decisions and conditions of the Luxembourg Summit of December 1997 .
The European Parliament , by endorsing the principles and conditions of enlargement and , more importantly , because it has responsibility for the final decision on the accession of any country to the European Union , must monitor and give its opinion on all phases of implementation of the accession procedure .
More especially , as chairman of the Delegation to the EU-Bulgaria Joint Parliamentary Committee , I want to underscore the enormous efforts taken by Bulgaria and the creative course that it is following .
To be sure , this country , like other countries , needs pre-accession support which is both positive and productive .
I would like to take this opportunity to reiterate the fact that I regard it unacceptable that Bulgaria , as well as Romania , is " black-listed ' for the visa . This is a wrong which must immediately be righted .
The Danish Social Democrats have today voted in favour of the Oostlander report .
The reason for this is that the report contains many good social democratic characteristics .
We support the rapporteur 's statement that structural support should be managed on a more decentralised basis , to make the structural support measures more effective and reduce costs .
We also support the wish that Parliament should then be consulted in the event of changes to the admission partnerships , and we share the view that it is regrettable that neither the Commission nor the Council have wanted any statement from Parliament on the medium-term goals and conditions for the accession partnerships .
There are problems with the Oostlander report in a number of areas , however , including on the statements on the individual countries in the explanatory statement .
The Danish Social Democrats do not believe that the report is objective in its treatment of the different countries .
We would point out , for example , that Poland is only dealt with superficially , whereas there is a more thorough treatment of , say , internal conditions in Latvia .
This gives the impression that Parliament has a preset attitude as to which countries are most suitable for membership of the European Union , which we consider very unfortunate .
We disagree particularly with the way the report deals with the Baltic states ; it includes a highly critical statement on those states ' protection of minority rights , with special reference to the Russian-speaking minority .
We think this might give the impression that the Baltic states have more problems with human rights and democracy than is the case .
The report stresses that Parliament should be consulted in this area .
It is therefore essential that we should give an objective , considered critique of the applicant states .
We believe all the applicant states are potential candidates , and so should all be treated objectively .
Watts recommendation ( A4-0068 / 98 )
As a Member from the north of France , I am aware of the difficulties which the establishment of a new European directive on the registration of persons sailing on board passenger ships to or from Member States ' ports would raise .
Over the last few years , the ports of Calais and Dover , along with the shipping companies controlling this route , have increased their efforts to reduce port transit times in order to be more competitive with the Channel Tunnel .
As they are not affected by this directive , the shuttles which runs through the tunnel between Calais and Folkestone will not be faced with the increased transfer times which will automatically occur because of this measure .
Consequently , it is clear that serious distortions in competition will become apparent between these two means of transport .
Furthermore , this draft directive completely undermines the considerable investment undertaken by the Calais Chamber of Commerce and Industry to modernize its terminal .
In fact , the port infrastructure , which aimed to speed up the loading and unloading of ferries , has been largely financed by the European Community - through the ERDF - which is thus putting itself in complete contradiction with its previous , yet recent decision since the work is not yet completed .
That is why I support the amendments proposed by Mark Watts aimed at maintaining fair competition between the ferries and the Shuttle , whilst staying in keeping with the position within Europe as a whole .
I hope they will be taken over by the Commission and the Council .
A short time ago the European Parliament voted on the Watts report .
In this recommendation for second reading , the European Parliament proposed in Amendments Nos 4 , 5 , and 7 that as far as the registration of passengers is concerned , companies operating a railway tunnel must meet the same requirements as those operating a passenger ship .
Their argument is that this ensures fair competition between the Channel Tunnel and the ferries .
In its common position , the Council indicated that the above-mentioned amendments fell outside the scope of the directive , although the directive is aimed at harmonizing an important SOLAS regulation and the SOLAS treaty concerns vessels .
Alongside the Council 's formal legal argument , the Commission also has objections .
It believes that we cannot simply apply safety regulations which apply to one means of transport to another .
The safety regulations for trains are not the same as those for ferries .
To my mind the Commission 's argument is convincing .
Fair competition between different means of transport means that each method can maximize its strongest points .
The registration of persons aboard passenger ships is needed to offer adequate assistance during an emergency situation .
When such a measure does not improve the safety of travel through a train tunnel , it should be omitted .
That is why I voted against Amendments Nos 4 , 5 , and 7 .
Darras ( PSE ) , Bernardini ( PSE ) , in writing .
( FR ) This report gives us the opportunity to voice our agreement on a European policy regarding safety at sea concerning security on board passenger vessels , security with regard to the training of the crew and , last but not least , safety of passengers .
The maritime disasters which have occurred to date , in particular the sinking of the Estonia , have led to this motion , which recommends that passengers be registered on ferries travelling distances over 20 miles . This is to ensure that the maximum capacity of the boat is not surpassed , that search and rescue operations can be facilitated and that information can be provided as quickly as possible .
It is a step in the right direction .
This proposal bears the stamp of common sense and safety , apart from the fact that it will cause serious distortions in competition with undersea tunnel systems of transport - particularly the Shuttle under the English Channel - which will not be required to implement these security measures .
As an elected Member of a coastal region , I can only subscribe to the rapporteur 's proposal to extend the directive 's field of application to include " underwater ' tunnels with a rail journey of more than 20 miles .
It is a question of passenger safety and fair application of the rules of competition within the European Union .
I support Mr Watts ' report and , in particular , the amendments which are aimed at extending the strengthened security measures for passenger boats to encompass " underwater ' rail travel via tunnel .
The European Parliament must be consistent and strengthen its vote given at first reading .
It is essential to extend the measures within this text to include the Shuttle under the Channel .
We must go further than the Council 's and the Commission 's position .
It is a question of public safety and respect for the rules of competition .
In fact , the recent fire in the Channel Tunnel showed that the lack of detailed registration of passengers made the work of the rescue teams more difficult , both during and after the fire .
Lastly , with regard to the rules of competition , tightening up the rules regarding the registration of persons travelling on passenger ships , through the increase in formalities and the extended waiting time that this form of transport will suffer , will significantly distort competition between the ferries and the Shuttle . This will mean that the investment made by the Calais Chamber of Commerce and Industry - with a large degree of funding by the ERDF - in the modernization of port facilities with a view to speeding up embarkation was a waste of time .
These are weighty demands but they are necessary for heightened safety , for employment and for the future of the crossChannel ferry business .
The Commission 's directive as proposed wishes to make the rules on registering ship passengers in Member States more uniform .
I believe this is a thoroughly sensible and necessary initiative , as it will enable rescue work , medical assistance and legal matters to be clarified better and faster everywhere in the Union .
It is understandable that , in its statement , the committee repeats some of the amendments from the initial negotiations which the Council has not accepted in its common approach to date .
But I would like to emphasize that neither I nor my group can accept the proposal that advance passenger registration should also be used for train journeys through underwater railway tunnels .
Introducing such a rule would remove the efficiency , simplicity and speed with which it is possible to buy train tickets up until a few minutes before the train goes today .
The benefits of such a measure would be far too modest in relation to the damage it would cause to rail competitiveness .
Rail transport has rightly been given a high priority in planning the EU 's trans-European network and is enjoying increasing success on the transport market .
I feel it would be unwise to impose unreasonable competitive conditions on this sector .
I am in favour of a set of sensible ship security rules being imposed within the framework of this directive , and so I am voting in favour of this recommendation , as I hope that rail will be kept out of its field of application .
Novo Belenguer recommendation ( A4-0069 / 98 )
, in writing . ( DA ) Transportation of dangerous goods requires clear , consistent regulation if the authorities are to react quickly and effectively in the event of an accident .
This is equally true of transport by sea , and so EU Directive 93 / 75 / EEC is a necessary instrument of law .
It is also particularly valuable that , in the amendments to the directive , the Commission wishes to include transport of nuclear fuel , plutonium and highly radioactive waste within the directive 's field of application .
It is only natural that Parliament supported these aims at first reading , as this will increase safety levels .
The Council has also accepted Parliament 's reasonable proposal concerning the selection procedure for adjusting the appendices to the directive .
Many other amendments have been rejected in the Council 's common position , however . This was due , among other things , to Parliament 's wish that rules covering the transit through EU waters of ships en route to ports in third countries would be given a directive of its own .
However Parliament 's proposals are implemented , the amendments to the directive proposed are desirable , and so I support the recommendation for second reading .
Trakatellis report ( A4-0067 / 98 )
Due to the economic growth of the last thirty years , the standard of living in Europe has tripled .
At the same time , the rate of suicide in all age brackets has also tripled .
Half of all suicide attempts are second attempts .
Suicide is thus the only cause of death which has not declined in Europe .
The European medical system is incapable of dealing with the growing number of people with psychological difficulties who are thus more likely to attempt to commit suicide .
We must urgently look for solutions to this major public health problem .
Specific and original proposals are needed , given that only 38 % of young people who have tried to take their own lives have had any subsequent follow-up from a doctor .
It falls within the jurisdiction of the European Union to support applied research programmes in this area , in order to set up a network of structures of a personal nature .
Experiments have been carried out , for example , that of Dr. Xavier Pommereau , who set up a special unit for suicidal adolescents at Bordeaux Hospital , which is also where I practise .
There are also collective explanations for this increase in individual tragedy .
We have to help in the search for a method of prevention .
Applied research could consequently be very useful , for example , in the study of the correlation between unemployment rates and suicide rates .
I support Dr Trakatellis ' report .
Nevertheless , I would like to draw your attention to the meagre budgetary means anticipated , which will all too soon become clearly insufficient .
The intention of the Commission 's action plan , namely , that it wants to prevent suicide and accidents is , of course , appropriate .
The question I ask myself , however , is whether it really is best to let the EU act in this area .
I do not think so .
Instead I think that , in accordance with the principle of subsidiarity , these issues are best resolved at national level or at lower levels in society .
Of course I am not against cooperation between Member States on these issues , but I think this can be carried out , as today , through cooperation between the professional groups which work with these issues .
Such cooperation already exists and I am sure that the EU will not try to take over or interfere with this work .
There is a real risk of duplicating work .
I would also like to see an analysis of why so many people commit suicide and are involved in accidents .
Committing suicide is , unfortunately , increasingly common among young people who have lost hope for the future .
It would have been valuable to have an analysis of these problems before the European Parliament made its decision on the issue .
Viceconte report ( A4-0074 / 98 )
Mr President , I rise in support of this report on rare diseases .
The coordinator of a support group of one such rare disease , Action on Tracheotomies lives in Billericay , in my constituency .
I would like to support , in particular , the involvement of patients and families of patients benefiting from the programme .
Given the cut in the original budget proposed and my own experience of the cost and ineffectiveness of the Handinet European Database in relation to disability , I question whether it is a good use of the limited budget to spend so much on the database and only ECU 0.2 million in the first year for support groups .
However I strongly support the proposal for direct representation by patients on the advisory committee .
Finally , I urge the Commission to bring forward its proposed regulation on orphan drugs as soon as possible , to work with the pharmaceutical companies to ensure support for care today as well as cure tomorrow for patients experiencing both isolation and uncertainty from their illness .
Cabrol report ( A4-0075 / 98 )
Pollution-related diseases cannot be confined just to those diseases linked with air pollution . Although these are serious , they are not the only ones .
Noise is one of the worst sources of pollution these days , and has a serious effect on the health and repose of the population .
I should like to remind people here today of my report on noise as a source of pollution , and also of the forthcoming meeting on this question in Copenhagen in May , with the participation of representatives from all over the Union .
So this " resounding ' omission is surprising , to say the least .
Also , more attention should have been paid to how pollutants relate to the increase in the various allergies which affect us all to an ever-increasing extent in our cities .
Finally , it is also surprising that the Commission made no mention of diseases related to the pollution of drinking-water or bathing-water . For example , nitrates cause cancer of the stomach and oesophagus .
Fortunately , the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Protection has made adequate amendments to the proposal , which will have my vote .
If the EU really wants to prevent diseases caused by pollution , it would be best if it stopped a number of the decisions it has taken which will directly cause more diseases because of pollution .
As long as we continue to subsidize environmentally-damaging agriculture which promotes pesticide use , invest in anti-environmental road transport and support nuclear power production , diseases caused by this anti-environmental policy will continue to increase .
Unfortunately , there is no sign of this understanding in either the Commission 's or the European Parliament 's document .
Instead , people want the EU to start taking action in areas which concern the consequences of the EU 's policy .
The intention of the Commission 's action plan is , of course , good , but you must still ask yourself whether it really is best to let the EU take action in this area .
I do not think so .
Instead , I think that under the subsidiarity principle these issues are best resolved at national level or at lower levels in society .
It is not primarily more studies and comparisons which are needed , but specific measures to ensure that the diseases do not continue to increase .
Of course I am not against cooperation between Member States on these issues , but I think this can be carried out , as today , through cooperation between the professional groups which work with these issues .
Such cooperation already exists and I am sure that the EU will not try to take over or interfere with this work .
There is a real risk of duplicating work .
I agree with the rapporteur 's view expressed in his report that the Commission 's proposals to reduce pollution related diseases do not go far enough .
It seems that the Commission has wasted an opportunity to bring forward proposals which would deal with pollution-related diseases in general , rather than the specific matter of air pollution related diseases alone .
The rapporteur is right in calling for a broader programme which could deal with noise , food , water and waste pollution-related diseases as well .
One matter which I would like to see considered in a broader programme than that proposed by the Commission is that of diseases believed to be related to the use of organophosphorous sheep dip .
Whereas there has been considerable disagreement among scientists regarding the effects of organophosphorous sheep dip on farmers who have used it , there has been increasing evidence to support campaigners ' arguments that use of organophosphorous sheep dip can lead to damage to the nervous system .
I would like to see a Commission programme on pollution-related diseases which is broad enough to include matters such as that which I have outlined .
Trakatellis , Viceconte and Cabrol reports
I would first of all like to congratulate the three rapporteurs for having carried out this work and for having reconciled their points of view . This will enable the adoption of a better approach towards public health at Union level .
A great deal of progress has been achieved compared to the recent past .
I unreservedly share Mr Antonio Trakatellis ' desires regarding prevention and the setting up of an information network for the use of victims of all kinds of injuries .
Mr Viceconte 's report marks an important stage in the treatment on rare diseases .
I support the proposal inviting the European Community to become involved in research on these diseases .
To increase the effectiveness of this research and improve the diffusion of information , I think that it is essential to establish of a free database , accessible to all who may be able to assist in the provision of knowledge regarding these rare diseases which affect so many families , is a must .
I also want to support Mr Cabrol in his efforts to widen the programme 's field of action against pollution-related diseases .
A study seems necessary into the effects of long-term pollution and the possible synergies between the different pollutants .
Finally , given the costs supported by society in the area of public health , an investment of ECU 14 million will work in favour of the well-being of the population in the long term , but also towards a reduction in the budgets which we currently devote to social security .
The Swedish members of the Confederal Group of the European United Left - Nordic Green Left have voted against the reports .
We think that all questions concerning health care and the combating of particular diseases are best dealt with at national level .
There are already a number of structures , including the World Health Organization , for the international cooperation which is needed in this area .
We are also opposed to Parliament 's request to greatly increase appropriations for the proposed programmes .
I would like to express my heartfelt thanks to the three rapporteurs , Mr Viceconte , Mr Trakatellis and Mr Cabrol , for the excellent work they have done on the Community " Action on Health 1999-2003 ' programme .
The three reports which the House has just adopted regarding programmes for Community action on rare diseases , injury prevention and pollution-related diseases clearly improve upon the proposals submitted by the Commission .
Rare diseases , which are 80 % genetic , will from now on be the objective of concerted effort on the part of the European Union and I am very pleased about this .
Early diagnosis and the pooling of scientific knowledge at a European level will enable more rapid progress to be made and this is something that everybody wants .
I am thinking , for example , of Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease but also many other lesser known , but just as dreadful , diseases .
With regard to the programme on injury prevention , I must stress that Community information systems , one on intentional and one on unintentional injuries , should be set up as the rapporteur recommends .
Similarly , I am in complete agreement with him that absolute priority should be given to the groups most prone to these injuries : children , women - through domestic violence - and old people .
Finally , pollution-related diseases are becoming more and more unacceptable .
The consequences of atmospheric pollution , in particular those linked to transport and water pollution , but also noise and construction materials - asbestos , for example - must be the object of an ambitious programme , as desired by the rapporteur .
I therefore hope that the Commission and the Council will take great note of the wishes of Parliament in this matter .
Trakatellis , Viceconte , Cabrol and Flemming reports
The Danish Social Democrats in the European Parliament have voted in favour of the Trakatellis , Viceconte , Cabrol and Flemming reports on popular health programmes in the EU .
These programmes will cover research and cooperation between Member States until the year 2003 .
We believe that cooperation on health and exchange of experience in particular is working well .
The problem with the programmes is that they are all-inclusive , and so implicitly promise an enormous amount , but when it comes down to the detail , there is no money for very much more health for the citizens of Europe .
We would also like to point out that these programmes come under Article 129 of the Treaty , which calls for cooperation between Member States , although is not mean the same as harmonizing those states ' health policies .
An EU health policy is the same as an EU environment and consumer policy where the competence exists .
Integrating health principles where relevant and applying the principle of caution are together worth more than these programmes , which may be more for show .
Bazin report ( A4-0072 / 98 )
The report by the chairman of the Committee on Transport and Tourism bears the stamp of good sense .
The legislative proposal aims to complete the production of harmonized statistical data on the carriage of goods by road .
Within the framework of the Single Market it is essential to assure a description of the origin and destination of international transport .
This collecting of statistical returns will enable an analysis of the traffic corridors and of the so-called sensitive routes as well as an improvement in the reflection on a common transport policy .
The achievement of this objective requires a financial effort on the part of the European Union in order to support that of the Member States .
We support the position of the Committee on Budgets , which aims to renew the funding of ECU 300 000 for 1998 and 1999 .
Finally , our satisfaction with this proposal must be added to that of the road haulage professionals who participated in its formulation .
Women 's rights
It may seem paradoxical to say it , but I would like to see an end to International Women 's Day .
To me this would be proof that there was no more inequality between men and women , no more violence against women in any form and that they were no longer the victims of discrimination of any sort .
But we know and we can see , whilst bitterly regretting it , that we are very far from that and thus International Women 's Day has " many a good day ahead of it ' .
I might add that , this year , with the denunciation of the medieval obscurantism of Kabul - to which Commissioner Bonino has contributed so well - we have reached new heights in the misery which continues to affect so many women around the world .
Afghan women have become the " living dead ' and the world seems incapable of doing anything about it .
It is a tragedy !
If you add this to the pain of Algerian women in the face of the terrorism they suffer you can see that perhaps there has never before been such a need to demonstrate our support to the women of the world on 8 March this year .
I welcome the call this Parliament is making to commit all EU institutions to renew efforts to improve the lives of European women at work and in the home .
However , on this particular International Women 's Day - 8 March 1998 - we are turning our attention to the terrible pain and suffering being endured by Afghanistan women under the cruel Taliban regime , which has taken away their freedom of movement and freedom to work and provide for their families , as well as their right to proper health care .
We applaud the work of Commissioner Bonino and the world attention she has brought to bear on the plight of Afghanistan women .
We call on all UN countries to bring serious and unrelenting political and economic pressure to bear on the Taliban regime .
Women must be free to make their own life choices , and their lives and health must not be put at risk by the Taliban regime any longer .
The " anniversary ' crowns and the celebrations of 8 March will end up by being simply quaint if not deliberately disorientating , since they do not call on women , who continue to be one of the most vulnerable categories of the population , to fight for their rights , which are being roughly trodden underfoot by today 's socioeconomic system .
Throughout the length and breadth of our planet , which is being shaken by totalitarian regimes and ideas , cultural and economic backwardness , famine and destitution , where wars and clashes are being played out or even where conservative and regressive social and economic policies are being promoted , women are the first to be called upon to pay the price and face the consequences .
Women throughout the world have made a great many changes though their unrelenting and unstinting struggles , not only for women but for the progress of society as a whole .
Today we must honour the force of these struggles by calling for them to continue while fundamental problems remain unsolved and other new problems come to threaten the rights and achievements of women .
A victim of religious fanaticism , a victim of exploitation by international crime networks , a victim of unemployment and social marginalization , female dignity suffers in the most terrible way the behaviour of a world which offends human dignity and existence just as severely , though in different ways , in Third World countries , in developed countries and in countries of the European Union .
Equal opportunities for women can have no meaning in a society without equality of social outlook , a society of unemployment , underemployment , a society without a welfare state , a society of the commercialization of human worth .
Not only are social rights and social gains not expanding , they are being squeezed more and more as too costly , a fact which places even more burdens on women who have to combine many duties with dual and triple social roles .
Flexible forms of employment , which are being offered to women with great largesse , are not a product of growth but represent the flexibility of the economically strong , which enables them to offset the economic crisis and to safeguard their competitiveness to the disadvantage of working people . The chief victims are women , who continue to be paid less for equivalent work , and who continue to face more problems and unequal opportunities of access to the labour market .
Women continue to hold mainly lower grade and unskilled jobs and to have limited participation in responsible and senior administrative jobs in economic , social and political life .
The institutional protection of women against any form of discrimination and the guarantee of their positive influence in social , economic and political life , cannot be achieved independently of the reorientation and the reorganization , often from the very foundations , of the model of development of our societies .
In the face of plans for war , for exploitation and for oppression , in the face of a tactic of discrimination , women are called upon to push forward their own demands in the context of a broad popular battlefront , in each country individually and at European and international level , to express the common struggle to obstruct this policy , until it is overturned and until the power of the people is established .
We are positive about the efforts which the Commission has made with regard to increased road safety .
Comprehensive measures are needed to reduce the number of road traffic accidents in the EU , which the Commission has also presented in its action plan .
Many accidents are still related to alcohol consumption in connection with driving .
We therefore welcome the proposal which limits the maximum permitted alcohol level in the blood to 0.5 mg alcohol per ml of blood .
This is a step in the right direction .
For reasons of principle we are also going to vote for a lower permitted limit of 0.2 mg alcohol per ml of blood .
I read Mr Pétrus Cornelissen 's report attentively and I fully support the desires and objectives set out in the text .
It may seem absurd to try to reduce the number of victims in a text . Nevertheless , given the extent of the figures at Union level , financial measures are urgently required .
I would like to remind you all that the tragedies which affect thousands of families are very costly to society as a whole .
Mr Cornelissen 's text contains many good ideas , both in the area of prevention and suppression and I feel that a correlation between social legislation and safety in the area of road transport is most timely .
The particularly tragic accident which occurred on the Lille-Gand motorway recently makes it necessary to take specific measures when climatic conditions are especially propitious to serious accidents .
Fog is statistically the most dangerous , in particular on the major trunk roads .
I have already asked the Commission to look into specific measures to be taken in particularly dense fog and I would like to take advantage of the debate on this report to encourage all Members to agree to a possible temporary closure of motorways in thick fog .
This proposal will undoubtedly surprise some of my colleagues .
However it can be explained in terms of the price paid by thousands of our citizens , killed or injured in similar conditions .
The number of dead and injured that are sacrificed every year on the roads of the Member States of the European Union is comparable to the number of those who are killed or wounded in a war .
What else could one say about the 45 000 who are killed , the 500 000 who are taken to hospital , or the 160 , 000 who are injured !
Unfortunately , first prize for this awful death toll in all probability goes to my country , in proportion to its population , with 2 000 dead , 32 000 injured and approximately 22 000 accidents a year .
However many plans are put forward , however many programmes are implemented , however good are the intentions of those who promote them , the situation , unfortunately , is not going to change significantly . The reason for this is that there is no radical change in the overall transport policy which would transfer the bulk from private individual means to public mass means of transportation .
The aim of this would be , among other things , to reduce or at least to limit the number of traded vehicles and to achieve better control of the safety conditions in which they circulate .
In our view , there are several basic causes of the exacerbation and perpetuation of the problem including the continuing reckless policy of promoting and increasing the sales and profits of large motor car manufacturers without the existence of suitable infrastructures to support the continually increasing volume of vehicles . Here , we also include the ageing fleet of vehicles due to the lowering of people 's standard of living , the deteriorating state of the road network and corresponding infrastructures due to policies of financial stringency , and the continuing violation of safety regulations and the rights of working people in the area of transportation for the cause of pure competition and an increase in profits .
To the enormous cost in human lives and the consequences of road traffic accidents we must add the significant social and economic cost , which is shouldered by the population . Instead , those directly responsible should shoulder the burden of necessary expenditure and appropriate measures for the prevention of accidents .
We believe that the report makes positive proposals and improves the Commission proposal by promoting measures for the improvement of the road network and other necessary infrastructures , the safety of cars and the safeguarding of the observance of rules of conduct .
However , we believe that it is more important that those measures become reality , and that they do not face technical and artificial obstacles .
They must be the subject of wider debate and activity and they must be accompanied by education from the very youngest age , passing through all levels and structures of education , to the rules of the highway code . They must lead to social control over the taking of preventive measures ; this concerns not only users and people working in the transport sector but also the guarantee of safety specifications for vehicles and infrastructures .
If legislation is to be considered at all at EU level , it must relate to minimum rules .
Every country should have the right to go further by keeping or introducing tougher rules .
Mr Cornelissen 's report rightly sets the objective of rapidly and sharply reducing the number of road traffic accidents which each year kill 45 000 people in the European Union and injure another 1.6 million more .
The report condemns the behaviour of some individuals , who put other people 's lives in danger , as well as their own .
It also highlights the need for a global strategy on road safety , in both the area of vehicle safety and choice of method of transport .
In this respect I am glad that the comments I made regarding the need to readjust the balance in favour of rail transport , a reduction in working hours of lorry drivers and controls on existing regulations have been taken into account .
We all know how real the link between fatigue and the risk of an accident really is .
As regards road safety , a sense of responsibility will be encouraged through the provision of the necessary financial means to create the best conditions of safety possible .
We are sensitive to the tragedy of road accidents and to the importance of road safety .
Indeed , road traffic is responsible for almost 95 % of all victims of traffic accidents . Over the whole of the European Union this represents 900 accidental deaths per week and some 500 000 people being hospitalized every year , of whom 25 % end up with varying degrees of permanent disability .
Consequently , we agree with the different objectives put forward by the rapporteur .
Indeed , it is particularly important to protect children at school entrances , to improve the standardization of vehicle safety systems , to assure the safety of cyclists and pedestrians and to give some notion of first aid in driving schools .
Nevertheless , in point 7 ( c ) , the rapporteur suggests prohibiting the sale of alcohol in service stations on motorways .
We should remember that it is forbidden to drink alcohol in motorway restaurants , if not accompanied by a meal .
This measure seems largely sufficient to us since it is linked to the maximum level of alcohol permitted in drivers ' blood , which is 0.5 mg / ml of blood .
It should be noted that motorways pass through many producing regions , in particular the wine producing areas , and that it is therefore logical for producers to sell their regional goods at service stations .
These products are bought by consumers for consumption at their place of destination .
In conclusion , this ban would bring no improvement to the current situation . On the contrary , it would cause negative effects on the promotion of regional produce and on the preservation of the regional cultures of the different Member States of the European Union .
Given that at present one in three of us in the European Union can expect to be treated in hospital at some point for injuries suffered in a road accident , we should all welcome the Commission road safety programme .
The report rightly calls for priority to be given to EU action to ensure that vehicles are produced with safety foremost in all manufacturers ' minds and to give consumers a safety rating system to bear in mind when buying a vehicle .
Given the number of people who now drive in EU countries other than their home state , it is also a sound idea to consider an EU-wide penalty point system for driving licences .
Similarly , the safety of both professional drivers and everyone else on Europe 's roads can be increased by enforced rest periods and driving hours limits .
I hope that the Commission will take this report 's safety suggestions on board so that all of us will need to worry less in future whether we will be the unlucky one out of every three citizens to need hospital treatment for injuries on the road .
I think Mr Cornelissen 's excellent report is a good basis for discussion .
He puts his finger on a number of trouble spots in the area of road safety .
The only part I find disappointing is where he speaks of the need for better driver education by ensuring that driving schools function better .
It has been proved - and the statistics are extremely clear in this regard - that it is , in particular , excessive speed , incomplete and outdated training and a certain lack of concern behind the wheel which are at the basis of this new human scourge .
But if we want to change this situation we have to revolutionize the way driving schools function .
Training must be completed in slow cars , with a maximum speed of 20 kilometres per hour in town and 80 kilometres per hour on main roads .
I can honestly say that it breaks my heart to hear or to read that a certain young person , very often having passed his driving test only a few days , or even hours earlier , has lost his life because our society is not functioning in the way that it should .
It is thus a shame that the rapporteur has not wanted to copy the example of France and introduce accompanied driving .
We have here the categorical proof - and the chairman , Jean-Pierre Bazin , has confirmed it on my request - that thousands of young French drivers have obtained their driving licences through accompanied driving .
These young drivers drive between 3 000 and 5 000 kilometres during their learning period , in place of the 200 to 300 kilometres through the traditional driving school system .
But the most worthwhile result of accompanied driving is that accidents involving these young drivers are far fewer than those who have undergone traditional instruction , and this is statistically proven .
Nevertheless , what seems even more important to me is that this new form of training creates a highly beneficial and new link between the parents and the candidate as they are literally on hand , that is , next to the learner , to advocate caution , give advice and form a sense of responsibility in the candidate regarding his own life and that of others .
How does accompanied driving work ?
The principle of accompanied driving encompasses three stages .
Firstly , initial training takes place in a recognized driving school .
This training can commence from the age of 16 .
Then , practice with one or a number of designated accompaniers over the age of 28 who have held a driving licence for at least three years .
The young driver must , within a time scale of one to two years , spend at least 3 000 kilometres driving under these conditions , with regular visits to an instructor .
The driving test can be taken from the age of 18 onwards .
I would like to make a second comment .
The rapporteur mentions only briefly the penalty points driving licence .
However , I am convinced that the introduction of such a licence would have a favourable and direct impact on road safety and awareness raising , and would certainly reduce the total number of accidents in the various countries .
Increasing fines is perhaps a good thing for the state 's finances , but when all is said and done it is an anti-social measure since some are able to pay whilst others are not .
To have a points system on your driving licence would at least have the benefit of putting everyone on an equal footing .
I sincerely think that we must not under-estimate the psychological effect on drivers with problems , for whom a retraining course should be considered and , for the most hardened cases , the withdrawal of their driving licence for a certain period of time .
My third remark concerns the lowering of speed limits in towns .
I fully share the rapporteur 's opinion that something must be done .
With regard to how we achieve a reduction of speed within towns , I think that the principle of priority to the right should be generalized in all towns .
It is a cheap but effective method .
Kreissl-Dörfler report ( A4-0073 / 98 )
Mr President , the Group of Independents for a Europe of Nations firmly supports the criticism of the draft multilateral agreement on international investments on which a vote has just been taken with the Kreissl-Dörfler report .
Indeed , we consider that whereas it may be useful to provide an overall legal framework to these investments , the text of the agreement should establish , in its first article , the inalienable sovereignty of a people and their right to choose the laws and the type of society that suits them .
There is no question of us accepting the project as it stands thus prepared by the OECD , which seems to put Member States in the position of the accused , as if the only result of their actions was the prevention of multinational firms from working for the common good .
Worse still , we see in this the outline of a world where multinationals will be the major players and where individual states are in some way reduced to the role of sub-contractor for questions of local security .
This approach is radically contrary to our concept of the sovereignty of nations and of the distinguished role of synthesis which politics must play .
We are therefore delighted with the European Parliament 's sudden burst of resistance and would like to comment on the fact that our protests regarding the GATT have perhaps slowly and finally borne fruit : a good number of the motions voted for today , for example on the need for a clause recognizing the legitimacy of regional preference zones , would have been included in the GATT if our requests had been listened to at the time .
But this sudden outburst from Parliament is insufficient , for the multilateral agreement on investments is only one aspect of a more general movement which is developing on many levels and which tends to distance power from the control of the people and to take away from them the final word in controlling their destiny .
Thus , on a different level , the Amsterdam project pushes us in the same direction , by by-passing national democracies , by reducing the quality of democratic control in Europe and by favouring the emergence of a technocratic European power which obeys the pressures of the global financial powers far more than the needs of its people .
It is for these reasons that we must reject not only the MAI , but also the Treaty of Amsterdam .
Mr President , I am pleased to support this report which raises serious and fundamental concerns about the multilateral agreement on investment and calls on the Member States responsible for its negotiation to respond .
I have been involved in meetings with our UK Government representatives and know they are listening to the concerns .
They have already tabled a large number of exceptions , a proposal for special and differentiated treatment for developing countries , the aim of transferring discussions into the WTO and a study on the development impact of the agreement , all of which are consistent with our resolution today .
I make two further points of principle : first , it is for those who proposed the agreement to justify why there should be a different standard of legal protection given as of right to the investor , in comparison to the responsibility he or she has in relation to human rights , labour , social or environmental standards . Secondly , in our support for the inclusion of the OECD guidelines for multinational enterprises as an appendix to the MAI , we must recognize that these can and must be made more effective , and that we , in the European Union , have a direct responsibility in relation to promoting appropriate codes of conduct .
We are critical of the MAI agreement in its current form .
It gives far too extensive rights to multinational investors , while the political influence of national governments is severely restricted .
There is a risk that democracy will be greatly undermined .
We are voting for the report which deals with the shortfalls in the agreement , and we would like in particular to stress the importance of Amendment No 1 .
We regret that the debate on an agreement which severely restricts democracy such as this has been conducted behind closed doors , and that it has been conducted within the OECD rather than in an international body in which developing countries have an opportunity to participate and to influence the content of the agreement .
We would like to thank the rapporteur for his good work on a very important report .
We think that the criticism of the OECD agreement on a multilateral agreement on investment ( MAI ) which is made in the report is fully justified .
We think that the existing ideas for MAI contain a number of unacceptable elements which demand that people in the European Union act collectively for major changes .
The issue also shows the importance of strong associations of the kind the European Union represents and the need for the European Parliament to have the opportunity to express its opinion on the Union 's participation in this agreement .
The MAI issue requires additional , clear scrutiny , and the role of the European Parliament must be seen as an important element in such scrutiny .
We are the first parliament to discuss the draft multilateral agreement on investments and to give an opinion on this subject .
We believe that governments should not accept the agreement as it stands .
Firstly , we challenge the approach .
Opaque and secret negotiations have been held within the OECD , with no debate on the objectives , the appropriateness or the purpose of this type of agreement .
We challenge its ideological foundations .
Liberalism on a world scale will become the only driving force behind both governments and " non-governments ' .
The rapporteur raises a number of questions . Will the multilateral agreement be incompatible with international agreements such as the Rio Declaration , Agenda 21 or the United Nations guidelines on consumer protection ?
As the rapporteur notes , what guarantees do we have that the environmental , social and cultural policies of the European Union and its Member States will be respected ?
As the rapporteur also notes , what mechanisms must we put in place to protect the cultural sector from unconditional liberalization ?
For the Group of the Party of European Socialists , there is no question of accepting such an agreement in its present state .
It is a warning to governments that they must not lose their means of action or regulation .
Citizens often feel dispossessed of their future by an all-powerful economic globalization .
Governments must share this concern with them .
The Kreissl-Dörfler report contains a lot of sensible views , but even so I am unable to support it .
I believe that , in the final instance , this report is superfluous for the simple reason that , as point 8 of the report itself states , the EU is not a member of the OECD .
So I cannot be pleased in any way that the Commission is actively involved in negotiations on an agreement on multilateral investments at OECD level .
I feel it is a bad habit that , as we are seeing more and more , the Commission is being put on an equal position with EU Member States in international negotiations .
There is no doubt in my mind what the intention is here : trying to give the EU the status of an economic and political superpower .
Finally , I would like to say that I am glad that the Kreissl-Dörfler report is against this future OECD agreement -possibly - restricting EU law and making it more difficult to pass new EU legislation on the environment , for example .
On this point , I would merely point out that EU Member States themselves are now subject to the same restrictions when it comes to their own national legislation .
This is a situation caused precisely by the basically rigid , centralist form of the EU treaties .
Mr Kreissl-Dörfler 's report shows very precisely the great risk the MAI will represent in respect of our European social , cultural and political model and , more fundamentally still , for democracy and people 's capacity to control their own destiny in general .
I supported the Group of the Party of European Socialist 's amendment encouraging the European Parliament to insist that governments and national parliaments do not sign the agreement as it currently stands .
Indeed , it is precisely the currently prevailing logic which must be condemned , rejected and brought to a halt .
As it stands , the MAI constitutes a new stage , a decisive one , one of liberation , of economic globalization with no protective rules , with no democratic rules which , as we know , does not benefit the majority of people , not even in the developed world .
If such an agreement were to be put in place , we would be depriving individual states , the European Union and public authorities of their means of action and authoritative sovereignty to enact , for example , social or environmental rulings , commitments benefiting regional development or employment or to use Structural Funds , incentives and selective measures .
The multinationals would become masters of our world in the name of the sacrosanct free market and free competition . They would hold all power and , in particular , the possibility - and this really is the limit - of bringing a state to justice on the grounds of a " loss of profit opportunity ' , a company 's profits prevailing over the choice and interest of a people !
What will be left to our democracies but the crumbs of power which these omnipotent forces leave them ?
If it becomes concrete , the MAI will make European political and social construction all the more difficult and will remove all substance from it .
In short , the project of a community which is master of its own destiny , capable of giving life to an area of solidarity , liberty , creativity and cultural diversity , will no longer have any sense nor the effective possibility of embodying this .
We must therefore put a stop to this deviation .
Of course , we can only subscribe to a better organization of investment possibilities in a transparent and just framework and the report clearly sets out the conditions without which such an agreement cannot be accepted .
The framework of this agreement must be global and cannot be defined by the rich or developed countries alone .
That is why the OECD is not the right body to do this .
The WTO , or better still UNCTAD or the UN , would be in a position to offer a more representative context in which to draw it up .
Any initiative must be ruled out until global social and environmental standards have been set .
The individual states and political and public inter-state organizations such as the European Union must retain their right to act , to ensure that the interest of their people prevails , to regulate the economy with social , fiscal and environmental regulations .
In short , democratic sovereignty must in no way be ceded to the economic interests of the powerful .
The MAI is unacceptable !
We Nordic EU critics support the strong criticism of the MAI agreement in the report .
We believe that the agreement in its current form would have such serious adverse consequences that it should not be signed .
It is unreasonable that an agreement with extensive global consequences should be negotiated solely between the rich industrialized nations in the OECD .
The agreement should instead be negotiated in the framework of the UN or possibly the WTO .
Negotiations in the OECD countries are also characterized by great secrecy and a lack of parliamentary control .
The contents of the agreement are completely unacceptable .
Its proposals mean that transnational companies are given extensive rights at the expense of the states .
That means that companies , through the courts , can overturn democratic decisions in important areas such as the environment , management of natural resources and social issues .
The agreement totally lacks any wording which guarantees the rights of workers , environmental standards and important national interests .
There are also parts of the report which we cannot accept .
These include the positive view of the Commission 's role in the negotiations and the demand that the EU should be given the authority to make decisions on questions concerning foreign direct investments .
Given its confederal nature , the explanation of vote of the Confederal Group of the European United Left must outline the reasons behind the vote of all its components and members which in this , as in other cases , do not necessarily coincide .
There was a consensus during the internal discussion of the Kreissl-Dörfler report , and in the statements of the members of our group in denouncing the process whereby the MAI agreement was reached . This was conducted virtually up to the time of signing with practically no publicity or democratic debate that would be desirable and indeed necessary in the light of its importance , not only regarding public opinion in EU Member States but also regarding third countries outside the OECD .
I would mention the fact that the Committee on External Economic Relations , chaired by Mrs Luciana Castellina , took the initiative of drawing up a report . It does honour to this House in the manner in which it lends an institutional dimension to the expressions of protest and reservations voiced when the agreement became known , particularly in the cultural and artistic sphere .
And , notwithstanding all the commitments necessary to turn it into a Parliament resolution , Mrs Kreissl-Dörfler 's report has succeeded in making a concrete contribution by manifesting an openly critical position regarding the process and its result .
The vote of the components and members of the Confederal Group of the European United Left was also based on their consensus in rejecting a situation whereby multilateral investment agreements , which are drawn up and negotiated between political leaders and major business groups , can prevail over national legislations which are the product of democratic structures and mechanisms and which defend national positions in the economic , social , cultural or environmental spheres .
in writing . ( EL ) The might of big business , represented by the governments and states of the OECD and headed by the USA and the EU , have decided to launch an attack on national sovereignty and independence , by doing away with the fundamental right of nations to choose the pathway to their own growth and development .
To date , there has been the possibility , albeit limited and on the basis of the correlation of powers , of exercising some autonomous economic policy , since draconian programmes of consolidation have not been imposed by international credit organizations or associations of regional integration . There has also been the possibility of concluding bilateral agreements which , to a certain extent , took account of the mutual interests of the participants .
With the agreement that is being drawn up , the safeguarding of profits and , more generally , of the interests of foreign investors determines every measure of social , environmental , developmental or regional policy , under threat of the severest penalties in the event of a violation of the provisions which protect , wholly and exclusively , foreign investments .
The oppressive nature of the agreement is such that we can talk of a charter of the rights of multinationals and of the obligations of nations and governments .
The fact that only foreign investors have the right of recourse concerning the observance of the agreement , while this same possibility is not given to states , is certainly worth noting .
The agreement gives every multinational the possibility of demanding the state in which it is investing to abstain from any attempt to support national production or some sector or some region through the granting of state assistance or other advantages .
Foreign investments cannot be accompanied by conditions for the support of local production , for the employment of the local workforce or for the respect of labour relations .
States will not be able to negotiate or even impose on multinationals the slightest commitment to reinvest a part of their profits or exchange their technology .
In fact , multinationals will have the right at any time to export the whole of their profits and their capital and to move towards whatever other accommodation they deem to be to their advantage .
Moreover , the implementation of the agreement will allow multinational companies to rescind any previous commitment they have undertaken in relation to the investments they have already made .
The agreement deals a hard blow for the trade-union rights of working people and urges governments to crack down in any way on labour movements by brandishing the threat of compensation for lost profits as a result of strikes , social unrest and even revolts .
At the same time , the standstill principle consolidates any liberalizing or deregulatory measure , given that every new measure to protect social rights could be attacked as being protectionist and could therefore be invalidated .
It is particularly striking that the text , which aims to subject people at a global level to the hunt for increased profits , has been surrounded by the utmost secrecy . Its ratification will oblige developed countries to submit to the method of " adhere or be condemned ' .
We have never before seen in the annals of international law the fundamental abolition of the right of release with the planned commitment of states for at least five years from the date of ratification and for fifteen years from the date of rescission .
The central issue of directly thwarting any further negotiation and quashing any attempt to accept such plans is hidden , since attention is focused simply on the exemption of certain sectors from the scope of the agreement .
In the event that this agreement finally comes up for ratification our position must be to reject it unconditionally .
Nations cannot tolerate the planned dictatorship of multinationals and will do everything to overturn it .
The intensity of the euphoria surrounding international agreements may have the adverse result of cancelling their desired positive effects .
The European Union has shown a tendency to produce ever more agreements without stopping to think whether each additional agreement contributes anything new and , more particularly , whether it runs counter to the basic interests of society as a whole , in terms of the future .
The current negotiations with the United States - which have immense implications for the future of a European model of society - is one , although by no means the only example .
Under the MAI agreement , in the context of the OECD , the European Union could exert considerable influence if all its members were united in defending a long-term view which did not benefit the market at the expense of the European acquis in the environmental sphere .
The MAI agreement differs from its WTO counterpart on account not only of the identity and number of countries involved , but also of the type of negotiation involved .
Under GATT / WTO , any countries concerned with defending the interests of the European audiovisual sector had only to refrain from making offers in that area .
In contrast , under MAI , which is approaching its culmination in May , the audiovisual exception must be expressly guaranteed .
This will be an acid-test for the Union .
Let us hope that we are not disappointed .
I am going to vote for the report - assuming that Amendment No 1 is approved - because it is critical of the MAI agreement and in effect demands that it should be renegotiated .
However , I have reservations about certain formulations , such as point 22 of the draft report which seeks to approve a ban on investment subsidies .
That would damage Swedish regional policy which is based in part on investment incentives .
There are also a number of other points in the report of which I am sceptical , and which I would like to see expressed in a different manner .
Flemming report ( A4-0022 / 98 )
As a doctor in charge of a hospital ear , nose and throat unit , I witness the damage caused by the abuse of tobacco on a daily basis .
Nevertheless , I do not believe that we need to withdraw our support to tobacco production in Europe over the next ten years in order to guarantee public health .
This kind of tobacco prohibition , which would damage our economy , would have little effect in reducing the annual consumption of cigarettes , since supplies could be obtained from American and Asian producers who are always looking for new outlets .
This prohibition would be matched by financial support to tobacco growers to change to other forms of agricultural production .
This would automatically be an extra burden on the budget , and the extent of this has not yet been assessed .
A real problem of choice would also be raised with regard to the nature of such diversification , given the system of quotas and the surpluses that already exist for many products .
What sort of a situation are we going to put the producers in ? They are already getting worried .
Are we not going to destroy jobs without improving the health situation ?
On the other hand , the proposal to carry out research into the cultivation of other types of tobacco with lower levels of nicotine seems far more logical in terms of its medical and economic consequences .
It would contribute to a real improvement in consumer protection .
Whilst supporting the underlying principles of the Flemming report , I would like to emphasize the unrealistic and utopian nature of a number of its proposals , should they be translated into fact .
As everyone knows , Article 129 of the Treaty of Amsterdam increases the obligations of the European Union towards the protection of public health and consumers .
That means that in order for the Union to address and properly fulfil its new commitments in these areas and , especially , the demand for health protection to be included in Community policies , new proposals will have to be presented following the ratification of that Treaty .
The Commission 's report is correct and detailed . However , in view of the new step taken in Amsterdam on these matters , the Union now demands new approaches .
We therefore call for a Green Paper , to inform us of the Commission 's new actions to fulfil the Union 's new health policy , as I mentioned earlier .
The reports from the Commission and the European Parliament are both welcome .
I think it is important that public health aspects are taken into account when the EU shapes its policies , including transport measures and agricultural policy .
At the same time the report surprises me because , in fact , it indirectly criticizes the decisions made in the EU , including decisions taken last year .
Several areas can be mentioned , such as genetically-modified food products , support for environmental poisons in agriculture , an open door for salmonella and antibiotics , support for several infrastructure measures in road transport and support for tobacco growing .
All these areas have in common the fact that they affect public health and so should not have been shaped in the way they actually were .
I fully support point 10 of the report which points out that the aim of today 's tobacco subsidies is that they should be phased out and eventually end completely .
I hope that the European Parliament takes this decision , since so many times in the past the majority has continued to support subsidies for tobacco growers .
Just as political decisions which affect the environment should be accompanied by environmental impact assessments , decisions which affect health and consumer protection should be accompanied by health effect assessments .
However , there is no reason to set up a separate control apparatus at EU level ; this should be left to the Member States .
Environment , health and consumer issues should be given greater priority in political work at European level .
Majority decisions may be justified , but it should then be a question of minimum rules .
Each Member State should have the right to keep higher standards or introduce tougher rules than provided for by the EU .
On the issue of tobacco growing the approach should be that subsidies for tobacco growing should be phased out within a five to ten-year period .
In order not to increase unemployment , the growers should be offered alternative crops and support to develop them .
I voted in favour of the report .
The importance of protecting health within the European Union must be emphasized .
For this reason , the report that has been approved today deserves our overall support in terms of drawing up a Green Paper analysing the future areas of action for a European policy in the area of health and the need for mutual recognition of professional qualifications in the sector . I also support the points made on the defence of the rights of patients , including compensation in cases of inappropriate treatment , the implementation of high safety standards in the veterinary and phytosanitary spheres and , finally , the reorganization and clarification of responsibilities in this area which is subject to problems at Commission level .
However , as we say in Portugal , there is always a " but ' and here it lies in the fact that , on the subject of tobacco , this report echoes others in adopting only a partial approach to the problem .
It skates over the need to promote a pedagogical approach and to introduce preventive measures which discourage tobacco consumption , which is a clear and obvious factor of risk for health .
It makes no suggestions for preventing or placing a global ban on tobacco advertising , particularly at sporting events .
It merely emphasizes , in point 10 , the need to stop subsidies for tobacco growing in the European Union , and even specifies maximum periods of ten years for this to come into effect .
In a manner that verges on the hypocritical , the report ignores the fact that this policy could put tens of thousands more people out of work in some regions where there are no alternatives in either the short or medium term . Curiously , it forgets that halting tobacco production in the European Union would simply give rise to higher imports and hence additional profits for the large tobacco-producing multinationals , which retain their empires intact and which are not even mentioned in the report .
We question this partial approach to the health implications of tobacco consumption , and clear protectionism of the interests of the tobacco firms .
For this reason , we voted against those points where this partial approach is most obvious and significant , and for those amendments which sought to minimize them and which , fortunately , were ultimately accepted .
The Group of Independents for a Europe of Nations is also aware of the effects of tobacco abuse on health that have been noted by the rapporteur in his explanatory statement .
Nevertheless , if you estimate the number of deaths per year in the European Union caused by tobacco at around 500 000 , it is also appropriate to note that various recent epidemiological studies have shown that in the United States the death rate due to tobacco , whilst not decreasing , is remaining constant .
This is true even though tobacco consumption has been falling constantly there for more than twenty years .
Our group has tabled an amendment to point 10 of the motion for a resolution .
The rapporteur considers it necessary to reduce , even withdraw , the system of aid to tobacco growers .
On many occasions over the past few years we have been reminded that the European Union imports 70 % of its tobacco and that we should not therefore link the aid to tobacco growers ' incomes to tobacco abuse and its effects on health .
Our group would thus like to see a restrictive policy with regard to the promotion of tobacco consumption .
We must not confuse tobacco abuse caused by tobacco consumption with production .
We would like to remind you that if support to tobacco growers ' incomes were withdrawn European production would immediately cease with all the inherent consequences on employment .
Tobacco imports from third countries would increase greatly to compensate for the reduction in European production .
The impact on tobacco abuse would be zero and the European Commission would have thus caused an increase in unemployment within the Union , particularly in marginalized areas already strongly affected by unemployment .
Alzheimer 's disease
I fully support this series of questions regarding Alzheimer 's disease .
It was high time they were raised .
Indeed , it seems necessary to put in place an action programme against this disease , which affects a considerable number of old and sometimes even young people in the European Union .
It is essential to establish a programme of this type on the basis of both research and on prevention and treatment .
Let me add that any progress in the fight against this disease must be considered as an improvement in the living conditions of the elderly .
It is worth noting that apart from the health aspect there is a social and , quite simply , a human issue taking shape .
A large number of elderly people find themselves cut off from all links with society and Alzheimer 's disease only accentuates this sad fact .
I would like to take this opportunity to thank health and geriatric staff for what is generally recognized as the high quality of their work .
Specific training must be encouraged in order to respond in the best way possible to the needs of those affected by this terrible illness which condemns people to isolation .
It is encouraging to see that Parliament is looking into the matter .
It is already two years since Parliament adopted the Poggiolini report , which requested the Commission to present an action programme to fight Alzheimer 's disease and other neurological syndromes which affect the cognitive functions .
The text at the time requested that this programme should be implemented as soon as possible .
It has to be noted that the delay has been longer than anticipated .
It is , of course , a difficult issue . The disease is misunderstood , its causes remain unclear , epidemiological studies have been limited to a few Western countries and staff as a whole have been ill prepared to care for the sick .
This is all the more reason for making advances in the scientific areas of neuro-biological , epidemiological and therapeutic work .
The Commission must double its efforts , support research and make special budgetary provisions in order to speed up the improvement in care that the sufferers deserve .
The proportion of those affected by Alzheimer 's disease in developed countries , where it has been mainly observed , is already high .
The numbers are significant and high in comparison to other viral diseases such as AIDS .
However , neither information nor scientific research , nor prevention , nor cure , nor dealing with the sufferers has received the necessary , systematic , comprehensive , social and collective attention commensurate with its gravity .
The reason for this is perhaps that this disease mainly concerns elderly people .
To date there have only been research programmes of limited scope , while the funding of programmes does not correspond to scientific and social interest .
The often heavy medical expenses and social burdens continue to be borne by the families of the patients , resulting in significant financial , psychological and social costs .
Alzheimer 's disease does not feature in any social security organization funding programme , while neither the Member States nor the Commission have responded to the need to step up efforts to fight a disease which is turning into a scourge , since forecasts predict that it will affect 8 million people by the year 2000 .
After the squeezing of pensions and social benefits in the name of profit and competitiveness , a new type of racism is being cultivated by the state and by the organs of social security against a section of the population which is vulnerable to such diseases .
The rules of an unaccountable free market " vote ' for death when this costs less than life .
Community policy continuously puts off examining the issue until the future , a future which is however very uncertain for the thousands of sufferers . We should concern ourselves with their present by taking supportive measures and creating infrastructures of therapeutic care , by organizing care centres and programmes for the specialist training of medical and geriatric staff who will look after the patients and who will be able to relieve their family environment of the psychological and social consequences of the disease .
It is necessary in the immediate future to fund research into the causes , the prevention , the timely diagnosis and the combating of Alzheimer 's disease , along with the related syndromes .
A society which presumes to look forward to an increase in average life expectancy and indeed under the best possible conditions , cannot possibly allow greedy " profit ' to hand over unopposed the spirit and personality of the elderly to the effects of a disease which is so painful and catastrophic for the sufferers and their families .
( The sitting was adjourned at 1.30 p.m. and resumed at 3.00 p.m. )

Situation in Kosovo ( continuation )
The next item is the continuation of the debate on the Council 's statement on the situation in Kosovo which was suspended prior to the vote .
Madam President , it is rather pointless continuing a debate which seems to have already ended , but let us carry on .
The Albanians who live in Kosovo are asking for something which I think is logical and self-evident and they have been asking for it for many years : the recognition of their right to determine their own fate .
They are asking for respect of their human rights and the leader in Belgrade , Slobodan Milosevic , chooses , against all logic , the policy of intensification .
This is a policy which facilitates extremist elements that exist among the Albanian population .
The terrorists of the so-called Freedom Army of Kosovo , with their violence and murder , are not helping the Albanians of Kosovo .
For his part , Slobodan Milosevic does not seem to have learned very much from the still fresh wounds of the civil war in the former Yugoslavia .
Events in Kosovo are creating dangers for the whole region .
Preventing the crisis from spreading to the neighbouring states of Albania and the Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia must be the prime aim of the European Union .
I think that we must regard the actions of the Presidency and the initiatives of Mr Cook as very constructive .
Serious problems are already being created by the movement of the population towards the south and west of Kosovo .
If several thousand refugees are forced to take refuge in neighbouring countries , the governments of Tirana and Skopje will face serious problems .
All the good work that has been done by Fados Nanos in Albania to stabilize his country will be lost .
Destabilization throughout the region would then be a fact with unforeseeable consequences for peace in the Balkans .
The European Union must not permit any changes to existing borders .
On the other hand , we cannot return to a new bloodbath in the Balkans .
What was said by Mr van den Broek and by Mr Henderson is very constructive .
It is necessary to begin immediate dialogue in order to find a solution .
This must be done by Mr Milosevic .
He owes it to the people of Serbia , who have paid very dearly for his intransigence .
Madam President , once again we have seen the distressing pictures of children and women disfigured by the violence of the Serbian government police and once again we have arrived late , despite the fact that these events were heralded by a whole series of episodes .
Last October , 3 000 Albanians claiming a fundamental right - to learn in their own language - were dispersed violently by the Serbian government police , in the silence of the diplomatic authorities of the EU .
The EU has adopted a document which was mentioned by the President-in-Office of the Council this morning and which I believe is a good document , a text that provides specific information .
But that is not the problem . Mr President , will we manage to do what you set out in your communiqué ?
That is the big question !
When the Serbian government representative subjects the beginning of discussions to the recognition of the Serbian constitution , he is establishing an objectively unacceptable condition because , as you recalled , that constitution is the worst obstacle to beginning negotiations .
The situation is becoming objectively more difficult because , instead of drawing closer , the parties are moving apart .
Today , even the most moderate leaders , such as Rugova , have established extremist positions .
The Council 's work therefore needs to be extremely energetic , if we want to prevent blood baths and if we want to prevent further outbreaks of war with unforeseeable consequences .
Madam President , during the discussions on the Maastricht Treaty , the war in Yugoslavia started and the country fell apart .
On the eve of the beginning of the enlargement negotiations , the nightmare of a Balkan war is looming over us .
Mr de Vries , Mr Swoboda and Mrs Pack have already given a thorough analysis of the situation , which I agree with .
So I will confine myself to asking the President of the Council a few questions .
Is the President-in-Office of the Council prepared to give the same signal with regard to Kosovo as was given to Iraq ?
Are there plans to send military observers to the Albanian border ?
As you know , the country is full of weapons and it is said it is supplying a small liberation army .
The President appears to consider the autonomy of Kosovo important .
How is he going to get Milosevic to bring this into effect ?
Madam President , in spite of the difficulties and in spite of the dramatic number of deaths in Kosovo , I think there are elements which can give us some optimism at least in relation to what happened in Bosnia .
In the case of Bosnia we had a Croatian population in Bosnia and opposed to it was a nationalistic and aggressive Mr Tudjman .
In the case of Kosovo we have an Albanian population but also Fatos Nanos , who is moderate and prudent .
In the case of Bosnia we had divided wholes .
In the case of Kosovo we have borders within the framework of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia .
For this reason it requires prudence and effort .
Naturally pressure is also required , but Yugoslavia , Serbia , needs to be given the security to enable it to make the necessary moves .
We must not forget Yugoslavia 's fear of a new secession , the fear of a Vodnjan after Kosovo , the fear of a Mavrovounio after Vodnjan . From this viewpoint I think that assurances of a border commitment would help the Yugoslav government to make the necessary moves .
Madam President , I hope nobody in this Chamber is unaware of , or in any doubt about , the seriousness of the crisis which confronts us today .
After the Bosnian war many of us feared there would be some who would use the peace as an opportunity simply to take breath before returning to their evil work .
I am fearful at the moment that we are seeing those predictions come true .
In Croatia , as we know , President Tudjman 's recent speech to his party congress , the situation in eastern Slavonia and the way in which the Dayton Agreement is not being enforced effectively all indicate that the international community must not drop its guard in the region .
Clearly , in Kosovo President Milosevic believes he is strong enough to challenge that international community and its resolve .
We therefore have to send out a very clear message that we remain committed to the permanent restoration of peace and stability in the region .
We must have total unity of purpose amongst the international community .
Any small perceived difference will be exaggerated by Milosevic and used to justify his brutality .
Our condemnation of the brutality of the Serbian repression must be unambiguous while making it clear that we will have no truck whatsoever with terrorism .
I congratulate the Presidency and the contact group on the speedy response they have made to the latest crisis .
But we must ensure that sanctions are effectively enforced on Serbia and we must give support to the efforts of the Albanian , Bulgarian and FYROM governments in trying to stop the crisis spreading and destabilizing the whole region .
Recently the Committee on Foreign Affairs , Security and Defence Policy of Parliament asked for a high representative to be appointed to Kosovo .
Therefore , we welcome the new mission and mandate given to Felipe González as the personal representative of the OSCE Chairman-in-Office for the former Yugoslav Republic .
If we can resolve the short-term problems we must increase our efforts to resolve the long-term problems . In particular , we must try to have the education agreement implemented and make progress on civil building measures within Kosovo .
Madam President , I wish to highlight one aspect that has not been debated .
Five countries , first among which is Greece - the only member of the European Union - , Bulgaria , Romania , Turkey and , on the recommendation of Greece , the Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia yesterday established a common position on the explosive problem in Kosovo .
These are the five countries which feel more intensely than any other country that a conflagration in that tormented region would destroy in the Balkans the peace that has succeeded , with so much bloodshed , tears and horrific losses , in gaining a foothold after the partition of Yugoslavia .
And these five countries will be the first to suffer the consequences of an uncontrolled upheaval .
These last few days the President of Albania , Mr Meidani , has been on an official visit to Athens and he has heard from the most official sources that the solution to the dramatic problem must be based on a dual position : on the one hand , the exclusion of any change to the borders in the Balkans and , on the other , the recognition of general autonomy , with complete freedom and the real reinstatement of the rule of law in Kosovo .
Total respect for national rights , the tolerance of peaceful assembly and the implementation of educational agreements are the only way towards achieving constructive dialogue and breaking the vicious cycle of terrorist activities and brutal repression .
Anything else would throw lighted torches into the powder-keg of Europe .
Madam President , it is quite clear that Europe and its institutions are once again tragically late over a specifically European problem .
However , it is important for the contact group to have firmly established the terms of a political solution to the conflict ; I stress political and not military , as also absurdly requested in this debate .
We now need to reject any accusation of interfering because it is not a question of interfering in the event of military intervention over a political contradiction .
At the same time , we need to reject the illusions of independence established , this morning , by Kosovo .
I believe that Europe should exert very strong pressure to ensure that Milosevic resumes direct talks with the Albanian community .
This is the problem we are faced with and the only feasible path is to have talks between the parties in question .
The objective should be a return to independence for Kosovo which has been denied by the Belgrade government .
I believe this to be a feasible path , which the Council should endeavour to follow , according to the dictates I share that have been established by the contact group .
Madam President , we have the opportunity to use preventative diplomacy to prevent Kosovo from suffering the same fate as that which we were unable to prevent in 1991 in the former Yugoslavia .
In order to do so , we must put pressure on President Milosevic to make him stop the repression immediately , initiate dialogue with the Kososvo representatives and re-establish the autonomy of that region , whose legal status he removed some years ago .
As well as putting that sort of pressure on Milosevic we must condemn terrorism , which does not work , cannot work and can never be acceptable as a means of defending political objectives .
And on those lines , we should support international political action through political means , based on two considerations : firstly , that what is happening in Kosovo is not by any means an internal problem , since in matters of democratic principles , human rights and human life there is of course no right of sovereignty ; and secondly , any solution for Kosovo should be developed within the context of the existing borders , if we do not want to create further problems .
So we are going to support the measures adopted by the contact group , call on Europe to play a greater role and , of course , support the mission which appears to have been accepted by the former president of the Spanish government , Felipe González .
I would like to make a number of comments in response to the points which have been raised by colleagues in the discussion .
I reject any suggestion first of all that the Presidency has been inactive in trying to do what is practical and realistic in dealing with the problems in Kosovo .
As I said in my introduction , the Foreign Secretary , Mr Cook , in his capacity as President of the Council , visited Belgrade and met Mr Milosevic last Thursday .
He was accompanied by the Commission .
On Monday the contact group met in London and four areas of agreement as part of political action were put in force : an arms embargo , a refusal to supply equipment which could be used in a repressive way , visa restrictions and a moratorium on financial credits with the area .
That was the basis on which the international community has spoken and has taken action .
Today my colleague , the Minister Mr Lloyd , as a Presidency envoy , is in the area , as he has been since Monday .
He will be in Belgrade .
He will also be visiting other neighbouring countries to find out about their particular problems and concerns so that he can bring that information back to the centre .
Additionally , the European Conference , which is taking place tomorrow in London , is another opportunity for matters to be discussed and again , the foreign ministers ' informal meeting in Edinburgh on Friday and Saturday is yet another occasion .
If there are other ideas then they can be debated and acted upon .
There has been a lot of activity by the Presidency involving the Council , and that is also in response to Mr Bianco .
In response to Mrs van Bladel , at the moment the aim is to try to seek a political solution .
The question of any military action has not been raised .
Were it to be raised it would need to be considered whether or not it was in line with international law and whether or not it would be appropriate and effective action .
If the answer to those questions were both yes , it would then need to be decided who would be involved in it , what would be the purpose , how any military action would end , and what political solution would be required .
There are a lot of questions way down the line on all of those issues .
The important thing is to try to seek a political solution to this problem .
As one of the contributors to the debate said near the end : if it is recognized that the conduct of the Yugoslav government in Kosovo is unacceptable to the international community , the situation can be retrieved by giving back sensible autonomy to the people of Kosovo so that they can , as regards their internal affairs , determine their own future .
There has been activity , the Presidency has been active , the Council has been active and indeed the international community has responded to the crisis .
That is also reflected in the very fact that there is a debate in Parliament today and that Parliament itself is playing its role in speaking for the peoples of the European Union on how seriously they regard the situation and , it is to be hoped , how they would be able to seek a solution based on a political settlement .
Madam President , the President-in-Office looked at me when he rejected the accusation that the Presidentin-Office has not been very active .
Perhaps this was because I am one of the few people in the Chamber but I must clearly state that my criticisms were not directed at the current President-in-Office but the Presidency , Commission and even Parliament , which for many years recognized the problem without doing enough .
I hope that the present Presidency will contribute much to solving the problem and the crisis .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12.00 noon .
ASEM process
The next item is the joint debate on the following oral questions :
B4-0174 / 98 - O-0004 / 98 to the Council and B4-0175 / 98 - O-0005 / 98 to the Commission by Mr Swoboda and Mr Titley , on behalf of the Group of the Party of European Socialists , on the ASEM process ; -B4-0176 / 98 - O-0018 / 98 by Mr Bertens on behalf of the Group of the European Liberal Democrat and Reform Party , to the Council on the next Asia-Europe meeting ( ASEM ) ; -B4-0178 / 98 - O-0055 / 98 by Mr Jarzembowski and others , on behalf of the Group of the European People 's Party , to the Council on the EU-Asia Summit ( ASEM ) ; -B4-0180 / 98 - O-0058 / 98 by Mr Telkämper and others , on behalf of the Green Group in the European Parliament , to the Council on the second Asia-Europe Summit ( ASEM II ) in London in April ; -B4-0261 / 98 - O-0061 / 98 by Mr Vinci , on behalf of the Confederal Group of the European United Left - Nordic Green Left , to the Council on the EU-Asia Summit ; -B4-0264 / 98 - O-0064 / 98 by Mr Pompidou , on behalf of the Union for Europe Group , to the Council on the ASEM process ; -B4-0268 / 98 - O-0068 / 98 by Mr Dupuis and Mr Vandemeulebroucke , on behalf of the Group of the European Radical Alliance , to the Council on the second Asia-Europe Summit in London in April .
Madam President , recently a major company in my constituency announced major job losses because it had lost an order from the Far East .
This reinforced to me the dangers presented to Europe by the current crisis .
Our banks are extremely exposed and our dependence on trade make us extremely vulnerable to this sort of crisis in the world markets .
Clearly , we should be using the ASEM process therefore to see how we can ensure that this crisis is overcome very quickly and to ensure that the crisis does not get any worse .
In particular , we need to notice that at least part of this crisis can be put down to what you might call cronyism and what others might call straightforward corruption , in some of the countries involved .
Too many cosy deals were done with other people 's money and people were prepared to turn a blind eye to the weaknesses of those deals .
Clearly we cannot separate out economic freedom from political freedom .
The demands this Parliament frequently makes for respect of human rights is as important a part of the process as the demands for economic freedom .
We must ensure that there is transparency of the political process in the Far East .
I would like to hear from the Council and the Commission how they intend to use the ASEM Summit to bring home the importance of developing projects aimed at good governance in the Far East so that we can build from a stronger economy in the future .
We ought to be seeing a much stronger role for parliaments to play in this process because by having a parliamentary dimension we will ensure that nobody turns a blind eye to cronyism and corruption .
Finally , we must look at a reform of the financial institutions .
Some of us suspect that the rescue packages being enforced at the moment are more about rescuing people who made bad deals than trying to restructure the societies and the economies of countries in the Far East .
I will be interested to hear what the Council and the Commission have to say about how they intend to approach the ASEM Summit from these points of view .
Madam President , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , the ASEM Summit is of course extremely important .
Europe should have been present right from the start of the uncertain financial situation in South-East Asia .
This should be part of balanced dialogue between that part of Asia and Europe .
The Asian countries should implement reforms on a large scale , but the Union should express its support for this , and cooperate with the IMF .
I would like to ask the President-in-Office of the Council whether he shares this view , and whether he can indicate how the European Union could have avoided gaining the image of the big absentee in the recent dramatic financial-economic developments ?
How does the Council envisage putting this right ?
We support the joint initiative of the ASEAN countries to set up a joint surveillance mechanism . Together they might be able to prevent a possible new crisis , and keep the famous financial-economic domino effect under control .
Does the Council agree that a supporting role from Europe might be useful ?
It is a simple question , which might warrant a long answer , but I would like you to bear it in mind .
My group , the Group of the European Liberal Democrat and Reform Party , also considers it important that economic and financial topics are not the only topics discussed during the Summit .
In a balanced relationship , political dialogue is at least as important .
In line with the conclusions of the ministerial meeting held at the beginning of last year , I therefore call on the Council to put human rights on the agenda of the ASEM Summit .
Perhaps these can be discussed during the bilateral agreements between various countries .
Can the Council promise me that this will indeed happen ?
Madam President , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , Commissioner , my group is also waiting with bated breath for the answer to the four written questions , for Asia-Europe relations are very important not only for our own foreign relations but also as regards the economic and social situations in the 25 countries involved .
It is our view that the ASEM process should not simply be left to the Ministries of Foreign Affairs and the bureaucrats , but that the European Parliament and the Asian parliaments , which represent the people involved in the process , must also be included .
We support this process which must encompass a broad spectrum of cooperation ranging from political dialogue , through economic partnership to social and cultural cooperation .
We would also be very interested to find out whether the Council intends to discuss the enlargement of the ASEM with its Asian partners .
We see the inclusion of India , Pakistan , Bangladesh , New Zealand and Australia as interesting possibilities .
I do admit , however , that it must be our Asian partners themselves who take the decision , in the same manner as we have reservations in the case of Burma , due to its human rights situation , and are unable to accept the inclusion of Burma .
The London Summit can be successful only if the 25 heads of state and government can demonstrate that we can find common solutions to ending the financial crisis in Asia .
It is a question of creating greater transparency in the international banking sector .
It is a question of finding a mechanism to check short-term currency speculation .
I support those in the Council and in the Commission who hold the view that a country like Indonesia which is not only refusing to implement the reforms agreed with the International Monetary Fund , but is actually choosing to reject them , should not be able to count on the support of the Asia-Europe partners and that , on the contrary , both the Community and the Asian countries should work towards changing the political and economic circumstances in this country .
I share the view of my fellow Members that if it is to address economics , trade , finance and foreign policy , the ASEM Summit will also have to discuss the underlying problems which are common both to ourselves in Europe and to our Asian partners , that is , issues such as the fight against poverty , the observation of human rights , the development of democracy and the rule of law and the environment - let me remind you of the forest fires in certain parts of Asia which have not only local , but also global effects .
Finally , I believe - as some of those speaking before me have already said - that it is important to involve the European Parliament and the Asian parliaments in the process .
This is also an opportunity to support democratization in general and to strengthen Members ' responsibility for international relations in particular .
This is why the involvement of the Asian parliaments and the European Parliament is of such great importance .
In conclusion , let me make just two further remarks .
Firstly , I would be very pleased if the President of the Council and Commissioner Sir Leon Brittan would announce personally that they will be making an official statement on the outcome of the London Summit at the mini-part-session in Brussels at the end of April , so that we will have another opportunity to debate the outcome .
Today we are discussing expectations , but it is also important that this House has a chance to debate the outcome on the basis of an official statement by the Council and the Commission .
Finally , ladies and gentlemen , may I take this opportunity to wish the Council and the Commission every success at the ASEM Summit in London .
Madam President , the second meeting between the ASEM heads of state and the European heads of government to be held on 3 and 4 April takes place against the backdrop of a serious economic and financial crisis in East and South-East Asia . It is a crisis which is exacerbating and will continue to exacerbate the usual effects of capitalist economic growth in large industrial cities : uncertain and badly paid jobs , the reckless and uncontrolled exploitation of natural and mineral resources and occasionally the infringement of human rights on a massive scale .
Forecasts made by the OECD state that unless the governments of East and South-East Asia can do something quickly , with lasting effect and that unless a recovery takes place , the economies of Europe will also suffer under the effects of the crisis .
Indeed , there are many Members in this House who embraced the tiger economies , the boom and the politics of the fast buck . In my view , we need new mechanisms and , above all , a degree of political primacy .
We need a new framework . It should be established in London .
If we consider that the ASEM states are responsible for over half of the world 's gross domestic product , the burden of responsibility carried by this meeting in London becomes quite clear .
Over the past few months in this House we have repeatedly demanded democratization in Burma , the establishment of trading relations only if Burma guarantees human rights and makes some progress towards democracy . In relation to North Korea we have asked that money not simply be poured into the KEDO project , but that we should use the money to relieve or alleviate hunger , that we should promote the development of the domestic market and thereby promote a policy of peace in Korea .
These projects must be addressed .
Mr Kinkel spoke of a new policy for Timor .
Perhaps the Council and the Commission can suggest something of this new policy to the repressive regime in Indonesia .
Then there are the jungle fires .
The jungle does not burn by chance , someone sets it on fire .
I believe that a climate protection programme is required .
We want to know how you intend to approach these various problems which we have so often discussed ? What initiatives you are taking ?
What is your view , for example , in relation to the economic and financial crisis , on the introduction of a Tobin tax ?
How do you intend to explain the new cooperation to the governments ?
In my view , it would be a good idea if Parliament were to give you a list of recommendations the next time you embark on these negotiations and that , as Mr Jarzembowski has already suggested , you should then report back to Parliament on what you negotiated , how you negotiated and how we can continue to shape our policy towards East and South-East Asia with common perspectives and in a democratically responsible manner .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , as regards the ASEM II Summit , in my opinion , it is important to define the role which the European Union can and must play within the framework of cooperation and the development of links with Asia , what its priorities must be , and what steps must be taken to coordinate and target clearly the actions to be undertaken .
Aimed at encouraging dialogue with our Asian partners , the Asia-Europe Meeting can indeed contribute to encouraging reciprocal understanding and to tightening the links between our two continents .
These are links which , in the crucial context of current globalization , must be made concrete through the setting up of a Euro-Asian form of cooperation on regional and international questions of major importance , in particular on economic and financial , scientific and technological , environmental , cultural and humanitarian issues .
Within the framework of a new partnership with Asia , it is therefore essential that the Union plays a predominant role in the development and implementation of the tools which will enable synergies and partnerships to be created in these areas .
I therefore fully support the initiatives identified during the first ASEM Summit and the suggestions drawn up at the second Asia-Europe Business Forum in Bangkok , which should improve the overall climate and develop reciprocal investments .
With regard to the crisis which has affected a large part of Asia for several months , an issue which will certainly be discussed at the London Summit , it is important that the Union participates actively in the implementation of financial and economic measures to curb the recession mechanisms .
The Union will contribute , on the one hand , to encouraging the necessary reforms of the sectors affected by the crisis and , on the other , to giving back confidence to foreign investors .
In conclusion , and with the objective of giving a parliamentary dimension to the ASEM process , it is appropriate to support the organization of an Asia-Europe Parliamentary Partnership , or ASEP , and to involve the House closely in this .
Madam President , I was privileged to be on the ASEAN delegation that visited Malaysia and Singapore in January .
We did not meet the Prime Ministers of Malaysia or Singapore as they were both away but we met the Foreign Ministers and we were very well received .
The financial crisis was the main topic of conversation and in that regard one thing came over very clearly to the members of the delegation .
Insufficient credit is given to the European Union even though we are partly the paymasters in connection with the IMF .
If Mr Clinton visits he gets a lot of credit in the press .
If EU Ministers visit , very little credit is given .
We must bear this in mind as it is not really fair to the European Union .
We have a deep sense of commitment to this part of the world and to the countries which have been suffering in the crisis .
They were also very interested in EMU and were of the opinion that it would be of assistance in the global monetary situation where they have crashed so badly .
In today 's press I notice that one editorial suggests that Indonesia is facing a total collapse and that the re-elected Suharto has said that he is not going to keep to the conditions of the IMF .
This is very serious for the whole process .
We must encourage democracy and human rights in all these countries .
We also visited the Department of Forestry in Malaysia and were rather impressed by environmental concerns there .
I think we could offer more help to their projects .
We want to see the dialogue expanded to culture , social affairs and politics in all the countries .
We also met NGOs and would like to see more encouragement from the European Union to these hard-working bodies .
Madam President , the second Asia-Europe Meeting , to be held in London on 3 and 4 April , will be an important landmark in the development of Europe 's relationship with Asia .
The range and depth of the questions by the Members of this Parliament underline the importance of ASEM and the expectations it has raised .
Since the first ASEM in Bangkok in 1996 , we have seen results in all three key dimensions of the ASEM process .
Questions have been tabled by Members of this Parliament on what has been achieved .
First of all , in political terms , we have seen a series of ministerial meetings : foreign ministers , economic ministers and finance ministers all met separately during 1997 and , in doing so , increased the level of understanding of the issues we need to work on to bring the two regions closer together .
There have also been less high-profile but very useful contacts between officials which have deepened relations at a working level .
For example , working groups of customs officials have met to put forward proposals on how to harmonize procedures and enforce the regulations to make trade between the two regions work better .
In economic terms , there has been a business dialogue between businesses and government and this is central to the ASEM process .
The Asia-Europe Business Forum has met twice already : in Paris in 1996 and in Bangkok last November .
The Third Business Forum will take place in London at the same time as the ASEM II Summit , and it will be a unique opportunity for business people to have a direct dialogue with leaders on a whole range of concerns , including further trade and investment liberalization .
Thirdly , an investment promotion action plan has been drawn up and endorsed by ASEM economic ministers .
It covers a range of promotional activities and provides for further dialogue on regulatory issues .
Implementation has been entrusted to an investments experts ' group which will be launched , like the plan itself , at ASEM II in April .
We hope that the leaders will adopt an ASEM trade facilitation action plan , the framework for which has been endorsed already by the ASEM economic ministers .
The plan aims at reducing non-tariff barriers and transaction costs , as well as promoting trade opportunities between the two regions .
I know that concerns have been expressed about other links , ' people links ' if you like , and there have been a number of other developments since the last ASEM .
The Asia-Europe Foundation was established in February 1997 to further links between ASEM members at the level of civic society .
It has sponsored a series of lectures and conferences , including a seminar on human rights and the rule of law held in Sweden in December last year .
Cultural links will have a high profile at ASEM II ; there will be a full programme of cultural and arts events taking place to coincide with the summit ; some of which will be visited by those attending the summit , and I hope some ideas will be taken back from those inspirations .
Events range from an East-West film festival to exhibitions of Asian arts and concerts of Asian music .
A lot of colleagues have raised the question of the financial crisis and what can be done to help to restore stability .
The importance of the ASEM process in general , and ASEM II in particular , becomes even clearer at a time when there is a need for a better understanding of respective economic situations and of the need to help bring stability to the situation in Asia .
It offers an opportunity for us to address any perception in Asia , or indeed here , that Europe has been slow to respond to their problems and to demonstrate that Europe has made , and continues to make , a real contribution to help .
We are helping both through the international financial institutions and bilaterally .
It is also an opportunity to stress the need for Asian countries to act on the recommendations of the IMF .
We will want to use the occasion of ASEM II to deliver the message that protectionism is not the solution and that markets must become more , not less , open as part of this response .
What other areas will be covered at ASEM II ?
The Union will be looking for comprehensive political dialogue at ASEM II .
We hope discussion will cover regional issues in Asia and Europe , as well as international issues , and will touch on issues of fundamental rights .
The Council is committed to the equal importance of the three dimensions of the ASEM process and welcomes the cooperation between European and Asian countries in numerous fields , such as environment , child welfare and education .
We see significant scope for the summit to show that ASEM can deliver results in areas that matter to people .
We expect that environmental issues will be one theme of discussion among leaders at ASEM II .
Given the topicality of the issue and the shared concern of Asian and European members of ASEM , assistance in dealing with acute environmental degradation will , I hope , be among the subjects raised .
The problems of forest fires in South-East Asia , already referred to in the debate , will obviously be a matter of immediate concern .
Questions have also been raised about the future membership of ASEM .
I can confirm that participation in ASEM II will be the same as at ASEM I. But the Union expects membership to be an issue at ASEM II .
Future enlargement will depend on consensus among existing members .
So what lies ahead of us ?
Important steps will be taken at ASEM II to set priorities for future cooperation between the two regions .
The Union is looking forward to the adoption at ASEM II of an Asia-Europe cooperation framework to focus and manage ASEM activities .
We also expect to see the launch of an Asia-Europe vision group , which will consider the long-term objectives for ASEM .
This will report to foreign ministers in 1999 in good time for the conclusions to be fed into ASEM III in the year 2000 .
ASEM II in April has a solid agenda .
The Asian financial crisis will make Asia-Europe dialogue more important than ever .
The Presidency looks forward , with the Council , to a fruitful meeting in April .
Since the first ASEM , progress has been extremely rapid .
In the political field a substantive political dialogue has begun at both ministerial and official level , touching on global and regional issues .
Even the field of human rights has been open for discussion , with an informal seminar in Sweden in December , which is likely to be the start of a series of such seminars .
The recent senior officials ' meeting in London has seen a remarkably open exchange of views on Cambodia , Iraq , the Korean peninsula and EU enlargement .
In the economic field , economic ministers and officials have made great progress in preparing action plans for both investment promotion and trade facilitation and in establishing a commonality of views on WTO-related issues as well as on such themes as infrastructure and sustainable growth .
Finance ministers and officials have agreed that considerable scope exists for greater cooperation between financial supervisors in our two regions .
They have also agreed that improved arrangements for exchange of information and sharing of best practice will promote improved financial stability .
Intensive cooperation has been established in the field of customs and the private sector has established its own ongoing dialogue through the Asia-Europe Business Forum and other meetings .
In the cultural and social field the Asia-Europe Foundation provides a flagship initiative seeking to promote mutual awareness between our two regions .
Various other initiatives have also been undertaken or prepared in such fields as technology , the environment , youth contacts and educational exchanges .
Other major events such as the Manila Forum on Culture and Values in Asia and Europe have taken their direction from the road map set by ASEP .
I note that the period since the Bangkok Summit has also seen much thought being given to questions of process , coordination and vision .
In particular , the proposals to establish an Asia-Europe cooperation framework and an Asia-Europe vision group are both likely to be taken forward at the London Summit .
Looking to the future , the preparations for the Summit are proceeding smoothly and constructively .
The coming two years will first and foremost be a period of consolidation .
But we will need to show more concrete , tangible results by the year 2000 .
The ASEM process has been and should remain an informal one which should primarily function as a political catalyst for achieving mutual understanding , dialogue and cooperation .
ASEM should not develop into an institution with a secretariat , or anything of that kind ; but we will need to focus the process more clearly on a limited number of priority areas .
An effort to do this has been undertaken in the context of the Asia-Europe cooperation framework to be adopted at the London Summit .
The Summit is expected to take a number of important decisions for the future of ASEM , namely , to adopt the trade facilitation action plan and the investment promotion action plan , to launch the Asia-Europe Environment Technology Centre in Thailand , to adopt the Asia-Europe cooperation framework and launch the ASEM vision group , which will consist of highprofile personalities from all ASEM partners , mandated to give an independent view on the medium- to long-term development of Asia-Europe relations in the ASEM context .
The Commission has nominated Mr Percy Barnevik , previously CEO of ASEA Brown Boveri and currently chairman of the Investa Group , as its participant .
The Summit will also launch some new initiatives , possibly in areas like money laundering , child welfare , environment , etcetera .
The ASEM financial crisis clearly increases the importance of Asia-Europe cooperation and of ASEM .
The London Summit will devote a lot of attention to it .
We must give strong political messages and also put forward initiatives to help overcome the crisis .
The UK Presidency has just sent a high-level mission to the South-East Asian countries to correct misunderstandings about the extent of Europe 's role in dealing with the situation and to help prepare the Summit 's message on this subject .
The Summit will have to deliver a strong political message with regard to the crisis , recognizing that it has global implications , highlighting the contributions that European partners have made , confirming the commitment of ASEM partners to undertake the necessary reforms and underlining the need to resist protectionism and pursue further liberalization as the most effective antidote to any calls for protectionism in both Asia and Europe .
We are considering how to provide further assistance to strengthen financial supervision and to address the social implications of the crisis .
ASEM is intended to build a comprehensive partnership going beyond governments and administrations , which would include a dialogue between parliamentarians of the two regions .
It was therefore appropriate that the first ASEM was followed by the meeting of the Asia-Europe Parliamentary Partnership here , in April 1996 .
I hope this can be continued .
It is also notable that the Asia-Europe Foundation is planning a programme to bring together young parliamentarians from both regions .
This kind of informal approach between parliamentarians should be particularly useful .
Finally , I should mention that the Commission will be happy to report back to Parliament on the outcome of the Summit .
Madam President , the answers given by the Council Presidency and the Commission underline the opportunities which exist for a successful ASEM Summit in London .
I believe that it is really important , at this time in particular , that we convey a message which stresses that the two regions can work together successfully .
After all , the ASEM process is not intended to replace multilateral cooperation in any form , but to promote partnership between Europe and Asia on certain issues .
My thoughts on this matter concern not only possible solutions to the crisis in Asia but also the progress that can be made in reforming international financial institutions by developing ideas common to both regions .
I feel , too , that in fact we probably need new supervisory rules and a new definition of public foreign debt .
These are undoubtedly issues which will also be raised in this context and consequently I expect the ASEM summit to make progress in this area .
Undoubtedly , too , this ASEM Summit should be used to emphasize the fact that the euro can help not only to stabilize monetary and economic relations within the European Union , but can also make a contribution towards international monetary stability .
This is an important message which the Summit should convey .
I underline once again just how essential good cooperation is for this important region of the world .
Despite our different traditions and cultures , opportunities for cooperation exist and are also necessary , precisely because we already have such a high level of economic partnership .
This is another reason why we need political stability as well in both regions .
This indepth political dialogue should contribute to that stability .
It can do so because security concerns in Asia are also our security concerns , and good government is a topic which should increasingly become a focal point in political dialogue .
We must not forget , however , that cooperation between Asia and Europe does not only mean cooperation at governmental and parliamentary level . It also involves NGOs and the young people and women of Asia and Europe .
There are many issues which can be discussed and , more importantly , many measures which can be implemented within the framework of people-topeople dialogue .
I would ask the Presidency of the Council and the Commission through its projects and programmes to provide a clear and concrete model of cooperation at all levels .
Madam President , it is a great comfort to me to learn that in the wake of the crisis an exceptional number of things which need to be done has occurred to us .
An analysis of the situation prior to the crisis reveals the comforting fact that we have already done a lot .
I ask that at the Summit in London , the causes which were recognized beforehand but about which nothing could be done should not be forgotten .
If we examine the causes of the crisis in detail , there is general agreement that the main problem was excessive balance of payments deficits in the various national economies in question , high levels of foreign debt , particularly in the private sector , encouraged by fixed exchange rate systems , the financing of unproductive sectors and many other factors .
What we are witnessing at the moment is everyone running scared , pulling out , even cutting lines of credit as is the case in Taiwan where the crisis is not actually as marked and where people should be holding their ground rather than pulling out .
Instead , however , capital is pouring out of the region and the politicians are offering good advice .
The good advice which the politicians must give for the future is a matter of concern for us as a parliament .
That is why we see this debate as just beginning .
I am grateful , Sir Leon - and I imagine the Presidency feels the same - that we are to continue this discussion here in the European Parliament and that we will speak about these events .
But , quite naturally , we are also extremely interested in the political relations between these Asian tigers who were until recently so puffed up with their own arrogance in certain areas that they could hardly walk and were giving us in Europe advice , and who , now that the crisis has happened , are turning to us for help .
Together we will have to learn that one of the causes of what has happened in Asia is the fact that many Europeans who could not invest their money quickly enough to make a quick profit , and were totally unperturbed by the risks involved , are now pulling out and in some instances leaving behind Asian countries in abject poverty .
May I remind you that it is not only the economy which has been damaged . Socially we are faced with a retrograde step , with emergencies , with hundreds of thousands or even millions of people who trusted politics and the economy to do the right thing and who have had their existences snuffed out .
Hunger and poverty are rife .
I ask you , in London , to think too about how we can set up aid programmes to help these people .
Indonesia , currently with the fourth largest population in the world , is demonstrating that when difficulties arise it has little understanding of the need for greater democracy , but has its own view of how a transformation can be affected . I wonder how the world will react to its failure to meet the IMF 's requirements and its decision to go its own way .
Asia was already in a learning process when it was successful .
Now it is in a bitter learning process .
I shall watch with interest events in Asia and we will continue to discuss them in this House .
Madam President , the crisis will obviously be discussed in London , as was requested by Mr Pompidou amongst others , but we should like particular attention to be paid to the people of , if I may call them thus , our former colonies .
Japan has a golden opportunity to make up what it has caused in grief and suffering to the people of these areas by its occupation during the war .
I ask you to remember in particular - now that you have been appointed President-inOffice of the Council - that these areas were occupied by Japan and liberated by British troops ; this must not be forgotten , Mr President , during the Burma campaign .
The War Chapel in Rangoon has a hand-written list of the British casualties who were killed in action after 5 May and before 15 August .
I have asked the Council - and I would like an answer - to raise flags throughout Europe on 15 August .
This date also marked the end of the World War II for the Netherlands .
Do not forget these people .
Japan has already started to make compensation payments to Indonesia .
Madam President , as Robin Cook , Britain 's Foreign Secretary , said here in January , nations today are as interdependent as they were once independent .
The same is true of the relationship between Europe and Asia as it is between the Member States of the European Union .
The ASEM II Summit will bring together the heads of state and of governments from ten Asian countries and the fifteen Member States of the European Union .
The meeting in London will be an opportunity , a means to forge stronger economic , political and cultural ties between the two economic powerhouses that represent over 50 % of world trade .
The first summit meeting in Bangkok in March 1996 ASEM I laid down the framework for future relations between the EU and Asia , initiating a series of parallel dialogues aimed at finding common ground where we could work together on peace and stability , creating conditions conducive to economic and social development , political dialogue based on mutual respect , equality and the promotion of fundamental human rights .
Alongside that , we also have the parliamentary dialogue and in 1996 parliamentary delegations from the Asian countries plus the relevant members of the European Parliament met here together in Strasbourg .
We are now preparing for ASEP II , under the auspices of the Asia-Europe Foundation set up following the first Asian summit which I hope will be taking place in Kuala Lumpur in the middle of August following the General Assembly of the ASEM interparliamentary organization when Europe again will be meeting ASEAN without Myanmar .
It is in the interests of both Asia and Europe to cooperate for our mutual advantage .
There are many areas where we are already cooperating .
There are areas where the countries of Asia are helping in Europe .
For example , as the vice-president of the European Parliament 's delegation with Japan , I can report that Japan is contributing approximately ECU 500 million for Bosnian reconstruction .
It has a programme of aid and assistance to the Palestinians to help establish a Palestinian settlement .
It is helping with the clean-up after Chernobyl and in recompense we are involved in the very important KEDO project .
The crisis in Asia will have an impact on Europe .
It is not something that can be left to them .
In conclusion , April 's AsiaEurope Summit and the August parliamentary meeting are two more steps towards a new partnership that spans the globe .
Seven motions for resolutions have been tabled pursuant to Rule 37 ( 2 ) of the Rules of Procedure .
The joint debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12.00 noon .
International criminal court
The next item is the joint debate on the following oral questions :
B4-0179 / 98 - O-0056 / 98 by Mr de Vries , on behalf of the Group of the European Liberal Democrat and Reform Party , to the Council on the setting up of an international criminal court ; -B4-0262 / 98 - O-0062 / 98 by Mr Puerta and others , on behalf of the Confederal Group of the European United Left - Nordic Green Left , to the Council on the setting up of an international criminal court ; -B4-0263 / 98 - O-0063 / 98 by Mrs van Bladel , on behalf of the Union for Europe Group , to the Council on the setting up of an international criminal court ; -B4-0265 / 98 - O-0065 / 98 by Mr Aglietta and others , on behalf of the Green Group in the European Parliament , to the Council on the setting up of an international criminal court ; -B4-0267 / 98 - O-0067 / 98 by Mr Swoboda , on behalf of the Group of the Party of European Socialists , to the Council on the setting up of an international criminal court ; -B4-0269 / 98 - O-0069 / 98 by Mr Dell 'Alba , on behalf of the Group of the European Radical Alliance , to the Council on the setting up of an international criminal court ; -B4-0270 / 98 - O-0070 / 98 by Mr Oostlander and others , on behalf of the Group of the European People 's Party , to the Council on the setting up of an international criminal court .
Madam President , it is a very opportune moment indeed to discuss the question of the international criminal court .
We are on the eve of the last preparatory conference before the Rome Conference .
In June we should have finally established the basic principles .
Europe for so many years after World War II thought it was safe as far as the protection of human rights was concerned .
We developed the Council of Europe , the Convention on Human Rights and the whole elaborate system , but it has become very clear over the last couple of years that Europe is not safe as regards the issue of human rights .
Apart from the rest of the world , there were 250 cases of violation which occurred 1500 km from this city .
In Bosnia women were raped , children were abducted , people were slaughtered .
There is no reason for complacency in this House , because indeed human rights can be violated everywhere , including Europe .
We heard from the President of the Council yesterday and today on the issue of Kosovo .
It is very clear that there , too , new violations may occur .
Against that background it is very important that the European Union and at this moment the European Parliament should exercise new leadership .
If we really want to be clear , we can give a signal that we want to have an international criminal court , with a properly independent public prosecutor .
As the resolution states , we have an issue of core crimes , all core crimes against humanity being covered .
We must be independent from the Security Council .
Most of the Member States of the European Union support these basic principles .
There are one or two who are hesitant and it is against that background that it is extremely important that a clear and unanimous signal should be given by Parliament .
I hope that both the Commission and the Council will support the lines put forward by those who presented this resolution .
Madam President , the process of setting up a permanent international court should be supported , and it is the not the first time that I am speaking in this Chamber to support it .
It is an important means of ensuring justice , particularly to judge crimes against humanity and genocide .
It is important for the diplomatic conference in Rome , which will be held in July , to establish the Court 's statutes definitively .
In this connection , I hope that the government of my country , the Italian government , will manage to take effective action to prepare adequately for the eve , naturally cooperating with the other Member States of the Union .
In view of the diplomatic conference , it would be useful if the Council were to adopt a common position with regard to the Treaty in support of the Court .
I would also like to say that , in my opinion , the Council should say no to any subjection of the court to the UN Security Council .
I cannot accept that the Council 's right of veto , an abuse of power which defies the course of history , should block the judicial activities of the Court itself , preventing it from judging crimes that are committed .
I would therefore like to ask the Presidentin-Office of the Council to commit himself , if he can do so , in this connection too , on this divisive issue : it is very important for the Court to be separate from the UN Security Council .
Finally , I am turning to the Commission and the Council to ensure adequate financing for the Court , and for that purpose a line should be created in our budget to ensure that the permanent international court can work properly .
Madam President , the questions I asked three months ago , when we discussed a resolution here in this House calling for the establishment of a permanent international criminal court , have not been answered .
Regrettably , the ad-hoc tribunals in Arusha and The Hague on Rwanda and Yugoslavia have not managed to catch the perpetrators most responsible for the atrocities .
What is more , it should be noted that in The Hague , very little factual material has unfortunately emerged .
The investigation was focused too much on the first part of the war .
Recently , cases have come to light of EU SFOR soldiers drinking and socializing in a bar with one of these minor war criminals .
Mr President , can the Council tell me whether it will be a tribunal for war crimes , or is the intention indirectly to institutionalize the fight against international terrorism and the drugs trade ?
What can the Council tell us about that ?
There are rumours that the United States would not recognize the jurisdiction of such a tribunal .
What does the Council know about this ?
Which nationalities with what sense of justice will take on the office of public prosecutor ?
Mr President , in view of the mountains of papers on the necessity of this tribunal sent to my office in Brussels , I am becoming a little suspicious as to who is so keen to get through .
Fifty years after the Universal Declaration of Human Rights , more people should indeed be tried in an international context .
I am thinking of Saddam Hussein and Milosevic .
But to do that effectively , the structure of such a tribunal must be transparent and workable .
As long as that is not yet the case and as long as we have no thorough evaluation of the ad-hoc tribunals , I continue to have my doubts .
Madam President , I think that when we are talking about the principle of an international criminal court , it is hard to underestimate what far-reaching consequences this might have .
But I agree with Mrs van Bladel that we should say , " might have ' in this instance , because sadly there is plenty of evidence that neither the tribunal in Arusha , nor the one in The Hague dealing with the former Yugoslavia lived up to our expectations .
But to my mind this says more about a lack of resources and a lack of transparency and freedom to act , than about the principle of such a tribunal .
On behalf of the Green Group I would therefore like to express my support for the principle of a well-functioning international criminal court , but with the understanding that it should have sufficient resources .
And where will these come from ?
Moreover , the Public Prosecutor should have the freedom to act , without having to depend on prior permission from the Security Council or anybody else .
Madam President , Mr President of the Council , ladies and gentlemen , I have today already endeavoured to indicate what a member of the public can see by turning on his television set , and I have already pointed out just how negative the impression must be as a result of there not being a European Union representative in Kosovo while the Americans are very well represented indeed .
Another thing which any average upright citizen with a concern for law and order cannot have failed to notice at the moment is the great song and dance being made about Mr Pinochet , a man who led a regime of torturers and murderers and who , having been the head of the army for many years , is now taking up an undoubtedly well-paid and comfortable position as a senator in his country .
I am aware of the political thinking which lies behind this decision , but none of us can be happy with the fact that people who kill , murder and torture others are then courted and rewarded with offices of state .
We are still far from happy with the situation in Bosnia , although some progress has been made .
However , the masterminds behind the scenes who , historically , have time and again managed to avoid prosecution , have often been able to avoid all responsibility as well .
This is why the issue of an international criminal court is so important and so hard to achieve .
I know the political calculations which are being made when it is said that these matters are not important , that it is better to make peace than to deliver criminals to justice .
However , war and the arguments continue .
We must pursue a policy which aims to achieve both of these goals : to secure peace and to bring to justice those responsible for mass killings and serious crimes .
I am no moralizer and I also know that politics is not always about morals , but I am nevertheless very happy that Mr Cook 's British Presidency , and you too , Mr Henderson , have repeatedly stressed that even foreign policy must find room for a minimum of morality and morals , whether it is in relation to weapons and weapons transfer or an international criminal court .
Foreign policy needs a moral dimension , and the public will only accept such a policy if it comes with a little morality .
For this reason , and on behalf of my Parliamentary group , I give my full and total support to this joint motion .
It is exactly in line with our objectives , the creation of an independent criminal court .
Politics and courts have different roles , but this court must be free to act independently .
It must be able to call witnesses who are obliged to appear .
They must not , as happened in the case of one Croatian politician , be able to avoid testifying .
This independence must be guaranteed , and it is with this objective in mind that tomorrow we will give this joint motion our full support .
Madam President , Mr President-in-Office , it is not the first time that Parliament has expressed its opinion on the international criminal court .
I believe it will do so tomorrow as well , by a very large majority , perhaps unanimously , as it has done in the past .
That , I think , could be the best possible message we could send to the Presidency-inOffice : that those elected in the EU countries support a text which , as you will have seen , Mr President , is a very specific text , that is in line with and matches the position of the so-called like-minded countries in a prudent version , an open version to be able to bring everyone together on this strong position but , at the same time , including the reasons why some countries continue to obstruct , not the establishment of the Court , but the operating procedure .
I also think that this may help the British Presidency to look for that cohesion which seems to me to be lacking at the moment and lacking in particular because one Member State , which is also a member of the Security Council , continues to doubt this line which we will be voting on and approving tomorrow .
The last session of the preliminary negotiations will begin on 16 March and the Rome Conference will begin on 15 June , in a Member State of the EU , thereby giving the Union a key role .
I hope , Mr President , that in your reply you will reassure us of the attempt you are certainly making to reach a harmonized position and that you will , in particular , agree with us on the extraordinary importance the establishment of the Court may have for the development of international law and , I would also say , for the role the EU may have as such in an initiative of civility , of law , of change , of an end to the impunity so many criminals still enjoy today throughout the world .
Madam President , what started out as a mere palliative , in place of a firm policy on Yugoslavia , namely the court for war crime in the former Yugoslavia , is beginning to grow into an initiative of permanent and general character .
I must say , this is much , much better than we had ever hoped for .
I think it is extremely important , because we are seeing that the tribunals for Yugoslavia and Rwanda are working , that they are indeed able to have an influence .
The more successful these courts are , the greater the deterrent will be for people who want to commit genocide and perpetrate massacres , but also perhaps for nations , because it is not unlikely that the phenomenon of a criminal nation will occur with increasing frequency .
In that case we would also need a criminal court , it would seem to me .
The tribunals for Yugoslavia and Rwanda , however , had a very clear objective .
We knew what was to be investigated and what was to be prosecuted .
This is not so clear in the permanent criminal court .
I wonder who in fact will instigate an investigation .
You would say it is the public prosecutor , but in an ordinary constitutional state the public prosecutor is part of a hierarchy which includes a Minister of Justice who can also set priorities as to which issues should be investigated and prosecuted , and which issues might get less priority .
In this case there will have to be a body which is somehow linked to the public prosecutor .
Who will appoint him ; who will appoint the judges ?
These issues I presume will all be discussed in the UN Commission , and they will be something for legal specialists to get their teeth into .
What in any case must be avoided is that such a court becomes subject to the vetoes of certain countries who thus try and protect their friends .
I think that our entire group is very strongly in favour of the resolution before us .
But I would like to stress that I believe it is extremely important that the political and diplomatic responsibilities are clearly separated from those of the NGOs , for instance .
I am pleased to note that in the Dutch translation this at least is now well-formulated .
The NGOs are not participating in the diplomatic conference , but they are asked to make contributions which can be used by the conference .
We must be careful , also with the best intentions , not to fall into in organic thinking , not to fall into corporatism in these kind of areas .
I also hope that society and its specialized associations will be able to contribute , along an orderly path , to the success of this international criminal court .
Madam President , the Council fully supports the establishment of the international criminal court to try the most serious crimes and violations of international law of concern to the international community including genocide , crimes against humanity and war crimes .
The negotiations for a draft text of the statute of the court are of historic significance , and the world community has a particular responsibility to make use of the momentum generated over the past few years .
The court will ensure that those who commit the most serious crimes of international concern will not be able to do so with impunity and thus will have a deterrent effect .
It is hoped that the knowledge that those who have committed atrocities are being brought to justice may help victims to participate in a process of reconciliation .
The European Union is encouraged by the ever-growing number of countries that support the establishment of the court .
This is manifested in the wide international participation and a general spirit of cooperation in the preparatory committee meetings held in New York .
Member States of the Union have themselves been playing an active part in the preparatory committee meetings and we wish to pay tribute to the invaluable role played by Mr Adriaan Bos , chairman of the preparatory committee .
The Union looks forward to the diplomatic conference to be held in June and July this year .
We are grateful to the Italian government for offering to host the conference .
It is important that the conference is attended by the largest possible number of states .
Several Member States as well as the European Commission have therefore contributed to the UN trust fund for the participation at the conference of the least developed countries .
We also welcome the role being played by non-governmental organizations in the process of establishing the court .
Many of them have by their commitment and expertise contributed significantly and positively to this work .
The Union coordination meetings have been regularly held prior to and during meetings of the preparatory committee .
A statement on behalf of the Union will be delivered by the presidency at the opening of the Rome conference .
The British Presidency convened a two-day meeting of experts from Member States last month in London .
At the meeting there was a useful exchange of views on various key issues and discussion of how best the negotiations in the court should be taken forward .
The Union does not seek to agree common positions in advance on the detailed provisions of the court 's statute .
However , there is a considerable measure of agreement on many issues .
We are in particular agreed on a number of key principles , including the following : the court should be effective , it should stand the test of time , and it should be complementary to national systems of criminal justice .
The court should draw on the experience of the two ad hoc tribunals for the former Yugoslavia and for Rwanda , whose work we also support .
The Union expresses its hope and confidence that it will be possible to achieve a successful outcome to the diplomatic conference that is to finalize and adopt a comprehensive and universal convention establishing the international criminal court .
We urge all states to demonstrate the spirit of cooperation necessary to achieve this task .
Madam President , I believe that , among the many good reasons forming the basis of a vote which I think will be passed by a vast majority , if not unanimously , by Parliament , some should be pointed out in particular .
The first relates to the high symbolic value of a strong initiative assumed by the EU .
From this point of view , I am pleased with what the Minister said on the commitment the Presidency seems to have assumed , and I want to confirm the importance of a strong and decisive message conveyed by the EU in favour of the establishment of a court that represents a clear " no ' to impunity , that represents the ability to listen and that meets the requests of the conscience of the citizens who , very often , do not know how to use old , inadequate and inert means to the full .
The second reason lies in the fact that , in this world , we need many rules , but one of the essential rules is that relating to the fundamental criterion of justice and the possibility that all the democratic countries , the civilian society of men , recognize and punish those guilty of serious crimes against humanity .
It is one of the conditions for democracy to remain on its feet , and we know it , and that is why the rules for establishing this court are advanced rules providing a guarantee for democratic systems .
Naturally , the characteristics this court has to assume are those we can import from our model : independence and , in the rule of law , procedural guarantees for those under investigation .
Mr President-in-Office of the Council , in any society which calls itself civilized , the fundamental principles which form the basis of political action should be the principle of respect for the overriding importance of the individual and his or her dignity , and the principle of the defence of the rights which arise from that dignity .
However , all too often man continues to act like an animal towards his fellow man .
The proof of that lies in the war crimes , crimes against humanity and genocide which are still committed with total impunity . Such crimes are an outrage and can never be justified , and those who commit them should be tried and convicted .
That is why there is an urgent need for an independent , international criminal court which can do just that .
For the same reason , we must congratulate ourselves on the diplomatic conference due to commence in Rome in June to finalize the statute which will regulate that court 's activities . That conference represents a milestone and can play a decisive role in winning the battle to establish an international system of justice .
We should not forget that to a large extent that milestone has been made possible by the tireless and determined support of all the many NGOs committed to this cause .
If the Rome Conference is a success , the world may be able to enter the third millennium of our civilization with new hope .
The objective of the resolution prepared by the European Parliament is precisely to ensure that hope can become reality .
It is now up to the Council , the Commission and the Member States to say what they think .
Madam President , it is wonderful news that an international criminal court is to be created this summer .
There is no doubt that creating this court will be the best possible way of avoiding conflicts by means of preventative diplomacy , and of course , the best possible measure for discouraging the criminals who in recent times have failed to show the slightest respect for other people .
The ad hoc tribunals for the former Yugoslavia and for Rwanda have certainly served to further demonstrate , if that were possible , the need to set up this international criminal court .
However , just creating it is not enough .
This international criminal court should be independent of the Security Council , should be able to undertake its own initiatives , should have wide jurisdiction covering crimes against humanity , genocide and war crimes ( and therefore serious human rights violations ) , and should not be subsidiary to national justice .
It is essential for the European Union to have a common position in this respect at each of the meetings of the preparatory committee for the diplomatic conference .
That position should commit all the Member States to promoting the creation of a truly independent international criminal court , which is not modelled on the ancient fossils of international law such as the right to veto in the UN Security Council .
I have received six motions for resolutions pursuant to Rule 37 ( 2 ) of the Rules of Procedure .
The joint debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12.00 noon .
Competitiveness
The next item is the Council communication on the problems in the sector of competitiveness .
Mr President , I wish to thank Parliament for giving me the opportunity to talk to you today about competitiveness .
It is a great pleasure to be here , as the President-in-Office of the Council .
The new Labour Government in the United Kingdom welcomes the marvellous opportunity that this six months offers , and I am personally looking forward to the prospect of working closely with my colleagues across Europe to ensure that European industry is sufficiently competitive to meet the challenges we all face today .
The problems of competitiveness are not unique to any one country : all Member States are facing the same challenges .
Europe needs to meet the demands of a fast-moving world of constant innovation and technical change .
We must equip ourselves for a more competitive world , where firms have to adapt to changing markets and workers have the skills they need and the opportunities to use them .
The challenge is now to take a positive approach to the reform of our economies : improving the quality of life and respecting and encouraging the national , regional and local diversities which are an important part of Europe 's strength .
We need to find a third way that balances the interests of firms , workers and households , working with the grain of markets to improve competitiveness , while promoting sound , basic standards of social protection .
As the single action plan says : Europe needs a market that is a dynamic , knowledge-based market , socially responsible and sensitive to the concerns of everyone affected by it .
It is common ground for the Council , the Commission and Parliament that in today 's global economic environment we must not only improve European industrial competitiveness to match that of the best in the world but also continuously maintain that position once achieved .
The Amsterdam Summit last year concluded that the competitiveness of European industry provides the foundation for growth , jobs and raising living standards .
There are three main elements required to meet the challenges we face : ensuring our markets are strong , our companies are modern and that we are promoting enterprise to provide the foundations for all our futures .
Strong markets are vital for a range of reasons , not least because they expose our companies to the best practice of their competitors .
The European single market is said to have done more to improve EU competitiveness than any other single policy .
The single market has already increased EU GDP by between 1.1 and 1.5 % , created up to 900 000 more jobs and kept inflation around 1 % lower than would have happened without it .
But there is more to be done .
The determination of all the EU institutions to implement the Single Market action plan is a major step .
I hope that Parliament , like the Commission and the Council , will strive to ensure we can keep the action plan to the timetable agreed .
Competition and liberalization are key components of a strong market .
We do European companies no favours by allowing monopolies to continue or develop .
In the United Kingdom , I am acting to strengthen competition law across the economy and bringing it more into line with European Union law .
At the EU level , a specific illustration of this point is the liberalization of telecoms , which is already delivering benefits to consumers and businesses .
The Commission 's report last month shows that telecom service markets are growing very quickly .
Prices in some Member States have fallen by up to 40 % since 1990 , and the liberalization measures agreed for energy should soon have a similar effect in those markets .
Indeed , it is anticipated that more than 50 % of the electricity market will be open next year .
For the single market to be successful , both for companies and consumers , the consumers must get a fair deal : choice with protection .
Well-informed and demanding consumers will promote innovation , competitiveness and growth , and they must have the protection necessary to give them the confidence to shop throughout Europe .
Liberalization must also respect the public service role of utilities and suitably protect society 's vulnerable and the environment .
Of course there are new markets - the markets of the future .
Enlargement will bring an additional 100 million consumers with rapidly rising incomes into the single market .
Demand and growth will be stimulated , and trade in goods and services will be further opened up between North and South , East and West .
Consumers will have more choice and business more opportunity .
Enlargement also presents major challenges .
The benefits of enlarging the single market will only be realized if the applicants are properly prepared to join it .
However , I am confident that the European Union is putting the right pre-accession structures in place .
The European Structural Funds can make a substantial contribution to regional competitiveness and innovation , but they too present new challenges if they are to be affordable and durable in an enlarged European Union .
If the reformed funds are to be relevant to the underlying problems of Europe 's less-developed regions , they must address innovation , employability and competitiveness and , importantly , we must find a fair solution .
Failure to do so will undermine much of what we are trying to do in other areas .
So to the second element I mentioned : modern , dynamic companies , the companies that can succeed in a globalized economy .
We must help Europe 's firms by improving infrastructure , increasing access to venture capital and ensuring better regulation of product markets .
We must ensure that the European Union provides a modern forward-looking legal framework which is clear , accessible and promotes business competitiveness .
In the single market European companies should have the option of a single legal framework if they want it .
The UK Presidency is working hard to resolve the impasse over the European Company Statute , which has held up progress for over 20 years .
It is also important to promote fairness at work , including modern partnerships between employers and the workforce .
The message of the European Union 's Competitiveness Advisory Group in its report ' Competitiveness for Employment ' is that creating new jobs and lower unemployment is a by-product of globally competitive firms .
Resisting industrial change is a bad option for jobs .
But we have to prepare for such change by equipping our people as individuals with the skills necessary to adapt to change successfully . In short , employability .
We need to promote labour markets that can adapt sufficiently to translate economic success into new jobs .
Those are the key themes of the EU 's employment guidelines agreed in November .
Member States are committed to delivering their action plans demonstrating progress by mid-April .
The presidency believes that we must urgently produce employment action plans and ensure that they are implemented .
In the United Kingdom we are introducing a national minimum wage promoting investment in high-skill jobs and fighting the downward spiral of wages that leads only to the sweatshop and the low value-added economy .
In addition , we are tackling the problem of long-term youth unemployment through a new deal for young people , equipping people with the skills and experience they need to get into the market .
Governments can do a lot to encourage the sharing of best practice .
Modern companies must be encouraged to compete on quality and not just price .
The Commission , Council and Parliament have all emphasized the importance of benchmarking in this context and Member States are working together to encourage companies to compare themselves with the best in the EU and the best in the world because , finally , we must encourage an enterprising Europe .
The employment guidelines which were agreed at Luxembourg identified entrepreneurship as one of the four key areas for improving employment .
Though approaches differ from Member State to Member State , it is true to say that compared to the United States the EU is far behind in understanding or providing the environment required to support entrepreneurs and to help small and micro-businesses grow into the employers of the future .
There are many ways in which we can improve our position .
Regulation must be simple .
It must be as transparent as possible , avoiding undue burdens on business , and must be framed in ways that encourage investment and innovation rather than risk stifling it .
We must make sure that our firms are innovative and prepared to face the demands of competitiveness as they will continue to develop in the future , demands which change with astounding pace as information technology improves , electronic commerce spreads and environmental challenges are met .
As President-in-Office of the Industry Council , I welcome the fact that we shall be having the first discussion of finance for innovation at the Industry Council in May and our message cannot focus purely on big firms .
I , for one , will be a strong voice for the smaller firm in this debate .
They are an important motor for job creation .
There are other significant new challenges facing us in the next few years which will have a major impact on EU competitiveness , in particular the introduction of a single currency in some Member States .
This is likely to have a significant impact on the competitiveness of the EU .
As you know , because of the splits in the then British government , so little preparation was made in the United Kingdom that our business community would simply not be ready for us to consider membership of EMU for several years .
But I am very pleased that the UK holds the Presidency at the time the crucial decisions over membership are being taken .
We are determined to play a full and constructive part in making the launch of economic and monetary union a success .
In addition , the need for economic and monetary union to be successful requires us to build on the solid platform of macroeconomic stability , to reform our labour markets , product markets and capital markets and to tackle the curse of unemployment in ways which preserve social justice .
If we fail to make the reforms , we will lose the golden opportunity that EMU offers .
I hope that the Employment Action Plans will provide a practical and politically significant start to that process .
Last year under the Dutch Presidency the Council of Industry Ministers concluded that Member States and the Commission must increase their awareness of the impact their actions can have on competitiveness and , under the Luxembourg Presidency , the Council adopted a work programme carrying this forward .
We all recognized that benchmarking is a valuable tool .
It also helps both industry and legislators to provide a better understanding of the processes that lead to competitive advantage .
The Council fully supports the Commission 's work to encourage industry to use benchmarking at sectoral and enterprise level .
We must also use this to benchmark our policies , something I argued for at the recent OECD Industry Council which I chaired .
The Commission and Council are working together on a series of pilot projects to examine some key factors underlining competitiveness : finance for innovation , as I have already mentioned , skills , transport and organizational change .
The presidency brings with it both responsibilities and opportunities .
I am determined to build on the momentum already created by the Commission and the preceding presidencies and to manage the ongoing business of the Industry Council .
But I also want to use this opportunity to emphasize my belief that we need to work in partnership with industry .
I hope I can help to develop this partnership by getting ministers and representatives of industry together on the evening before the Council to discuss what we should be doing on competitiveness .
When the Council meets on 7 May we will continue the debate on the key factors affecting EU competitiveness .
We will not find all the solutions at once but we must at least identify the issues and see how best to tackle them either at EU or national level or , indeed , at both .
All Member States face similar challenges .
I hope we can work together to strengthen Europe and European industry .
Much can be achieved at Member State level where national characteristics may prescribe different solutions and much must be done by industry which has prime responsibility for its own competitiveness .
But at EU level we can exchange best practice and look for ways forward on issues which are common to the peoples of Europe .
I hope the approach I have set out here will have the support of Parliament and I look forward very much to hearing Parliament 's views .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , on behalf of the Group of the Party of European Socialists , I would like to thank the Minister warmly for her participation in this debate .
Let me say what a pleasure it is to welcome you to a discussion which is at the heart of our actions and our priorities .
Indeed , our task is to look for ways of improving the competitiveness of European industry , for increased growth , more jobs and , of course , less unemployment .
I have listened attentively to your speech , Minister , and I can say that I am largely in agreement with you .
Undoubtedly , the questions put to you here , and above all your replies , will enable us to progress along the path opened at Amsterdam and marked out at Luxembourg .
As rapporteur on this issue for several months now , with a few weeks to go before its move on to the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and Industrial Policy and before its probable vote during the May part-session , I would like to reiterate my personal desire for a concrete piece of work to be carried out in direct contact with the economic and social players on the ground , in order to arrive at ideas , proposals and concrete approaches which will enable us to advance in the right direction .
I am in favour of an open approach - I think I have shown this - in order to attempt to put our assets to best advantage , to maximize them , to reduce the rigidities and to determine where the true levers of our competitiveness lie .
It is difficult to have any certainties in this field .
However , I have one : there is no miracle solution , nor is there one single solution .
It is always necessary to combine and unite several , if not multiple , solutions .
I am sure that our debate will help me to finalize my report and I thank you , Minister , and all of the speakers , in advance .
If you will allow me , Mr President , I would like to finish by asking two questions .
Firstly , everyone is agreed that research must be considered as one of the basic levers of competitiveness .
I would thus like to have your opinion , Minister , on the decision of the Council of Research Ministers , held on 12th February , to reduce the Fifth Framework Programme to ECU 14 billion .
My second question relates to the European textile observatory whose preparation is due this year .
I would like to know if its future is on the agenda for the next Industry Council .
Mr President , Madam President-in-Office of the Council , ladies and gentlemen , this really is a very timely debate on competitiveness at EU level .
You are quite right to have referred to benchmarking - a term with no precise Spanish translation - in other words , levels of competitiveness applied and established in the different industries .
This has obviously been a step forward , enabling us to determine in exactly which areas the European Union is really competitive , and where we lag a little behind our main international competitors .
Specifically , these include those sectors which are still over-protected - telecommunications , the audiovisual sector , energy , air transport - and in which this Parliament has tried hard to apply a higher degree of liberalization , as established in implementing the European internal market . The Group of the European Liberal Democrat and Reform Party has been a leader in such efforts .
Unfortunately , this House has not always supported that process of liberalization as it should , for example in the area of energy .
The President-in-Office of the Council mentioned the European internal market several times , but she did not say much about the need to increase levels of competitiveness once we have Monetary Union and the euro .
That is something which changes the whole dimension of the European economy , not just quantitatively but qualitatively as well .
Finally , following on from this , I should like to ask the President-in-Office about the part played by the European Commission in promoting the viability of levels of competitiveness and employment , following instructions from the Council , especially in the wake of the Cardiff Agreement .
Madam Minister , Mr President , the objective of improving the competitiveness of our industry , as set out by the Minister , has the consequence of lowering the cost of work and trade liberalization , which will have serious consequences on employment within the European Union as a whole .
Proof of this is in what happened this morning , with the adoption by the Commission of the draft transatlantic agreement , the so-called NTM , devised by Commissioner Brittan .
Adopted without a vote and negotiated in the greatest secrecy , this agreement favours the business world .
It aims to lift all trade restrictions and to remove all customs duties on industrial goods by the year 2010 as well as to create a free trade zone for services , including postal services .
In spite of growing opposition to the multilateral agreement on investments , which has just been rejected by a large majority in the House this morning , Brussels has thus persisted in this matter and done the same thing again .
The NTM is unacceptable , for it compromises the economic , social and cultural assets of our countries . Since you are honouring us with your presence , Minister , I would like to have your opinion on this subject .
The Confederal Group of the European United Left - Nordic Green Left considers that this project must be rejected , for it does not concur with the interests of the Member States of the European Union .
People must mobilize to thwart these ultraliberal concepts and to promote a form of international cooperation which is respectful of people 's rights .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , this has been a very impressive exercise in political semantics .
Not that I wish to say that we managed to decipher all of what it means .
This talk of a third way must be taken seriously .
But where is it leading ?
Surely it cannot be the third way between the continental European welfare capitalism of the post-war period and today 's deregulated US-style capitalism or , in other words , a pretty term for the further deregulation , privatization and micro-economization of our society .
Here I have some real questions .
I am somewhat surprised that in this context the internal market is so glibly referred to as a success .
Undoubtedly there have been some success stories , but the mass unemployment , polarization of the regions , new poverty , social exclusion and the disenfranchisement - a term for which I have no equally elegant German equivalent - , affecting large parts of our population are surely signs of a structural crisis which we are very far from controlling .
I listened with interest to the talk of a fair deal , even of a new deal .
In the Green group , we have been talking about the sort of socio-ecological new deal which we need for years .
However , our new deal would open up a third way not between the two classical forms of capitalist economy , but between a continued form of capital accumulation and democratic responsibility for the ecological sustainability and socially cohesive development of the societies of Europe .
This would represent a model and an incentive for the rest of the world and not a sort of neo-imperialism as the current newspeak would have it .
Mr President , may I say how happy I am to see the President-in-Office here .
She has added some colour and charm to a fairly dull House when all the men are in dark suits .
I think I speak for all the women on this .
I would like to say that I am pleased with the mention of small businesses .
We in Scotland have a lot of these and we have a high exporting rate and success with quality goods , but I would ask if she would look again at the cheap money scheme of the European Investment Bank which involved banks all over the European Union and which was terribly effective , but seems to have come to a bit of a standstill .
I was pleased also that the structural funds were mentioned , because here am I with my heart in my mouth being told by the Commissioner , on the decision of whether the Highlands and Islands continues as Objective 1 , that there is nowhere unique in Europe .
I am hoping that the President-in-Office supports rather the view of the Secretary of State for Scotland , Donald Dewar , who is arguing for continuation for the very reason that we are unique .
Competitiveness depends in particular on the costs of distance , climate , small communities and sparse population - the sparsest in the Community and often called the last wilderness although it is a man-made wilderness .
We are not dealing with the demise of an industry in our use of Objective 1 money in the Highlands and Islands , we are dealing with the demise of a people .
We have been losing our young generation for decades and only now is Objective 1 beginning to have the correct effect and to retain our young people for the first time in generations .
I do hope , therefore , that you will support the Secretary of State for Scotland in his battle for Objective 1 .
I thank Mr Caudron for his kind and supportive remarks .
We very much look forward to the report of his group .
I entirely share his view that it is important for the European Union to play to our strength .
That is where we will find competitive advantage .
I also absolutely share his view that there is no single remedy ; that there is no single apocalyptic step that we can take that will somehow resolve all these problems and create prosperity on its own .
We have to seek to address a whole range of issues .
It may be less dramatic but it is likely to be more effective .
He asked me two specific questions about the research and development programme and about the textile observatory .
The decision on Framework V was the unanimous decision of the Council .
It was something of a compromise position because there were Member States - as he may know - who did not wish to see even any increase in the cash sum available from the preceding programme .
But common ground was ultimately reached , and it is the unanimous view of the members of the Council to put forward the proposals we have .
On the textile observatory , I am afraid that it is not on the agenda for the next Industry Council because we have no proposal coming forward from the Commission .
That is what would put it on the agenda .
I fear it will not be debated at the coming Council .
I enjoyed Mr Cassidy 's contribution .
Funnily enough , I could have predicted it without any difficulty whatsoever .
He mentioned ritual obeisance .
I thought that was exactly what he was making : ritual obeisance to what the Conservative Party in the United Kingdom would wish him to say .
When they make up their minds whether we are completely different from them and therefore disastrous , or exactly the same , it will be a lot easier to know the terms of the debate .
He talked about innovation and red tape stifling innovation and asked what was being done .
At European Union level there is a proposal , which I very much welcome , to set up a group of business people to look at a very early stage proposals coming forward , to see whether they are practical and constructive .
Similarly , at national level , we have remedied a deficiency - as I see it - left by the government he supported .
For example , small businesses were hardly represented at all on the committee that looked at regulation .
We have now put in place that half the members of that commission are from small businesses who are particularly susceptible to the problems of red tape .
Even before the last election we had set up pilot projects with local authorities to try to get some practical moves to tackle such problems at local level .
We are piloting and working on that approach .
He asked about a 35-hour week and also about a national minimum wage in this context .
Member States have to address their own concerns and conditions on issues such as a 35-hour week .
The issue of a national minimum wage only affects the United Kingdom .
We were the only developed country without any form of wage protection .
I believe it will contribute both to innovation and to competitiveness because it is an essential component of a drive for quality and of competitiveness on the basis of quality and not merely of the lowest price to have basic , minimum , fair standards in the workplace , of which a national minimum wage is unquestionably one .
( Applause from the left ) I had not appreciated that the word ' benchmarking ' is untranslatable .
I am rivetted to know how the Member managed to describe it .
Perhaps it is time we invented a new word that is translatable in order to ease everybody 's difficulties .
I do , however , completely endorse his comments on the value of the process , whatever it may be called .
It was then put to me that freeing-up trade and having liberalization was actually harmful to jobs and the issue was brought up of the possibilities of some form of agreement between the European Union and the United States .
I fear I cannot share that point of view .
The whole history of , for example , the United Kingdom , is based on the development of free trade and on prosperity through mutual exchange or multilateral trade .
Indeed that has been a source of employment and of economic achievement through many centuries in our part of the world .
So the notion that it must automatically lead to difficulty is not one that I could endorse .
With regard to the proposals by Commissioner Brittan , I do not think there is any question yet of a treaty being signed .
I understand that he is putting forward some proposals for moves towards more liberalized trade between the European Union and the United States .
That was , as I understand it , endorsed by the Commission as a whole .
Obviously it has to be discussed by the Council .
If the Member is asking me for my own view , I believe that this has considerable potential benefits .
We are at the earliest possible stage .
It will be very important to look at the detail of what is discussed and proposed and what its effects might be .
But in principle , the notion of greater cooperation between the European Union and the United States is one that I welcome .
Our colleague at the back asked what the middle way was and whether it was a middle way between a United States model and prosperity .
I hope I do not misunderstand what he said .
First , whatever one 's criticisms of the United States may be , I do not think it is possible to argue that it is not , in general , prosperous .
I share what I suspect is his concern that this prosperity is not always as widely shared as we would wish to see it within the European Union and its Member States .
He accused me of simple semantics .
With great respect to him , I could return the charge .
I am not quite sure what democratic responsibility for economically efficient social development as a model for running an economy entirely means .
However I suspect that if we worked at it , he and I could find agreement that we both want our economies , our countries and the European Union , as a whole , to prosper ; that we both want them to deliver high levels of employment so that people have satisfaction in their working lives and are able to earn enough to give them ease in their personal lives .
I suspect that we both believe that economic efficiency must and should go hand-in-hand with social justice .
Perhaps we ought to work more on the things about which we agree .
Mrs Ewing welcomed the emphasis on SMEs .
I am very grateful to her for that and very interested in the ideas she put .
There is a proposal now before the Council to look at schemes , to provide funding for small- and medium-sized enterprises , including a loan guarantee scheme backed by the EIB .
We in the United Kingdom , and indeed all Member States , place increasing emphasis on the role and importance of SMEs , particularly their role in job creation which is so important for the whole of Europe .
We are eagerly exploring all these options .
We hope this proposal will be welcomed .
She also asked me about the structural funds and raised the particular issue of the handling of the Highlands and the Islands .
We do not yet have the Commissioner 's proposals .
All that I can say is that I understand the point she makes and it was not an accident that I described my wish for these proposals as being for a scheme which is fair .
Thank you , Mrs Beckett .
As we only have 15 minutes left , I can only allow a few speakers to speak .
Mr President , I would like to take this opportunity to sincerely thank you , Minister , for choosing to speak about the enlargement in such positive terms and as an opportunity .
I would like to ask what you think of the tendencies , which I sometimes find in this Parliament , where people are afraid of social dumping .
How will you in the Council counter this type of argument , which shows a lack of solidarity , is short-sighted and protectionist ?
I would also like to ask to be forgiven for leaving now and not staying to listen to your reply .
The reason is that today I am meeting a large number of businessmen here who have chosen to come precisely to participate in the very important debate we are now having .
However , I promise that I will pay great attention to the answer in the Minutes and to further discussions .
I do indeed understand ; we all face the same problems about conflicting meetings .
I thank her for the welcome she gave to my remarks on enlargement .
We all understand the anxieties and fears that are expressed .
It is a matter of encouraging confidence in Member States and in all the participants in this discussion and debate , that this is indeed the path forward for Europe .
We have every right to hark back to the principles that inspired the people who first began to create what was then the European Union .
In those days , there were arguments , there was discussion about whether or not a group of countries coming together was Europe .
Increasingly , as Europe has enlarged it is hard to argue that this is not really Europe .
It seems to me that in terms of both the politics and the philosophy of the development and future of the European Union it would be criminally irresponsible - and also unbelievably shortsighted - not to recognize the enormous opportunity that opens up for the whole of Europe if we are able to enlarge and to open our arms to the countries that apply to join us from the east .
It is an opportunity for development for the whole of Europe of a kind which our predecessors could not have imagined .
I cannot believe that we will let down future generations by ignoring or wasting it .
Could I ask the President-in-Office about the question of investment .
One of the problems we face in the European Union is that during the period of consolidation in preparation for the single currency we have had zero growth in investment across the Union , both in the private and the public sector .
Investment now represents only about 18 % of the gross domestic product of Europe .
The Minister referred to the United States of America : they have seen substantial steady increases in recent years in investment .
Frankly , if we are concerned with the competitiveness of the European Union and if we are particularly concerned about job creation then we need to ensure that the growth capacity of our economy is expanded .
Could she set out for us how we can work together both in the public sector and the private sector to boost investment levels in the European Union which we hope will then lead to some job creation ?
I share the Member 's great concern both about current levels of investment and also the need to improve those levels of investment as a basis for future growth and for future wealth .
The answer lies in the combination of two tools .
The first is the practice of benchmarking , which means that we look to see what others do and then look to see what success it has brought .
That would be particularly valuable between countries , but also between enterprises .
The second tool we can use , apart from the technical step of benchmarking itself , is to use what should be growing relationships and partnership and a two-way flow of information with the business community .
One important lesson we can all learn by looking at what happens in practice is that the most successful companies have a combination of investing for the future , a long-term strategy for growth and for employment , harnessing the creativity and skills of their workforces and working very much in a team spirit with their workforce : all of these are lessons that will be taken on board by businesses and by countries as they see that they bring success .
It is a role which politicians in particular can play , but drawing on the practical experience of business .
I have always believed that while politics is in part a process through which one has the opportunities sometimes to make decisions , it should also be a process of education - and we need to educate ourselves too .
Mr President , I think there are two very important points here . The first point is the SLIM initiative .
SLIM is intended to reduce the burden on business .
Do you think it would be possible to get the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and Industrial Policy or the Committee of the Regions involved in the SLIM Programme as well , so that these Committees could concentrate most of their efforts on SLIM projects ?
The second point is the fiche d 'impact .
I have the documents for today 's sitting here .
We now have an extremely comprehensive set of documents to work through in the European Parliament .
I think it would also be useful to consider items in the legislative process that could be simplified .
Fiche d 'impact is , therefore , an excellent operating principle .
Does the Presidency have any plans to launch more initiatives in this area in future ?
Mr President , the Member asked me what I think of the SLIM initiative .
I think it is a valuable and worthwhile initiative .
I am not entirely sure but perhaps he was suggesting to me that it is a practice that could commend itself on occasion to some of the bodies in which we participate .
If that is what he meant I hesitate to intrude on private grief .
Certainly if what he is basically saying is that all of us in the different roles we carry out have to bear in mind the implications and the scale of the proposals we make , this is entirely true .
We will certainly endeavour to bear it in mind in the work of the presidency .
Madam President , it is a pleasure to listen to you .
It is very enjoyable indeed !
Your political eloquence is very impressive indeed .
I have two short questions . You have given here an impressive description of the model which you call the new model of competition , of fair competition .
In your opinion should this involve an initiative at international level , such as that which Sir Leon Brittan has been seeking for a long time ? Would you be in favour of this ?
My second question refers to another complex matter , namely to what we call electronic trade .
As you know , there is an initiative at European and American level in this field .
In your view , how far should the European initiative be extended ?
To what extent should our approach differ from what is happening at US and international level , and what would be a successful model for the future ?
I would like to make a final brief remark . I would just like to remind you , Mrs Moreau , that the proposal presented by Leon Brittan this morning was requested by this Parliament .
We have commented on it here in the House and it has been adopted in my committee , the Committee on External Economic Relations .
Parliament has approved it with an overwhelming majority .
Mr President , I support moves to continue to develop international trade .
I am grateful to the Member both for her kind remarks and also for the clarification she has given to the context of that debate .
With regard to electronic commerce , it is undoubtedly an area which is going to transform the climate within which we seek to make Europe competitive , the climate in which our companies will operate and , indeed , the background and the framework .
It is only part of a great many developments in the information society , which I believe will fundamentally change all our lives and our ways of work .
The honourable Member referred quite rightly to the moves that are taking place in Japan and the United States .
Both within Member States and in the EU as a whole , we need to consider how we use this tool - because that is what it is - to shape our lives in the way that we choose rather than allowing it to shape our lives for us .
If I dare say so , with respect to our colleague at the back , it is a matter of trying to find the third way of seeing how we can turn such opportunities to our advantage instead of allowing them to drive the agenda for us .
This is a hugely complex issue where we need to assess what the framework of legislation is required to be and the difference that it will make to patterns of employment , to ways in which business is conducted , to exchanges between individuals and so on .
I must admit that I do not take the view that is sometimes put forward that this whole package of information society means that people will never again come together in social groups .
I just do not believe that .
But it is possible that it might be driven simply by the opportunities of commerce without our trying to judge how we can use it to our advantage .
That would be a profound mistake .
This is an issue to which we will return again and again in many different debates .
Mr President , I wish to thank the President-in-Office of the Council for her comments , particularly about the simple regulation - the SLIM initiative .
This has been a good example of partnership between successive Presidencies .
Luxembourg started it , the British Presidency is taking it forward , working closely with the Austrian Presidency , and , I understand , the Austrian Presidency is now talking to the Germans , who will take the Presidency in due course .
However , one thing we find frustrating in this House and which undermines the simpler legislation for the internal market initiative is something we call ' gold-plating ' , where national authorities add on to the legislation we produce in this House .
Would the President-in-Office like to comment on what can be achieved at Council level to ensure that the red tape we issue from here is helping the situation and is not being hindered by ' gold-plating ' by national civil services augmenting for no good reason ?
I entirely understand Mr Murphy 's point .
First I should like briefly to observe that , not only in this respect but in others , we worked with the Luxembourg Presidency to try to make sure that we were progressing the same issues in the same direction , working together .
We are now working , as he said , with the next Austrian Presidency , and it is working with the Germans .
This is part of a growing recognition among Member States that we will achieve more within the European Union as a whole if successive Presidencies work to the same agenda and try to build on and successfully take forward the programme of work of the Council and of Parliament .
He then asked me about the issue of ' gold-plating ' .
When Mr Cassidy asked me about red tape , I nearly referred to it then but I did not want to take too long in that reply .
I am very conscious of how sensitive Commissioner Bangemann is to the suggestion that much red tape comes from the European Union institutions , and of the document he produced some considerable time ago showing that most of it actually emanates from national Member States .
I accept that point entirely .
I suspect , and I hope I do not offend too many Members by saying this , that one of the reasons is because too often these things fall into the hands of lawyers at domestic level .
He asked me what we could do to redress this at Council level .
Apart from the constant pressure to keep red tape to a minimum and to look to what others are doing and to see that to ' gold-plate ' directives can be a competitive dis advantage , the more we are able to build up our dialogue with the other social partners and the business community , the more likely it is that we will get a clear and sharp identification of the implications of ' goldplating ' of the kind he identifies .
In principle , because I strongly believe in a developing partnership , I welcome moves to increase this dialogue .
This is a good practical example of some of the other benefits it can have .
Thank you again , Mrs Beckett .
This has been a very interesting exchange of ideas .
I apologize to those who have not been able to speak , but time is a tyrant !
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12.00 noon .
Question Time ( Council )
The next item is questions to the Council ( B4-0260 / 98 ) .
Question No 1 by María Izquierdo Rojo ( H-0164 / 98 )
Subject : New COM in raw tobacco and promotion of employment in less-favoured regions
Regarding the data supplied by the Council prior to the adoption of the reform of Regulation 2075 / 92 on the COM in raw tobacco , what effects and consequences will this reform have on employment ?
Does the Commission 's proposal to the Council contradict the new employment promotion policies for the less-favoured regions ?
What socio-economic impact will it have on Granada , Estremadura and the most depressed Mediterranean areas ?
Mr President , thank you for your helpful suggestion , which will enable me to take back the good news from Parliament today to the European Conference tomorrow morning .
In reply to the honourable Member 's question , the Commission 's proposal for revision of the common organisation of the market in raw tobacco has only recently been tabled .
It follows up the extensive debates held in both the Council and the European Parliament on the Commission 's options papers on reform of the tobacco regime .
Council work on the Commission 's proposal is at an early stage , but in examining the proposal we will certainly consider whether changes to the current tobacco regime would have an adverse impact on employment in the Community or on the economic well-being of certain Mediterranean areas .
We will also consider whether changes to the regime could bring benefits such as a reduction in costs or in fraud , an improvement in public health , or an increase in efficiency and competitiveness .
As the Commission 's proposal on tobacco is based on Article 43 the European Parliament has been invited to give its opinion .
I am sure that in preparing this opinion Parliament will want to consider the employment issues the honourable Member raises in her question .
Mr President-in-Office of the Council , men and women living in the countryside around Granada suspect that , following the brutal attack on the olive oil they produce , the next COM in olive oil and especially tobacco may be a backward step compared with the current situation .
Tell me , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , will you really be able to bring yourselves to cut jobs in the less-favoured areas which need them , when tobacco production in the European Union represents 25 % of consumption , and when you yourselves say that employment is the number one priority ?
Can you really bring yourselves to make such a big mistake ?
Please say something to reassure my voters , the tobacco growers of Granada , because 2 000 families there have nothing else to live on .
What do you mean when you say you are going to examine the matter ?
You are the President-in-Office of the Council .
Tell us what you must tell us : that not a single tobacco grower 's job will be lost in the less-favoured regions , because you respect the European Union 's highest priority - employment .
Please give me an answer .
Thank you , Mrs Izquierdo Rojo .
I can understand why you are so vehement and passionate in defending the interests of such a beautiful area as Granada , but I must ask you once again to do so within the allotted time .
Mr Henderson , I invite you to address Mrs Izquierdo Rojo 's concerns about that beautiful province . I dare say you are familiar with the area , but if not , I am sure Mrs Izquierdo Rojo will invite you to visit it .
Mr President-in-Office of the Council , what Mrs Izquierdo Rojo said about Granada is equally applicable to the Spanish region of Estremadura , including the invitation for you to get to know at first hand the social problem which may arise in these areas .
In a recent resolution from this Parliament on the COM in tobacco , the following aspects were approved by the House : that in a new COM in the tobacco sector , policies to promote employment and combat job losses are the highest priority in the European Union today ; and that granting aid for tobacco growing solves structural difficulties in the less-favoured regions .
Could the Council please state clearly its position on the importance of tobacco-growing jobs in Mediterranean areas ? The explanation you just gave was not really clear .
I have to say to the honourable Member that I cannot go further than I have already gone in my initial answer and in the supplementary answer I gave to the first questioner .
The position is that there is a Commission proposal , the Council is looking at it and one of the factors which will be taken into account is the employment factor .
That is true for all the tobacco-growing areas .
Mr President-in-Office of the Council , this seems to be a debate between Spanish Members and yourself , since it is your turn to represent the Council today .
You told us just now that unemployment will be one of the basic factors taken into account in this COM . In view of the fact that unemployment in Spain is twice the EU average , could you explain to me what other factors will be considered by the Council in their evaluation of the Commission 's proposal ?
I have to say to the honourable Member that it is not just an initiative that affects Spain , it affects a number of our partners ' agricultural areas .
I really have to refer to my original response , which was that employment is an important factor which should be taken into account but there are other factors .
We will want to consider whether changes to the regime can bring benefits such as a reduction in costs or an improvement in counteracting fraud , whether there would be any implication on public health and what impact any proposal might have on efficiency and competitiveness .
So , a number of criteria will have to be taken into account .
The Council will look at all these aspects as it develops its view on the Commission 's proposal .
Question No 2 has been withdrawn by the author .
Question No 3 by Carlos Carnero González ( H-0170 / 98 )
Subject : The Middle Eastern peace projects and possible suspension of the EU-Israel agreements
The crumbling of the Middle Eastern peace process - largely the result of the Israeli Government 's failure to meet its obligations under the Oslo Agreements and other commitments given to the Palestinian National Authority and guaranteed by the international community - is dangerously close to the point of no return , seriously jeopardizing the region 's stability and the success of what has been achieved to date .
On the basis of the debates of the last few weeks surrounding the communication from Commissioner Manuel Marín on the Union 's role in the Middle East , does the Council not believe it would be appropriate to bring effective political pressure to bear on the authorities in Tel Aviv to change course in favour of peace , and to meet their obligations to the Palestinians , by temporarily suspending the current agreements between the EU and Israel until such a time as Prime Minister Netanyahu adopts such an approach ?
On 23 February the General Affairs Council discussed fully Commissioner Marín 's communication and proposed a number of ways in which the provision of Union aid to the Palestinians can be made more effective .
On that occasion , the Council reiterated the determination of the Union to make a constructive and effective contribution to international efforts to restore confidence in the peace process and establish a firm basis for a resumption of negotiations .
It agreed that the Union should demonstrate its continued commitment to the peace process through a renewal of its financial assistance to the Palestinian authority beyond the expiry of its current five-year pledging period .
The Council also underlined the determination of the Union to intensify its dialogue with Israel on the removal of obstacles to Palestinian economic development .
We believe that the current framework for negotiations provides the best hope for a just and lasting peace between Israel and the Palestinians .
At present to suspend economic agreements between the EU and Israel would not help break the current deadlock .
Mr President-in-Office of the Council , it is true that the measure I suggest in my question would not necessarily break the deadlock in the peace process , as you say .
But the fact is that the process is at a deadlock .
For example , I do not know if you are aware that the Israeli Prime Minister , in an interview to the Spanish newspaper El País published last Sunday , said that the Europeans know nothing about the Middle East . What a wonderful comment that is for the European Union and everything we are doing !
I assume you take it personally ; I certainly do .
That was a comment made by Mr Netanyahu .
The issue is this , Mr President-in-Office of the Council : that any agreement signed between the Union and a third country includes a clause on democracy and respect for human rights .
This very morning we were proposing measures to put pressure on the Yugoslav President , Slobodan Milosevic , because of what is happening in Kosovo .
I realize the cases are not exactly the same , but does Mr Netanyahu have some special status to exempt him from being the subject of such discussions ?
The position of the Union is that a range of initiatives are being taken to try to break the logjam in the peace process in the Middle East .
We have been urging the Israeli Government to be more receptive to the need to break that logjam and to be more considerate of a number of factors which will help to build a peace process .
There is no special treatment for Mr Netanyahu .
The Union expects Mr Netanyahu and his government to honour the same principles that are built into other third-party trade agreements .
It is important that the trade agreement with Israel is successful , because part of that deal enables products from the Palestinian sector of their economy to be exported through Israel and , were action to be taken to curtail trade , it would have a damaging effect on the Palestinian people , without necessarily substantially influencing the Israeli government 's position .
It is a movement in that position which the world community is now impressing on Mr Netanyahu , and it is there that our main focus will concentrate .
Mr President , Mr President-in-Office , I would like to ask you whether you agree that in the case of Israel we are dealing with a stable democracy which has renounced terrorism , whereas we have not had an equivalent renunciation on the part of the Palestinians , and whether you agree that there is no necessity for us to go teaching lessons to the Israeli government .
It is not my impression that Israel has unilaterally denounced the Oslo process , or do you see a different policy ?
I would also stress that I would be pleased to see the admonitions addressed to Israel also addressed to the Palestinians .
While I understand the point the honourable Member is making , I still maintain that there is a need for a new attitude from the Israeli Government : there needs to be more of an awareness that the logjam has to be broken .
That means that it has to be more receptive to some of the ideas arising out of the Oslo process - for example the port and the airport in Palestine - to be able to bolster those sections of the population who want to have a stable society , which means they must have more economic stability .
That is a basis , or more of a basis , for political stability .
That has to be recognized by Mr Netanyahu , and he has to move to bring about more change arising out of the Oslo processes .
Of course , where terrorism is a threat in any third-party country , then the Union will do everything it can to help to counter that threat .
I would like to commend the President-in-Office for the Council 's support of the Oslo peace process as the way forward .
Does the President-in-Office agree with me that economic sanctions against Israel would in fact inflame the situation ?
It would be a counterproductive political gesture which would cause more economic harm to Europe than Israel because of the balance of trade that exists .
Does he agree that it does not help to inflame the situation with ridiculous comparisons between Israel and Serbia ?
Does he agree that , instead , financial assistance to the Palestinian authority should be stepped up and that dialogue with a democratically elected government of Israel and a democratically elected Palestinian authority is the best way to move the Middle East peace process forward by emphasizing the good points in the Oslo peace process to all sides in this sad conflict ?
Can I say to the Honourable Member there is no question of the Union ending a trade agreement with Israel .
What we want to see is that trade agreement forming the basis of greater movement by the Israeli government and greater recognition of what it needs to do to push the Oslo peace process along .
The consequence of any trade breach could be that the European Union would suffer in economic terms rather than Israel , but that is a matter of speculation .
It would not necessarily be a factor if it was politically necessary to have a breach of trade .
One of my main concerns is that the Palestinian economy would be very heavily damaged by such a breach of trade .
That would also be in a sense doubly damaging to the hopes for a peace process .
I would also agree that there is a need to continue to provide financial assistance to the Palestinian economy to help it begin to build up strength , which is important if any political moves are to be underpinned by economic stability .
Question No 4 by Christoph Konrad ( H-0175 / 98 )
Subject : The Commission 's reform proposal for the EU 's market organization for bananas
The Commission 's recently presented plans for the reform of the 1993 EU market organization for bananas are very controversial as in many aspects they appear to be protectionist and to hamper free competition .
What does the Council intend to do to satisfy the WTO requirement that the reform must be completed by the end of 1998 at the latest , such that the EU market organization for bananas can be considered compatible with the rules of free world trade ?
The Council agrees that following the World Trade Organization 's finding against certain aspects of the European Community banana regime , the regulation on the market organization for bananas has to be made WTO-compatible .
It is a high priority for us is to reach agreement by the end of June to allow time for implementing regulations to take effect from 1 January 1999 .
The Commission presented its proposals for revising the regulation to the Agriculture Council on 20 January .
The proposal is still under examination by the Council and it is therefore too early for me to anticipate the final position of the Council .
In finalizing its position , the Council will wish to be aware of the opinions of both the European Parliament and the Economic and Social Committee once these have been received .
I should also mention that the consolidation and strengthening of the multilateral trading system remains one of the main priorities of the Council in the field of external economic relations .
The Union believes in the rule of law for international trade and it is to the World Trade Organization that we must look to establish that rule of law .
Mr President , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , many thanks for your concern and for your answer .
My question is as follows : do you not share my view that the Commission 's answer , that its proposal still smacks of the spirit of protectionism .
With customs fines set at £ 50 , £ 200 and £ 500 per tonne of bananas , it is easy to believe this to be the case .
And do you not share my view that since yesterday 's European Court judgement the situation has changed completely ?
You will be aware that the framework agreement between the EU and the four Central American bananaproducing countries was declared invalid .
This presents us with a completely new situation . Under the terms of the judgement , the market organization must be rectified and as a result I am asking now whether you at long last , and sooner rather than later , intend to stop this madness with an initiative which will look very different from that suggested by the Commission here .
I thank Mr Konrad for his supplementary question .
I am not aware of the Court judgment but will study it once my officials bring it to my attention .
I will reiterate the point I made in my introduction .
The general position is that the Commission proposal must be consistent with World Trade Organization rules .
We are looking at the Commission proposal .
We are looking at whether it is the kind of proposal which is fair and balanced in terms of the interests of the Council .
Once we have come to a decision on that we have also to be absolutely clear that it is consistent with WTO rules .
As far as I am aware , the Commission has made the necessary assessment and would be able to furnish us with its opinion at the time of any continuing dialogue between the Council and the Commission .
It is important that any final conclusion is compatible with what would be necessary under WTO rules .
Thank you , Mr Henderson .
The two supplementary questions I have are from Mr von Habsburg and Mr Medina Ortega .
Mrs Redondo Jiménez keeps requesting to put a supplementary question , but I must inform her that the Rules of Procedure say that each Member is only allowed one supplementary question during questions to the Council .
It is true that thanks to a suggestion from Mr von Habsburg , the Bureau has decided to ask the Committee on the Rules of Procedure , the Verification of Credentials and Immunities to amend the Rules of Procedure forthwith , to allow two supplementary questions to be put . At the moment , however , I cannot give her the floor , although I would like to .
Instead , it is my pleasure to give Mr von Habsburg the floor for his supplementary question .
Is the President-in-Office not aware that the opening of the banana market in Europe is going to be a very heavy burden on the small producers in the Canary Islands and other European territories ?
Is it not important that we should give them as much protection as we can against the tremendous American interests which with their enormous capital and enormous propaganda potential which we have felt , are trying to invade our market to destroy those bananas being produced on European territory ?
I would say to Mr von Habsburg , as I said to Mr Konrad , that it is necessary for the Council to assess the various implications on the Member States .
The Canary Islands producers are one of those factors and the Caribbean producers are another area to which consideration has to be given .
The Council has also to balance those interests with the need for compatibility with the World Trade Organization rules .
The secret of a successful conclusion to this will be to get the kind of deal which meets those criteria .
Mr President-in-Office of the Council , thank you for your answer .
You talked about taking Parliament 's view into account .
I would like to ask if you are aware that a large majority of this House has repeatedly declared itself to be in favour of protecting the interests of small producers within the Community , in the West Indies and in other developing countries , against the multinationals ' attempts to dominate the world banana market .
To reassure Mr Konrad and yourself , I can tell you that yesterday 's judgements do not change anything with respect to the WTO decision , or in any way threaten the protection we owe to those producers .
I can say to Mr Medina Ortega that I understand the point he is making .
Indeed , those same lobbies have been in touch with me in my national capacity , and I am giving consideration to those matters .
I understand that Parliament would want to give protection to those areas of the Union and its territories where there is an important interest .
I would also expect that Parliament would want to uphold the rules of the World Trade Organization as being essential for a trading community such as the European Union .
It is necessary to meet both criteria .
As I said to Mr von Habsburg , it is not just a case of being able to meet the interests of the Caribbean producers or the Canary Islands producers or others , we need to meet both criteria .
If we do not , we will fail to get any agreement , because any agreement we have made among ourselves would be incompatible with the World Trade Organization rules and we would find ourselves in difficulty in the future .
That is why it is important that we all devote the necessary thinking and scrutiny to those matters to try to come up with something which is acceptable .
Question No 5 by José Valverde López ( H-0188 / 98 )
Subject : Presidency of the Council
In his speech to the plenary of the European Parliament in Strasbourg the President-in-Office of the Council referred several times to the " Presidency of the Union ' . This phrase was then repeated by the media .
In view of the fact that to talk of the " Presidency of the Union ' is inappropriate and both constitutes a distortion of the terms of the Treaties and misleads the general public , can the Council say what steps it intends to take to ensure that speeches by the Presidency and official statements and documents stop talking about the " Presidency of the Union ' and refer simply to the " Presidency of the Council ' ?
It is important not to create confusion among the general public as regards the nature of the Community institutions .
There is no " Presidency of the Union ' .
Each institution has its own president .
I wish to say to Mr Valverde López that it is common practice for the Presidency of the Council to be referred to as the Presidency of the Union .
Mr President-in-Office of the Council , you have just said that Parliament and all the other institutions must comply with our obligations .
I would remind you that at no point in the Treaty is there any mention of the Presidency of the Union , only the Presidency of the Council .
I did not table this question in a critical way at all .
On the contrary , it is meant in a positive sense . We must take advantage of each country 's term of office to explain properly the nature of the different institutions and bring them home to the public , because that is the time when each country is best able to influence public opinion .
If we use language which is out of keeping with the Treaties we introduce confusion .
This is not a criticism , quite the opposite . We in this Parliament are always happy to welcome the President-in-Office of the Council , especially if he or she is British , because we owe this very Question Time to the parliamentary tradition of Great Britain .
Mr Valverde López is obviously an old hand at parliamentary procedures .
When he takes a crack at the front bench , so to speak , he begins by complimenting them , which makes it extremely difficult to be negative in response .
The British Presidency has followed the terminology of previous presidencies .
The French and the Irish presidencies , for instance , incorporated the term ' Presidency ' into their logo .
We are using a style of communication that is comprehensible to the population .
If the question was asked in the British parliament , the answer would be that members of my constituency would not understand what the Council , Parliament , the Commission or any of the institutions were , but they would want to know that the European Union was doing a good job and making their life better , and that if the Presidency had a role in that , then it was a positive role .
It is the issues we deal with and the values we hold that we have to communicate to the people of Europe .
I am not for a moment saying that we should not be accurate in our descriptions .
As a President-in-Office I would be happy to do that .
But there are perhaps greater priorities in forming public opinion and galvanizing public understanding on the European Union .
Question No 6 by André Sainjon ( H-0189 / 98 )
Subject : Child labour in the United Kingdom
The situation of many children working in the United Kingdom is intolerable .
Seeing hundreds of thousands of children under 13 doing alienating work without any social protection takes us back a hundred years .
What point is there in asking certain under-developed countries to comply with minimum standards if the European Union for its part does not set an example ?
ILO Convention 29 on forced labour is clearly being flouted .
So what decisions does the government which is currently chairing the Council intend to take to put an end to this state of affairs , and is it prepared to ratify Convention 138 on child labour ?
Council Directive 94 / 33 / EC on the protection of young people at work includes provisions strictly limiting the number of hours that can be worked by children under 16 and the types of work they can do .
These provisions will be implemented in the United Kingdom through regulations due to come into force in August .
They will reinforce the already extensive legislative protection available to working children in the United Kingdom .
It is the policy of the Union in the Council that there should be protection against child labour in all Member States .
The Council is aware that has been implemented .
Where modifications to legislation are taking place , they are being implemented .
Question No 7 by Maj Theorin ( H-0191 / 98 )
Subject : Support for action against drugs
European Cities on Drug Policy is an organization working for the legalization of drugs .
According to reports , it received over 6 m SKR in 1996 and the same in 1997 .
European Cities Against Drugs , as its name reveals , is an organization working for a drugs-free society .
It has 180 member towns and cities and is supported by local authority membership fees .
ECAD applied for 1.5 m SKR from the EU for spending on information , training and printing material in several languages , but got nothing .
So the only large-scale international organization working for a policy to restrict drugs gets nothing , but generous help is provided for organizations and countries seeking to legalize drugs .
How is the public in the EU to interpret these decisions in any other way than that the EU has given up the fight against drugs ?
Is that also true of the Council ?
Or is it prepared to act against drugs ?
The Council has always been fully committed to tackling the menace of drugs on our streets .
But arrangements for the organisation listed are not within the Council 's competence .
The Cannes European Council adopted a five-year action plan to combat drugs .
A complementary strategy focusing on measures to tackle illicit drugs trafficking was subsequently endorsed by the Madrid Council .
In implementing these , the Council has initiated projects both within the Union and within the wider global community .
The activities are too numerous to list here but include : a Council initiative to stem the flow of drugs through the Caribbean and Latin America to Europe ; an initiative to begin to create a security belt around Afghanistan by working with the central Asian states to help improve their drug-fighting capacity ; the establishment of the European Monitoring Centre in Lisbon to give a clear and objective picture of the nature of the drugs problem across Europe ; the creation of Europol , shortly to become fully operational , to ensure that all of our law enforcement agencies have rapid access to the intelligence that they need across the European Union .
Thank you very much for your reply .
The European Union 's action plan to combat drugs does , of course , form a framework for the EU 's and the Member States ' work on preventing the risks connected with drug addiction .
As I see it , such an action plan can hardly be compatible with support for liberal drug projects .
My question , which I have asked indirectly before , is whether it is also the Council 's intention that such an action plan against drugs should be incompatible with support for liberal drug projects .
In spite of this action plan , the EU supports the European Cities on Drug Policy which works for the legalization of drugs .
How should the EU 's members in fact interpret this ?
On the one hand , we have an action plan to combat drugs , while on the other hand , there is support for the legalization of drugs .
My main question is therefore : is the EU not sending out contradictory messages ?
I have a lot of sympathy for what has been said by Mrs Theorin .
If there were funding of action against drugs and at the same time funding of the legalization of drugs in effect it would be funding two processes which were counteracting each other .
It would most certainly be perceived in that way by the population of the European Union .
The question of funding for the organization that is mentioned in the question is a matter for the Commission and not a matter for the Council .
It would be better if the honourable Member took that up with them .
As is well known we have two different political opinions about drugs ; one which represents the conventions which the Member States have signed , and one which represents a more liberal view .
As a Swede it is clear that I would rather see support go to projects which represent the view held by the UN conventions .
But could the Council imagine providing support and thinking that it is reasonable for funding to at least be divided fifty-fifty between these two different political points of view ?
It may be a matter of academic speculation at the moment as to which is the best way to try to discourage people from taking illegal drugs and preventing the misery that arises , but the Council 's position is quite clear .
There are a number of initiatives which we believe must be taken and which I itemized in my initial contribution .
They are : to try to stop the flow of illegal drugs to people within the European Union and especially our young people ; to monitor what is happening in the communities where there are high levels of drug-taking incidents ; and to reinforce bodies like Europol who can play a potentially important part in counteracting this illegal trade .
Therefore I think it is right for the Council to build on those initiatives .
I would expect that the Commission , in its allocation of funding , would be guided by the policies which had been agreed on those matters .
I would like to follow up with information which we have just received from Commissioner Gradin in a meeting with the Swedish group .
Large amounts of drugs are seized in the EU which have entered from countries outside the EU .
Talk about legalization gives the general public a completely false impression , an impression which we do not want the EU to give .
On the other hand , we would like to convey the fact that we are making tougher demands on the outside world too .
My question is this : what are the demands the EU makes internationally in relations with other countries , that is , when we have the chance to ask other countries what drugs policies they conduct and are able to describe what drugs policy we want to conduct , such as in the agreements with the USA or Latin America , or in the relations we have through Europol - which the Council mentions - as well as with Interpol ?
I thank Mr Lindqvist .
He heard the response I have already made to the two previous questioners about the Council position .
He raises an interesting issue about activity which can be taken in cooperation with other law enforcement agencies outside the European Union .
Indeed , consideration of that question is one of the important items which the European Conference will look at tomorrow in London .
That indicates the seriousness with which the Council takes the need for action to counteract this illegal trade in drugs .
Question No 8 by Richard Corbett ( H-0195 / 98 )
Subject : Financial perspectives
The financial perspectives proposed by the Commission in " Agenda 2000 ' for the period 2000-2006 leave two major spending policies dominating the budget : agriculture and Structural Funds .
Given that , in both these cases , certain states benefit to a far greater extent than others , this creates the risk that some states will see little benefit in enhanced EU spending and will tend to resist any increases in the EU budget .
Does the Council agree that it is important also to develop those spending policies which benefit all Member States , especially where joint spending through the EU budget will , through greater effectiveness and economies of scale , save money for national budgets ?
The Council does not accept that agricultural and structural spending is of interest only to some Member States while other spending is of interest to all Member States .
All categories of the financial perspectives are of interest to all Member States and to the Community .
The Commission 's detailed proposals for the division of expenditure between the categories of the financial perspectives are expected very shortly , and will then be discussed by the Council .
It would be premature for the Council to take a position on those issues raised by the honourable Member at this stage .
The Council recalls that budgetary discipline and efficient expenditure are essential at Union level , just as they are at the level of the Member State .
The issue of future expenditure flows in the Union resulting from the reform of the Union 's main policies , highlighted by the honourable Member , is one which will clearly be addressed in detail over the coming months in the course of the deliberations in the Council on the Commission 's proposals .
I thank the President-in-Office for that answer .
The question did not intend to imply that items such as structural funding were not of interest to some Member States .
Clearly , all Member States benefit from a happy and balanced regional development of the European Union , and that is something I would certainly strongly support .
However , there is a perception among some Member States - or there is a danger of such a perception - that they benefit to a lesser extent than others .
As we move to an enlarged Union of nearly 30 Member States in the next few years , we are in danger of entering into negotiations on the future financial perspectives in a situation where there is a gross imbalance in what Member States perceive to be their relative advantage .
Would it not be advantageous in the long term for the European Union to develop , in addition , extra areas of spending other than those two , in order to achieve a better balance of interest to everybody ?
I have to say to the honourable Member that it is an interesting speculation that the Union should consider new areas of expenditure .
I would remind him that in most of the Member States there are considerable pressures on governments to reduce levels of expenditure and they are often narrow areas of coverage .
I do not totally rule out new areas within the European Union but it would be against that political background that decisions would have to be taken .
In relation to the current negotiations which the Union will face , the Council looks forward to receiving the Commission 's proposals which I understand will be published on 18 March .
It will then be up to the Council to try to make progress on those matters as speedily as possible , recognizing that some of them are very complicated and that time will be necessary .
The different views of the Member States will be put at the Council meeting .
It is important for the Union that at the end of the process the priority for the Union and for its coherence is a factor which all Member States will take into account in submitting their views to the Council to enable it to reach a decision on those important matters .
Mr President , I would like to address in particular the problems faced in the border areas .
Half of the Austrian border is shared with countries wishing to accede to the European Union .
I would like to ask what ideas have been developed in this report .
In geographical terms , frontier countries will have special issues they will have to deal with in relation to the enlargement of the Union , many of which will be linked to the proximity of boundaries and the movement of people and goods across those boundaries .
That is recognized by the Council .
Another major issue which the Council will have to consider at the time of the Commission 's proposals is the extent to which support should be given to those countries in central and eastern Europe who seek to accede to the European Union as a proportion of the total resources which are available for expenditure within the existing Union .
There are many contentious issues about how that expenditure will be allocated within the existing Union .
The first decision which has to be reached by the Council is how far the Community will be able to help those new countries who seek to accede to the Union .
That may well have spin-off consequences for frontier states .
I know that states like Austria will be making representations on those matters through the normal channels .
As the author is not present , Question No 9 lapses .
Question No 10 by Brian Crowley ( H-0199 / 98 )
Subject : Excise in international waters
Has the Council requested the Commission to specify the arrangements which will apply from 1 July 1999 for sales of excisable products on mobile forms of transport , such as ferries and cruises which take place whilst the vessel is traversing international waters and / or the territorial seas of different Member States during the course of an intra-EU journey and , if not , will it now do so ?
This is obviously a matter which Members feel is of considerable importance .
I know we discussed some other implications of this at the last Question Time .
In answer to the specific point raised on this occasion , the Council has made no such request .
Council Directive 92 / 12 / EEC on the arrangements for excise duty sets out the general principle that duty is payable in the country of consumption .
If this issue is raised by a Member State and there is agreement in the Council , the Commission would certainly be asked to advise on what precise arrangements should apply after 1 July 1999 .
I know that the President-in-Office spent some time last month discussing this matter very widely .
However , the point I raised is exceptional .
If a ferry , for instance , is sailing from Ireland to France , at one stage during its journey it moves out of EU or national territorial waters into international waters .
Under strict interpretation of the decision which the minister referred to , they would then be entitled to sell duty-free goods on the boat at that particular time .
The other point I want to bring into this is the lack of dialogue between the different institutions and the operators themselves .
I know that the Commission and members of the Council have consulted with the Association of Scheduled Airlines which represents the larger airlines in Europe , but no charter airlines were consulted , no airport managers were consulted and no ferry companies were consulted .
I would like to ask if the President-in-Office could give us an undertaking that wider consultation will take place in the future ?
On the issue of substance , the Commission has a responsibility to explain how the new workings will come into operation .
Set against that , there are already provisions in international law , and advice from the Commission will have to be consistent with existing international law .
It will therefore be a matter of interpretation by ferry companies and others as to what their responsibilities are with regard to what they can sell , at what rate of tax , and where .
On the question of consultation , I am not aware of any complaint about a lack of a facility to make representation to the Commission .
If specific instances are referred to me then I am pleased to look at them and see if I can have discussions with the Commission ; but I have never found the Commission to be difficult on receiving representations .
It may be that if those who feel their view has not been properly aired were to reapproach the Commission , they might find that a facility was be available to them to put their case .
But that is not really a matter for the Council .
The Council will be looking at the issues of substance , will be wanting to know what the advice of the Commission is , and it will then be up to operators to introduce the new regime .
Could the President-in-Office confirm to the House today that the Presidency is minded to allow a mandate to the Commission to undertake a study of the economic impact and any potential job losses consequent on the current decision that duty-free will cease and excise duties will apply as normal as from 1 July 1999 .
If he is able to confirm that , it is very welcome news indeed , bearing in mind that in the constituency of North Essex and South Suffolk we have both the port of Harwich and Stansted airport .
Perhaps the Presidency is not aware but KLM , which now operates out of the airport , has announced job losses already consequent on this decision taking place in 15 months ' time .
I hope he is able to confirm that to the House this afternoon .
I have to say as a matter of general economic theory to Miss McIntosh that if there is a retail outlet and a job is lost because that retail outlet no longer exists and there is still a public desire to consume the products through another retail outlet it might mean that an additional job created is somewhere else .
I am not saying that there would necessarily be equality in that exercise in that sometimes when change is brought about , companies decide to take advantage of productivity potential which is open to them .
But that general point has to be borne in mind .
The Commission already has that mandate and it has brought forward its proposals .
The Council have agreed a position in the knowledge that a mandate was there .
As you will be aware , many of us are concerned that there will be chaos in European waters if duty-free is abolished .
I give you one example - a service he is probably familiar with between the UK and the Netherlands where you will pay British excise in British territorial waters , no excise duty at all in international waters and Dutch excise , on the final leg of the journey .
On the reverse journey that will switch , so ferries operating between the UK and the Netherlands will have to charge six different prices for goods on a single return journey .
How does the minister think that contributes towards the completion of the single market ?
How can he sell that to the people of Europe ?
It clearly makes no sense and the Council needs to ask the Commission to look at this very serious matter because chaos could well result , undermining the very principle that all of us are trying to contribute to , namely the completion of the single market .
Abolishing duty-free will not contribute to that one iota .
It is widely recognized that the move towards a single market is something which should be unstoppable and is certainly desirable within the Union .
We all have an obligation to try to do what we can to remove obstacles .
But the tax regimes are quite different in every Member State .
In the perception of moves which can be made toward a single market , at the moment those regimes are outside of that .
That is a political reality .
I am sure the honourable Member will recognize there is not any great prospect of any major change in the immediate political future .
One can never talk about the very long term .
I would be very stupid to try to predict the way in which opinion will move .
If my mother was on the boat , she would know when to buy the stuff .
I think consumers will very much take that view throughout the Union .
Question No 11 by Liam Hyland ( H-0202 / 98 )
Subject : Wool
In April 1996 , the European Parliament unanimously adopted a motion calling for the development of a European wool industry .
Has the Council now had an opportunity to examine the proposals contained in this motion and , if so , will the Council now initiate discussions with the Commission with a view to taking practical steps to realize the potential which exists for the development of a European wool industry ?
First of all , the answer is no .
But the honourable Member will be aware that wool is not included in Annex II of the Treaty of Rome and is therefore not considered as an agricultural product .
Consequently there are no direct European Union support systems for wool and no common organization of the market .
Any amendment to the Treaty to designate wool as an agricultural product would be difficult to achieve and would require the agreement of all Member States .
Assistance is already available for wool producers from the Union 's Structural Funds programmes .
This assistance is conditional on the project meeting the aims and objective of the relevant programme , on its not duplicating funding already available from European Union sources , and on conformity with the state aid rules .
At the moment this is not on the agenda of the Council .
Any change would require unanimity .
It would be up to a Member of the Council to make representations to the Presidency to ask that a matter like this be placed on the agenda so that a discussion can take place on the way forward and whether any changes should be introduced .
At the moment I have not had that approach .
If I did receive that approach then the matter would be given consideration .
But at the moment there are no plans for any change in current regulations .
Mindful of what the Minister has said , and also of what Mr Hyland has said , Mr Cunningham gave a commitment to have this matter looked into in some detail at the Agricultural Ministers ' Meeting .
I should like to ask you , Sir , through your good offices , to see whether you could get it put on to the agenda , because this could be a very important sector for the creation of growth , both in employment and economic terms , and would actually stop jobs leaving the European Union .
At the moment , unprocessed wool is being exported out of the Union .
I have to remind Mr Crowley that I am not here to represent the British government .
I am here as a representative of the Council , as the President-in-Office .
I have not had any approach from the British government on this matter .
Were the members of the British government on the Council of Ministers to be approached by their colleagues in the Ministry of Agriculture , then they might give the matter some consideration .
At the moment , as the President-in-Office of the Council , I have to repeat my original reply to the honourable Member 's honourable friend .
I rise to make a political charge , that there seems to be absolutely no cooperation between the British Ministers , Ministers of State and Secretary of State .
Mr Henderson came here last month and answered questions in relation to duty-free , and he was not aware of what the Deputy Prime Minister , John Prescott , had said in this House some time earlier .
Maybe officials are advising him not to respond to me .
I am making a political charge , and I expect a politician to respond to it .
I suggest that there should be more cooperation .
The Minister of Agriculture , Fisheries and Food , Jack Cunningham , came here and gave some assurances , and the Minister for Europe is not even aware of it !
I put it to you , Minister , through the Chair , that this Parliament has asked that proposals be put forward .
Has the British Presidency now taken a decision to ignore the unanimous view of this House ?
I have been brought up in the school of constitutions and rule books and recognition of one 's responsibilities in that regard , and my responsibilities this afternoon are quite clear : I am responsible for reporting and accounting on behalf of the Council and not on behalf of the British government .
It is in that context that my responses are made .
I did not say that I was not aware of a view which had been struck by my colleague on the Agricultural Council .
What I said was that I had not been approached as a national representative , and that the Foreign Secretary had not been approached specifically to raise that issue at the Council at this time .
That is a different matter .
I have to say , in passing , that I have also not had any approach from the Irish government on the Council suggestion that the Irish government would want this matter raised .
It may be that the Irish government does indeed want the matter raised .
If it does , I am sure it will approach me to have the matter discussed at the Council .
Question No 12 by Robin Teverson ( H-0203 / 98 )
Subject : 1999 European Parliament elections
Would the Council please state what action it is taking to ensure that ALL citizens of the European Union are democratically represented in the European Parliament following the next European elections in June 1999 , especially citizens of Gibraltar ?
The honourable Member is undoubtedly aware that Annex 2 of the Act of September 1976 concerning the election of representatives of the European Parliament by universal direct suffrage provides that the United Kingdom will apply the provisions of the Act only in respect of the United Kingdom , that is to say excluding Gibraltar .
Amendment would require the agreement of all Member States and ratification by all Member States .
The 1976 Act was adopted on the basis of Article 138 ( 3 ) of the European Community Treaty on the basis of a draft drawn up by the European Parliament which made no reference to the particular case of Gibraltar .
I thank the President-in-Office for his reply .
I apologise that this question was not tabled last month .
While I understand the legal basis of this , it is a fundamental principle that citizens of the European Union should be democratically represented within their institutions .
I do not think anybody could disagree with that .
And yet we have this anomaly which I do not believe occurs in other Member States .
Their territories which are part of the European Union though not part of their main land masses are all represented here .
It is highly regrettable that there is a difference for the citizens of Gibraltar .
Given that the President-in-Office drew a line between his position in the British Government and that of representing the Council , could I invite him , as President-in-Office , to invite the appropriate Member State to start to make appropriate amendments to make sure that all citizens are democratically represented here in Parliament ?
I would say to the honourable Member that on this question we are all burdened with history .
If the Council were to invite the Member State alluded to make representations on this matter , the Member State 's judgment would be that it would be very difficult to make the necessary progress to achieve any real change .
Mr Henderson , thank you for your clear answer .
Obviously , as President-in-Office of the Council , you are well aware that this is a problem which runs up against historical and political obstacles arising from the fact that , in the fullest and strictest sense , the territory of Gibraltar does not belong to the European Union , because it is a colony . The British government recognized that fact many years ago in an official communication to the United Nations , which has never been amended .
Therefore , I should imagine the President-in-Office of the Council knows perfectly well that until that situation changes , what he wants to achieve - doubtless with the best of intentions - will be impossible .
Gibraltar is actually an overseas territory and not a colony of the United Kingdom .
That does not change the context of the reply which I originally gave to Parliament .
I set out the legal position and some of the history .
I have nothing further to add .
Mr President , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , in July 1997 an application was made in the House of Commons by representatives of both main parties examining the method of suffrage used at both national elections and European elections in Gibraltar .
In response to a question which I asked a month ago , I was informed that this matter is still pending .
I am not sure whether this is still the case or what the present situation is .
Am I right in assuming , on the basis of your comments and the legal basis you have just mentioned , that this question is probably invalid in the House of Commons anyway , since the point at issue is not itself legally feasible in practical terms .
The second question which I should like to add relates to the matter of Gibraltar which - as you already know from the Treaty of Utrecht - is basically split into two parts , the matter of the rock and the matter of the isthmus .
I would like to know how you regard the two parts .
I cannot see this is a matter for the Council .
The question of the legal position of Gibraltar is something that is clearly designated and entrenched in law .
If the honourable Member wishes to approach the British government , I am sure that they would be happy to take up some of the points that have been raised about procedure within the United Kingdom but it is not a matter for the Council .
Question No 13 by Sören Wibe ( H-0204 / 98 )
Subject : The situation in Algeria
Reports of fresh massacres in Algeria appear in the media every day .
It is increasingly unclear who is behind all these acts of madness .
Some people now suspect a number of different political figures of terrorizing the public .
Suspicions have also been voiced that shady elements of the Algerian authorities are perpetrating acts of terror in order to maintain an unstable society for their own political ends .
A European Parliament delegation visited Algeria in February 1998 and , in its conclusions , tended towards the view that the authorities are not to blame for the massacres .
What view does the Council take of such suspicions ?
The Council has repeatedly reaffirmed its outright condemnation of those abhorrent acts of terrorism and indiscriminate violence .
As the honourable Member will be aware a ministerial troika mission visited Algiers on 19-20 January 1998 .
The Council welcomed this visit as an effective expression not only of the deep concern of the European Union at the situation in Algeria but also of the strong sympathy of the peoples of the European Union with the suffering of the Algerian people .
The Council believes that there is no credible evidence to support the allegations of the involvement of the Algerian authorities in these massacres .
The Council continues to press for greater openness , media access and transparency on the part of the Algerian government .
This would improve international understanding of the situation .
To this end the Council has also encouraged parliamentary exchanges .
It hopes that such contacts will help strengthen democracy and the rule of law in Algeria .
The recent visit of European Parliamentarians is an important step in the continuing dialogue between the European Union and Algeria .
I will try to be very brief .
It is true that there is in fact no credible evidence either way , either against the authorities or against the Islamic groups , not least because the Algerian government refuses to agree to an international investigating commission .
But is it not the case , Mr Henderson , that there are very credible indications from , amongst others , the former Prime Minister of Algeria and from Amnesty International , which suggest that there may be groups within the Algerian authorities which are behind these terrible massacres - as you call them - which happen daily ?
Perhaps you should not be so sure about who is guilty .
I recognise that the situation is not completely clear which is the point of sending the mission in the first place .
It is hoped that there will be a further meeting between the Algerian Foreign Minister and the Presidency to try to examine the matters that the honourable Member has raised .
Thank you for your answers , Mr Henderson .
We wish you a good journey .
Mr Posselt wishes to make a point of order .
Mr President , I am sorry .
You have probably answered this question already .
I had to attend the meeting of the EU-Czech Republic Joint Parliamentary Committee .
That is why I am late .
I simply wanted to ask why Question Time ended before 7.00 pm today .
In principle , Question Time should run until 7.00 pm .
I also wanted to ask whether it started on time .
Demographic report 1997
The next item is the report ( A4-0056 / 98 ) by Mr Cabezón Alonso , on behalf of the Commitee on Employment and Social Affairs , on the Commission demographic report 1997 ( COM ( 97 ) 0361 - C4-0505 / 97 ) .
Mr President , as the 1997 Commission demographic report showed , the EU 's population pyramid is changing and we must be prepared for the consequences it may entail .
Since 1975 , population growth has been slowing down while at the same time the European Union 's population is growing older .
Other trends are becoming apparent : young people are studying and training for longer periods and , in general , people are taking earlier retirement .
If current trends continue , the population structure of the European Union will develop as follows over the coming 30 years : the over-60 age group will increase by 50 % ; the number of adults aged between 20 and 59 will fall by 6 % ; and the number of young people aged between 0 and 19 will fall by 11 % .
These trends were also evident in other demographic reports previously approved by Parliament .
This information means that we must consider certain consequences that are already evident and which are detailed in the report we are discussing today .
Current demographic trends are having and will have effects on the funding and organization of social protection .
The number of pensioners is rising , an increasing proportion of the budget is spent on pensions , health care costs are growing - due to the increase in the population protected and higher life expectancy - , and the greater dependency of elderly people is giving rise to higher social expenditure .
We must modernize the management systems of current levels of public social protection to ensure that they work to the advantage of competitiveness and employment .
It is also important to separate the sources from which benefits under public social protection systems are financed , whether they are universal benefits or those which are to be paid out of contributions from employers and workers .
The demographic changes taking place will not in themselves resolve the employment problems , but they will have effects on the job market .
To protect and preserve the welfare society , the so-called European social model , we must maintain economic growth , increase productivity and improve employment .
The balance of the population of working age over the past 20 years is going to shift in the future and it will therefore be necessary to expand the participation of women in the labour market , since many of them still do not work .
The foreseeable increase in the number of older workers of working age , that is , between 50 and 64 , will make it necessary to adjust working conditions , adapt the content and form of vocational training , and , generally , adapt legislation and taxation to the new conditions .
These new conditions are being debated today and will call for constant responses ; the basic elements they will involve will be the share or balance of responsibilities and family , professional and educational arrangements .
The new conditions , Mr President , must not be obstacles or barriers to paid employment ; nor must they be a disadvantage in terms of social protection for those trying to meet the new conditions and the new family and social needs .
These population trends may give rise to regional disparities , which will have an impact on the labour market , housing , health , and care policies as well as on the environment as a result of greater rural depopulation .
These regional trends must be monitored but there is no doubt that they are certainly evident at the moment .
We must also consider the demographic situation in the applicant countries , those countries which want to join the European Union .
Their situation , the new trends , will be used as reference in the negotiating processes with these countries , particularly as regards the active population , unemployment , levels of social protection , mobility trends , and so on .
Possible increases in migratory flows from the applicant states to the present Member States of the European Union will increase the pressure on social protection systems in both the current Member States and the applicant countries .
Current demographic trends in the European Union are also going to have an impact on the definition of new active employment policies - what they will entail and who they will affect - , on public spending on social protection , on the management of employment and training , on family allowances and on the internal cohesion and balance of our businesses .
In the debate on this report in the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs , I , as rapporteur , accepted for the most part the amendments tabled by our colleagues from the other political groups , the Group of the European People 's Party , the Confederal Group of the European United Left - Nordic Green Left , the Group of the European Liberal Democrat and Reform Party , etcetera . I also took up the recommendations of the Committee on Women 's Rights .
In any case , I wanted this report to include the opinions and suggestions of as many of the members of the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs as possible and , in fact , the report was approved in committee with only one abstention .
When voting on this report , I believe we should not accept the amendments tabled by the Group of Independents for a Europe of Nations ( Coordination Group ) , since all the amendments they tabled concerned an area that was not discussed in the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs and , therefore , we could not set out our position in this respect .
I believe personally , as rapporteur , that the House should reject these amendments .
Mr President , I would like to end by thanking all the members of the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs who helped to draw up this report , and I hope that it will receive the full support of the House .
Mr President , I would like to start by congratulating Mr Alonso on his excellent report and to thank him and the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs for the fact that they included , in the final text , the opinion of the Committee on Women 's Rights .
It is not necessary to emphasize how important the demographic problem in Europe is .
The population is getting older and women are called upon to pay the heavy price . Our committee , in its conclusions , insisted on the fact that women are bearing an even greater burden with the care of dependents , usually without reward and social security and at the same time are constantly distancing themselves from the labour market .
We asked the Commission and the Member States to target men and women equally when they promote measures to combine family and professional life , and to ensure the possibility of training and reinsertion into work for those - usually women - who are forced , for the reasons given above , to interrupt their professional life .
Above and beyond that , there is the danger that , if specific measures are not taken , women will be further discriminated against , through increasingly individualized superannuation systems which are basically not optional .
The European Union is preparing itself for an important new enlargement to include the countries of central and eastern Europe , which will have repercussions for our demographic map .
It is significant that the final report makes reference to infant mortality and that the Commission is called upon to provide data , according to sex , on the demographic developments in the accession countries .
The next century will see a Europe where the increased average life expectancy also has its problems , particularly among women rather men , apart from its positive aspect .
A fourth generation , older and more dependent , is taking shape and it consists mostly of women .
For this reason , the future role of active women in European society must be safeguarded and must be reinforced with equal value given to obligations and rights , both in the workplace and in the family .
Only in this way can the demographic problem be combated effectively , and only in this spirit can the Commission act and can we support our positions .
Mr President , I would like to congratulate the rapporteur on a very good report and to refer to a growing problem within the European Union , that is , the demographic trends and the fact that people are living longer .
These trends present a very strong economic challenge to the European Union , particularly as we are coming up to the new millennium .
As Mr Cabezón highlights in his report , increasing longevity , allied to declining fertility of younger generations , has resulted in a growing number of older people in our society compared with those who are still working or economically active .
Currently , within the European Union there are 48 million people over 65 , 20 million of whom are over 75 , so that gives some indication of the problem .
At the turn of the century that group will represent one fifth of the European Union 's population . Indeed , by the year 2020 it will be one quarter of the European Union 's population .
If we turn to my own country , Scotland , the figures show a similar trend .
In 1996 , 20.18 % of the population were over 58 .
By 2006 , ten years later , this will rise to 24.6 % and by 2036 it will rise to 31 % - almost a third .
So that is an indication of the trends ; these figures are not just statistics , ladies and gentlemen , they represent significant challenges for us as policy-makers .
We must adapt to these circumstances .
We must equip European society for this .
We must ensure economic security for older people in the face of growing social costs .
We must ensure that older people remain integrated in society and that solidarity between the generations is promoted and older people are assured dignity and non-discrimination in their twilight years .
In Scotland and throughout most of the EU , older people face a serious threat of economic insecurity and growing inequality .
However , until a few years ago , out of all the European governments only the UK 's own last government had decided to cut the level of maintenance to senior citizens .
I am pleased to say that within the European Union the British Conservative government was the exception .
However , since the election last May we have had a change in climate , a change of environment , and we have had measures which help the elderly .
We have had , for example , a halving of the VAT rate on fuel .
We have had additional assistance and practical measures taken to help the elderly population .
Across Europe , not just in the United Kingdom and not just in Scotland , all governments are facing a challenge .
We must introduce policies which recognize the fact that our people are getting older .
The demographic trends are such that there are fewer people in the younger age range and more in the older age range and we must look at these changes .
I am very glad to tell the Members present tonight that we have got the proposals for a pensioners ' assembly .
In October of this year , we will be putting forward the Social Affairs Committee 's points of view , this Parliament 's points of view on this trend , to make recommendations to the United Nations for the Year of the Elderly .
Madam President , Madam Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to start by thanking the rapporteur , Mr Cabezón , for his cooperation , and by congratulating him on his report .
When we look at the Commission 's demographic report we have to note that , contrary to the two previous reports , the European Commission does not confine itself to the Union , but also pays attention to central and eastern European countries ; quite rightly , because a significant proportion of the people from these countries who are to become citizens of the European Union have already been born .
It is clear that up until the year 2015 , Poland and Slovakia will see a modest increase in both the total population and the working population , but it will be lower than that of the EU .
Nations such as the Czech Republic , Hungary , Romania and Bulgaria will even experience a decrease .
Low fertility rates and high death rates , along with considerable migration , are all responsible for the population remaining at a standstill , or for it falling .
Explanations for a number of related phenomena , such as child mortality in Romania , the gap between rural and urban areas and differences between the sexes are missing .
These phenomena will exert a major influence over the success or failure of enlargement .
The Group of the European People 's Party is therefore pleased that many of our amendments to this effect have been included in Mr Cabezón 's motion for a resolution .
A second innovation in this report is the interest devoted to the interregional dimension .
It concerns relevant social and economic indicators of remarkable variances between regions or of differences between the Member States .
In countries such as Belgium , Germany , Italy and Spain the intranational differences are not without significance .
Population growth is irregular , but in many regions appears to be evaporating towards the year 2015 .
Ageing will be responsible for an increasing divergence in age structure towards 2015 .
The fall in the population of working age will start as early as 2000 in certain regions , and in others not until after 2010 .
This will lead to a decrease in the labour force , and to an increasing desire for geographic mobility .
The working population will age almost everywhere , but not at the same time , and not gradually .
This will in any case lead to a distinct need for permanent education , and the continuous training of largely elderly workers .
I note that my proposals regarding research into the labour market , the promotion of mobility , cross-border vocational training and so on , have all been accepted .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I believe a few additional themes were to be discussed here , but there is insufficient time .
I would like to draw the rapporteur 's attention to one further amendment I submitted concerning recital U. But all in all we are pleased with this report , and I would like to congratulate the rapporteur once more .
Mr President , I would like to put on record my thanks to the rapporteur for a brilliant report and also to the draftsperson from the Committee on Women 's Rights for her input .
The question of the changes which will take place over the next few years concerning the age profile in the European Union and the effect that will have is something which is concentrating all of our minds , not only because of the purely economic aspects - how we can pay the old age pension for people who are over 65 years of age , how we can have a new breed of workers entering the labour market to ensure that they pay enough social security etcetera - but there is also the great question of how we care for those who are elderly .
My colleague , Mr McMahon , has already pointed out that because of better health care and because of longevity the number of people over 75 years of age living within the European Union requiring more personal care and attention has risen .
I would ask the rapporteur , if possible , to take on board an idea which I put forward in this House two years ago and am still trying to get support for , which is a charter of carers ' rights .
They are a new breed of people who are mainly women , caring for elderly and disabled relatives on a continuous basis with no recognition for the work which they put in ; with no recognition of the savings which they make for the community in which they live ; with no recognition of the contribution they are making to social solidarity by maintaining people within the home as much as possible .
On top of that we have the question of how our policies of today are going to cope in 10 to 15 years ' time , when this population gets older .
Will we have to reverse our decision on a shorter working week ?
Will we have to reverse our decisions with regard to making people retire earlier from work ?
These are questions that Members have already touched on .
Finally , there is the question of rural depopulation .
We have now ended up with a scenario whereby in vast areas of the European Union there are populations where the average age is 50 to 56 because young people have left , migrating to larger urban areas .
This is having a huge knock-on effect .
Members should remember this when we are voting on the budget this year for the Cork Declaration to ensure we can encourage industry and people to come back to rural areas .
Madam President , Madam Commissioner , the rapporteur cooperated well with this Parliament and has taken on board the most important issues from all groups . We have an inclusive report before us , and I hope the European Commission will take serious note of it .
Last year I had the pleasure of being rapporteur on a similar subject , and I think it is terribly important that we continue to draw attention to this issue .
The world population is not decreasing , but what we have to note is that , demographically speaking , Europe 's importance in the world is diminishing .
In addition , it has already been noted by other speakers that we are ageing and that the number of young people is decreasing .
How should we deal with this ?
I do not think we should invoke woe upon ourselves ; instead , we should modernize .
I will mention a few examples .
Modernizing care for the elderly can save a great deal of money .
The demographic data and studies indicate that as the population 's age is shifting , so too are the costs .
People who get older do not necessarily require more care .
There is also a tremendous potential amongst these elderly people which we could use on all sides .
This brings me to another point , namely the labour market .
We have had a long tradition of retiring at an increasingly earlier age , and it is highly debatable whether we should not move towards making the retirement age more flexible in those places where we are living longer , and whether we should incorporate this into our annual report on employment , for instance .
The same goes for pensions .
If we are prepared to look together for creative solutions , then it might well be very possible to keep pensions affordable throughout Europe .
However , we cannot walk away from the facts ; we will have to incorporate them .
That is why I believe that the demographic data should be included in the annual report on employment , and that the solutions which are created for the Member States should continue to be discussed in the form of benchmarking .
For the rest , the report contains a number of excellent recommendations .
I think that we will go along with the rapporteur 's recommendations in the way in which we vote .
Mr President , Commissioner , Europe 's hair is fast turning silver-grey , as we can see .
Mr Cabezón Alonso quite rightly draws attention in his splendid report to the fact that an ageing European population requires a change in the way the labour market operates , to meet the needs of older people more adequately .
In the coming years employers will have to radically alter their attitude towards the elderly and the ageing .
At a time when the young are not coming into the job market in quite the way they did before , it is necessary to start paying attention to the work skills and fitness of older employees in a whole new manner .
It is especially important to try to maintain levels of fitness for work in a preventive way , and not wait until illness or injury has occurred .
The varying strengths and weaknesses of people at different ages should be part of the equation when work is being planned .
Good planning does not merely mean good ergonomics , but also work organization , for example , planning working hours - working time - so that it fits in with the needs of the older person .
In Finland we have developed the notion of " age management ' , which means taking age differences in the staff into account when managing work .
Nowadays fitness for work is becoming more and more a matter of psychological well-being and feeling happy at work .
This requires job development , so that older staff can see that their skills are valued , can be enrolled in further training programmes , and can have a say in their working environment .
It is vital that they are kept up to date with changes in their role , and that their opinion is heard .
Obviously , older workers also need training .
We must be particularly on the look-out to see that new technology in the workplace will not displace older staff .
They will learn to use the new technology too as long as hands-on training is provided for them .
Whereas computers are something every young person is familiar with from childhood , older people often have prejudices about them and underrate their ability to use them .
The knowledge and experience that older workers have can be a priceless resource for companies .
Applying age management to a job , which entails taking heed of the individual needs of all staff , means a job that will benefit all , and not just older workers .
Productivity and efficiency are also at their best in such cases .
Unfortunately , Mr Crowley is not here , but I could tell him about the Finnish family care compensation scheme , which makes it possible to get compensation while at home caring for someone in his / her family .
Mr President , I would also like to congratulate the rapporteur on his report which raises many important aspects of what we should think about and how we should act when we analyse the population development in the period up to 2015 .
We know that the number of elderly is going to increase , and that the working population is going to decline , which means that there are going to be great strains on our social welfare system .
We must , of course , be very creative when we try to reduce costs . I agree with much of what my Finnish colleague said in this respect .
I would like to point out some things which we must especially consider when we design these new systems , including social security .
Those who have borne responsibility for the family , those who have cared for children and the elderly , should not be punished through poorer social benefits .
Instead , we should consider doing what a number of countries have already done , which is to include housework as pensionable work .
Mr President , " most of the countries of Europe are in the process of committing suicide without even knowing it , because of demographics ' .
These are strong words , a quotation from our former Prime Minister , Michel Rocard , at the time of the first Conference on the Family in France , in 1981 .
We are in the process of realizing this , as can be seen from the work of the Commission and that of a number of colleagues over the years , including the reports we have in front of us today .
I would like to go further in encouraging this realization .
I do not believe in the inevitability of such a substantial demographic decline or in the inevitable ageing of the European population .
I do not say this without reason but because I have met an enormous number of women , couples and young people in the lead-up to the Cairo and Beijing Conferences .
Mrs Gisserot , in her well-researched report regarding the situation of women in France prior to the Beijing Conference , which you are aware of , Madam Commissioner , notes with scientific honesty that French women and couples - and I think it is the same in other countries - demonstrate a greater desire than is reflected in reality to have a child , in particular a third child .
It seems that there is a real desire there which is becoming apparent and which is perhaps something new .
Of course , policies must never be imposed in either a pro or an anti-procreation direction , and this is not at all my intention , but I do believe that there is a serious responsibility to make citizens ' choices possible , in particular when it concerns a desire such as this .
There have been indications from a number of my colleagues , which are perhaps not sufficiently highlighted in your report , Mr Cabezón Alonso , but which are present in your text , Mrs Daskalaki , as well as in the previous speech , which take up what was very clearly stated by a number of experts , including economists , at the International Conference in Beijing , and in particular at the World Summit for Social Development in Copenhagen .
We need to rediscover the meaning of the importance of children and the family once more , including their importance on an economic level .
Children are the wealth of a nation , in terms of their value , their love of life , their culture , their ideals , but also in terms of their economic value to a country .
Perhaps this has been somewhat forgotten .
" The only wealth is mankind ' , as Jean Bodin said .
We are rightly tied to the European social model , even though social policies in all of our countries cost a great deal of money .
But is it not time , whilst totally respecting the choice of couples and families - let me repeat that I am in no way in favour of any kind of pressure - to realize that a family policy would be infinitely more economic from all points of view and that we would avoid a great deal of social expenditure further down the line ?
Real consideration must be given to the unpaid work a mother does .
Mothers have always worked .
We must not set those who work against those who do not work - I do not like these expressions .
Up until the advent of urbanization women had always worked , in the fields , in crafts , but alongside bringing up their children .
This was done at the same place , at the same time .
Today we are faced with different challenges .
We must weigh them up , but I believe that some creativity is possible so that Europe can once again find vitality on all levels . That would mean that Europe would also become more generous , more capable - why not - of making not only material aid available to the developing world but also young people , young men and women willing to go for a period of their life , to offer the skills they have acquired in their own country .
I believe it is possible to find the meaning of a more generous Europe once again .
Mrs Scillier , I was really afraid that , by allowing Mr McMahon to exceed his time , there would be a problem .
Now , we are all suffering ! .
Mr President , every year Parliament receives a report on the demographic situation in the Union .
It is right and proper that population development should be a matter for constant observation , since the policy directions of the future depend on the recognition of current population trends .
Not for the first time , the report points to the gradual increase in the percentage of elderly people in our population . The measures proposed to counter this trend are well known .
We also know that the pension and health systems need to be adapted accordingly .
At the same time , however , we know that the decreasing number of contributors , the increase in expenditure on public health systems and the tightening of budgets in response to the convergence criteria are difficult to reconcile .
But the longer these problems remain unsolved , the more difficult they become and , above all , the more difficult they are to finance .
We must ask ourselves , therefore , whether this is the right approach to finding a solution , given that the inequality between supply and demand in the regional labour markets is to be balanced by means of initiatives to facilitate migration .
My ideas are based on a model of society which places the family at the centre of things and does not therefore see the solution to diminishing birth rates in an increased influx of migrants .
Mr President , may I begin by extending my warmest thanks to the rapporteur for this demographic report 1997 , and in particular for his commitment to the social market economy , which is not something which can be taken for granted .
Mr President , with your permission I should also like to take this opportunity to wish the rapporteur , whose birthday was on Monday , belated but nonetheless many happy returns .
Reading this report , one is automatically struck by the idea that the situation of the elderly in Europe is similar to that of the small- and medium-sized businesses .
A great deal has already been acknowledged about them , much has been said , much has been demanded , but there is little to show by way of concrete results .
It seems to me that the same thing could be said of the elderly .
It is true that working age population will continue to decrease due to the slowing-down of population growth .
That will lead to , in fact it is already leading to , higher social costs .
The question of financing is a difficult one to answer .
Various solutions are being considered , none of them ideal .
The effects on the labour market remain .
Neither the elderly nor employers seem particularly keen to take up the option of a gradual transition into retirement .
A switch to voluntary work , taken in isolation at least , has also failed to provide a solution .
It is unfortunate that at times there is no demand for the elderly to pass on their experience to younger people .
Women - and here the Committee on Women 's Rights is quite right - find themselves in something of a " sandwich ' situation . First they go out to work , then they want children .
This is initially put off because they are working and then later when they are looking after their own children , they also find themselves busy with other caring responsibilities , and so it goes on . This raises the question of the compatibility of domestic responsibilities and professional activities for men and women .
We need simply to ensure that in future family work is more highly valued . To date only two steps have been taken in this direction , whichever countries one looks at .
One is child care and the other is child care leave . We will have to continue down one or other of these routes sooner or later if we do not want to see social policy floundering in the European market economy .

Mr President , I would like to begin by thanking Mr Cabezón Alonso who accepted practically all our amendments in the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs . This should mean that tomorrow there will be no problems in approving his report .
As he rightly pointed out at the beginning of his speech , within 30 years more than 50 % of the population will be over 60 years old , while there will be a constant reduction in the number of young people . This will have worrying effects on social spending on the elderly , as well as on the role the elderly play .
After retirement , the role that the elderly play in society must be very important .
In a " Senior Citizens ' Parliament ' held in Luxembourg , one of the main concerns was that their knowledge and experience was not given sufficient recognition and that the community should exploit this experience and learning for the benefit of society .
This demographic change will also affect women , firstly , since we tend to think - and we often hear this in the House - that women should continue to take care of elderly people , dependents and non-dependents , as well as children in the home .
Naturally , the alternative - as has been stated many times in Parliament , and particularly in the Committee on Women 's Rights - would be to share the workload in and outside the house .
This would be better for the whole of society .
Women have longer life expectancy and earn the lowest wages ; widows only receive a partial pension ; elderly women usually have lower pensions . This is an additional problem which must be considered .
In conclusion , Mr President , I agree with some of the points set out in the Cabezón Alonso report , and I would like to mention three of them .
Firstly , real social cohesion should also involve further convergence . We concern ourselves too much with the indices of economic convergence , and not enough with the indices of social convergence .
The rapporteur recognizes this in one of his paragraphs .
Secondly , I share the rapporteur 's concern because in Europe many early retirements do not involve replacement contractual arrangements , and I can say this as someone who lives in a region , Asturias , which has lost more than 12 000 direct jobs without any hope of these jobs being filled again by young people .
Thirdly , one of the fundamental aspects of facing up to demographic changes is the definitive and constant creation of employment ; without sufficient jobs and without contributions , there will be little chance of meeting the social spending requirements that this demographic change will entail .
Mr President , it has already been said that there has been a tremendous increase in the number of very elderly people in the European Union , with a reduction in the working population and an even greater reduction in the number of young people under 20 .
All this means , among other things , that we have a time bomb in our social security systems .
Fewer and fewer working people are supporting more and more pensioners .
What must we do ?
I would like to discuss three key issues .
First , we must move towards a liberalized social security system .
There must be increased participation of the private sector , increased personal responsibility of the insured person for the amount of their pension , and increased capitalization of the current system of redistribution among the generations , which , under today 's conditions , does not seem to be a very efficient solution .
Second , concerted measures need to be taken to combat unemployment among the young , since only in this way will we have an increasing number of insured people .
How can this happen ?
It can happen through measures to promote flexibility in the labour market , measures to promote professional training and retraining and measures to encourage entrepreneurship among the young .
Third , we must at the same time promote a policy to increase the birthrate .
This must be done at two levels . Firstly as regards attitude , and perhaps here we need a large promotional campaign in all Member States of the European Union , and secondly in terms of basic financial assistance .
This problem is very serious and a national crusade may be needed in all Member States .
I promise on my part that in future I personally will do what I can to help find a solution to the demographic problem .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , may I say how pleased I am that this important issue is being discussed .
I would particularly like to thank the rapporteur , Mr Cabezón Alonso , for his excellent work .
This year 's report on the demographic situation of the Union concentrates on three specific areas of action : the labour market , regional disparities and the challenges faced by the candidates for accession .
Let me first of all reiterate what the report says with regard to the problem of the labour market .
In ten years ' time , the babyboom generation will have reached retirement age .
From then on , the size of the active population will show a steady decline and we will witness a rapid growth in the number of older workers .
We are able to plan for this and we should do so .
In particular , we must adopt new approaches to issues relating to this link between age and the job market .
We must fight against all discriminatory practices which are based on age and encourage companies to take greater account of the consequences of these demographic tendencies .
We must adopt new approaches to the way in which work is organized , with the aim of improving the employability , productivity and motivation of older workers .
It is precisely our inability to take into account the age dimension in our concept of jobs and the work place that has led to the growing tendency to lay off older workers in recent years .
Defining an active strategy on the issue of ageing assumes , as an essential component , a greater awareness and the promotion of better practice in this area .
However , policies which aim at maintaining the incorporation of ageing workers into the job market cannot be successful if the qualifications and skills of these people are not adapted to the demands of employers ' requirements for workers .
We must put adequate policies in place to improve the employability of the ageing labour force .
For this , life-long learning structures in order to guarantee each worker the possibility of adapting and updating his or her skills , according to developments in the labour market .
The issue of gender also deserves particular attention . We are all aware of the importance of this when considering demographic tendencies .
The report reveals that , over the next fifteen years , women will become the most important source of growth in labour supply .
The integration of this aspect into both general and specific policies must be strengthened .
The perspective of women 's growing participation in the labour market also raises the question of the reconciliation of family and professional life .
Despite the progress made in recent years , for many women the birth of a child leads to a cessation of work outside the home or , in certain cases , to alternative part-time employment .
For different reasons , as much to do with the availability of child care services as cultural factors , this change is sometimes a permanent one .
All over Europe , there is significant progress in women 's sharing of bread-winning responsibilities in the home .
However , there are few signs that men are progressively taking their share of family responsibilities .
Consequently , there is a risk that the ageing of society could increase the care burden on women in terms of looking after dependants , and this , in turn , could impose constraints on their increasing presence in economic and social life .
In its second part , the report concentrates on the regional dimension .
It shows that the impact of demographic changes varies considerably from one region to another .
The risk of regional polarization is an important challenge for the political decisionmakers .
The regional dimension of these changes could jeopardize overall performance at national , and even European level .
Finally , the report sets out the current situation in the twelve candidates for accession .
These countries also have an ageing population against a background of even greater social and economic change .
They have to face a complex and challenging set of problems , made even more difficult as a result of the sharp differences between urban and rural areas , for instance .
For the Commission and Parliament , demographic changes represent a serious challenge .
Your motion for a resolution highlights a certain number of strategic areas , including participation in the labour market , regional disparities and the development of family structures .
The Commission will go into more detail in the analysis of your resolution , although I must say that we are already working on a number of the issues raised .
I thank the rapporteur , as well as the House , for this report .
It seems that we are all moving in the same direction .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12.00 noon .
European Training Foundation
The next item is the report ( A4-0032 / 98 ) by Mrs Boogerd-Quaak , on behalf of the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs , on the proposal for a Council Regulation amending for the second time Regulation ( EEC ) No 1360 / 90 establishing a European Training Foundation ( COM ( 97 ) 0177 - C4-0261 / 97-97 / 0126 ( CNS ) ) .
Madam President , Madam Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the report on the European Training Foundation which we are discussing tonight , dovetails perfectly with the problem we discussed this morning on the basis of the Oostlander report on assistance to applicant countries in central and eastern Europe .
In this context I am convinced that the Foundation will be able to make a considerable contribution to the development of education and training programmes in the new Member States .
This is the most important political message in my report .
To my mind , the Foundation is one of the most perfect instruments within the European Union 's accession strategy , and should be utilized more .
Cooperation in the field of vocational training is of strategic importance .
Education and training in central and eastern European countries form the basis for social integration , lasting development and successful processes of economic transformation .
This way these countries will be able to quickly take over the acquis communautaire .
The external evaluation of the first three years , commissioned by the European Commission , shows that the Foundation concentrated too much on managing programmes and too little on policy advice .
This must change in the short term .
The Foundation must be given a more clearly defined role in the accession strategy on the partner countries from central and eastern Europe .
In order to achieve this , the role of the Foundation as contact centre should be strengthened by intensifying the contacts with the partner countries .
In practical terms this means that the Foundation should be involved in the implementation of the accession partnerships .
To support this view I tabled Amendments Nos 1 , 2 , 3 , 6 , 7 , and 8 , and I hope that the Commission will implement the spirit of these amendments .
At the same time I expect the Commission to clarify the situation with regard to the division of roles between the Foundation and the relevant Commission services , in particular DG XII and DG IA .
There is still a lack of clarity over the Foundation 's role in the preparatory stage of PHARE / TACIS measures in the field of vocational training .
As I have stated in my report , I believe the written contributions the Foundation is submitting at the request of the Commission to be unsatisfactory .
The Foundation and the Commission should jointly draft a job description .
General guidelines for policy as submitted by the Commission are fine as long as they are imposed unilaterally .
One of my amendments tries to restore balance on that point between the two parties .
Ladies and gentlemen , Madam Commissioner , numerous applications for partnerships in sectors such as environment , health care , telecommunication , not to mention government , are waiting to be carried out .
This is only possible if we handle the Foundation very carefully , and allow it to fulfil the role it is designed for .
That is why , in my report , I am asking the Commission to submit a report before 1 July 1998 on the financial consequences of the modified regulation on the activities of the Foundation .
This will become all the more important now that the Foundation 's activities are extended to include the MEDA countries .
Education and training plays an important part in these countries too , in areas such as the economy , the environment , and the strengthening of democracy .
Ladies and gentlemen , if we take each other seriously , and if we take the Foundation seriously then we will have to recognize the financial consequences of this seriously .
One issue which is important for me , however , is to determine the extent to which the Commission intends to adopt Parliament 's view of the Foundation now that the Council has already taken a decision on it .
I am not only referring to the amendments mentioned , but also the amendments I tabled with respect to the internal organization of the Foundation , including an improvement in the representativeness of the advisory forum and the guarantee of the Foundation 's independence .
I hope Madam Commissioner will be able to give a hopeful reply to this tonight , because , in themselves , the Council decisions did not differ all that much from what we as Parliament want , and that can be taken up very well by the European Commission .
To conclude , I would like to call on the Member States to play a more active role in the work of the Foundation .
In future I believe that the job of the national observatories could be filled by the ministries of the partner countries , so that a larger budget for investments and qualification measures for vocational training would become available .
Europe should not be the only party undertaking this responsibility as far as implementation and funding is concerned .
I thought this was a matter which might be difficult to debate , but at a mini symposium in my country which I had organized , it turned out that the Dutch Ministry of Education thought this was a view which could at least be discussed .
Mr President , I would like to join in with those who have congratulated Mrs Boogerd-Quaak .
I believe she has absorbed this important , yet technical subject well .
Along with her , I am very curious as to what the Commissioner has to say to our amendments , because this is how we discover its judgement .
I believe we should say the Foundation has had a short but successful history .
The aim of the Foundation was to help central and eastern European countries in their efforts to restructure their systems for vocational training .
In the beginning , it involved the countries which came under the PHARE programme , then the TACIS countries joined , and now the road is paved for the MEDA countries .
This programme is all the more important because , whilst the central and eastern European states are undergoing a transformation , it is the people who experience the workings of the market first .
This kind of cooperation is therefore extremely important .
It is a well known fact that education also instructs people in the way they think .
By giving them the basic elements , we can show them that the market economy is not an isolated entity , whilst at the same time sharing with them the perception that the market economy is also subject to preconditions .
In this way young people in central and eastern Europe will be able to familiarize themselves with the market economy as created in Western Europe .
The transition from a centralist economy to a market economy comes down to a question of supply and demand .
Again , establishing a new society comes down to making a choice ; a choice between the Anglo-Saxon model , the United States model , or the European model .
For a stable democracy , the social dimension , wholly imbued in the European thinking , will need to be given due emphasis .
That is why the Foundation in Turin will have to accord it due significance .
For the new managers who will become acquainted with the social dimension in particular , support within a new economic order will be important .
That is why the amendment should mention the social dimension , alongside human rights and equal opportunities , as an integral part of the package the Foundation will have to promote in Turin .
The Foundation has developed itself successfully amidst the significant problems involved in a foundation , and which are , after all , entirely typical to this community .
As rapporteur on the budget I have been able to see that the financial resources have been spent appropriately .
The fact that the Foundation is to extend its activities to include the MEDA countries is extremely sensible in this context .
It is true that the MEDA countries ' problems cannot be compared exactly with those of the PHARE and TACIS countries , but the expertise which has been built up must not be lost , and must not be confined to these countries .
That is why , Mr President , this Foundation is a very good thing , and that is why I believe we will be able to continue along the path we have taken with these amendments .
Mr President , the European Training Foundation , which has had its headquarters in Turin since 1995 , is one of the best examples of how the Community institutions can contribute towards growth in the job market through its objectives , which are both economic and social .
It seems as though the main objectives of the Foundation , which was set up only three years ago during an uneasy time in the development of the Community , are within reach and have already been partly fulfilled : to provide assistance for the beneficiary countries , to check the efficacy of assistance provided for training , to spread information and promote exchanges of experience and , finally , to encourage joint ventures aimed at providing assistance for information .
Several corrections are now requested , following an initial analysis of the work , aimed , among other things , at extending the mandate of the Foundation with a view to putting itself in a better position to involve the new Community partners , particularly the Mediterranean partners .
We therefore agree with the proposals made by the rapporteur , whom we thank for her work , which are aimed at providing greater consistency with the political priorities of the Union , and therefore fuller cooperation with CEDEFOP ( European Centre for the Development of Vocational Training ) and the resulting strengthening of the financial means , in view of the new role the Turin Foundation will hold .
Finally , we call on the Commission , which was so far-sighted and timely in setting up the Foundation at the time , to take into account the obligations to provide vocational training in view of the participation of the MEDA countries in the Mediterranean area , to improve the activities and the objectives of the Foundation .
These choices also pass through a renewal of the trust and independence granted to the Foundation and its Director and operating deadlines planned for five-year periods .
Vocational training is a fundamental means of revitalizing the entire labour market .
Mr President , I too congratulate Johanna on her very good report .
It is very appropriate that we should be discussing this tonight because tomorrow of course the conference on enlargement of the European Union begins in London and the key role of training in preparation for enlargement is very important .
I am a little sceptical sometimes of European foundations in European institutes and I have visited a few in my time .
I always like to see them properly monitored and evaluated . I am glad that this is being done in this case and I hope they respond to some of the external evaluations and the Commission evaluation .
Speaking on behalf of the Green group in particular , I would like obviously to stress the importance of training in environmental management and monitoring given the environmental problems of central and eastern European countries .
Secondly , the question of developing a civic culture for nongovernmental organizations is very important .
Specific training programmes and expertise in that area as well would help in the report .
Naturally , I too would like to congratulate and thank the rapporteur , who has accustomed us to her way of working , on a subject that has proved to be much more difficult than it at first appeared .
This is a report which has finally achieved unanimity in the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs . It is a report which , in my opinion , is accompanied by an extremely important and substantiated explanatory statement , which sheds a great deal of light on the issue .
Of course I too would like to refer to the coincidence - though I am not sure if it is sheer coincidence - that we are debating it after this morning 's debate on the prospects , realization and implementation of enlargement , and on the very eve of and just a few hours , in fact , before the official opening of the European Summit .
Please allow me , Mrs Cresson , to put these days , on which we are debating the Europe of learning , into a more general framework into which , I believe , today 's debate should go , since we are of course talking about partners of the European Union and about events surrounding the European Union .
I believe that this report succeeds in complementing , improving , correcting and adding to the work of this Foundation . The amendments do indeed complement a second generation foundation which was only created in 1995 and which , in a short time , has demonstrated the value of its creation and of its work .
I wish to refer to the viewpoint in Amendment No 2 , tabled by the rapporteur , which I believe gives a new dynamism to this Foundation , while closely linking its operation , beyond the value of professional training in practice , which is well known , to its participation in strengthening democratic institutions , " the social dimension , respect for human rights and equal opportunities ' .
I also wish to mention a special point , which the rapporteur touches on and which we have often debated in the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs : the need for cooperation with CEDEFOP , the foundation for the promotion of professional training . I believe that this is extremely important and that this cooperation may proceed even more constructively than the already constructive cooperation between the Foundation in Turin with the Foundation in Thessaloniki .
By definition , this cooperation is structural and powerful .
I also believe that , in the Europe 's progress towards a society of learning , CEDEFOP needs to make an enhanced contribution , and it is ready to do so .
The Foundation in Turin must work even more closely with CEDEFOP .
Mr President , the role of the Centre is to provide education and training as the foundation for social integration , lasting regional development and successful economic transformation .
I thank Mrs Boogerd-Quaak for her report .
It stresses the need to enhance the Foundation 's contribution to the EU 's preparations for enlargement .
The European Training Foundation can be useful as a tool in helping to implement essential partnerships and will provide the new programmes and the formal frameworks for EU aid to candidate countries .
Both independent evaluations as well as the Commission emphasize the need to enhance the Foundation 's role in providing expert vocational training assistance to partner countries .
The policy guidance role of the Foundation should be enhanced .
We need to reinforce that particular point .
The European Training Foundation must prepare adequately for covering MEDA countries .
I support the committee 's position which calls for clarity in the structures within the European Training Foundation , with three specific working groups : one for accession countries ; one for PHARE and TACIS countries ; and one for MEDA countries .
I urge Parliament to adopt the position which has been unanimously approved by the Committee on Social Affairs and Employment .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to thank the rapporteur very much for her sound report and also for the fact that it takes into account many of the proposals made by the Committee on External Economic Relations in relation to the content and organizational tasks of the Foundation and its role in establishing practical vocational training in third countries .
I would like to say clearly that the Foundation is doing good work .
The recent expansion of its vocational training activities should be welcomed .
The evaluation of the work carried out to date will lead to a much needed clarification of the status of the Foundation and its relationship with the Commission , an issue of great importance to its very committed staff , as I was able to discover for myself on the spot .
This evening , the debate has focused quite rightly on the role of modern vocational training in these countries in terms of new economic and employment structures and improved external trade relations .
In addition to capital aid , they also need to modernize their vocational training and further education systems at all levels , not only in management .
The Commission now needs to make full use of the specialist skills available at the Foundation in the preparation of accession candidates from central and eastern Europe in order to accelerate the alignment process as quickly as possible , and I also hope that in the process an effort will be made to speed up the disbursement of PHARE funds .
The experience gained by the Foundation to date must be used to the advantage of our new Mediterranean partner countries without delay and the Foundation must be given independent responsibility for certain , well-defined areas .
As far as I can see , little progress has been made as yet in terms of support measures for the MEDA programme .
It would be helpful , Madam Commissioner , if the Commission were to report to Parliament on this issue as soon as possible .
Brussels should not be allowed to overly restrict the Foundation 's field of activity .
Project-based cooperation between the Foundation and the partner countries should be more intensive .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to thank Parliament and , above all , Mrs Boogerd-Quaak of the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs , for the quality of this report , which has highlighted important new directions with regard to the work of the European Training Foundation .
As you know , the European Training Foundation was born out of the political will expressed by the heads of state and government when they met here in Strasbourg in December 1989 .
The emphasis was placed on training , an essential factor in the development of the eastern and central European countries and their adaptation to a market economy .
The Brussels European Council then decided , in October 1993 , to choose Turin as the headquarters for this Foundation .
In the context of the pre-accession strategy confirmed by the Luxembourg European Council , our eastern and central European neighbours will be increasingly included into the " Europe of knowledge ' emphasized in Agenda 2000 .
This is the European educational territory that we plan to create together with the applicant countries .
The achievements of the Foundation to date confirm its capacity to contribute to a reform of vocational training in our partner countries from eastern Europe and in the New Independent States .
In its report of 18 July 1997 to the European Parliament , the Council and the Economic and Social Committee , the Commission outlined the Foundation 's progress and its overall positive results .
The Commission 's current proposal aims to extend the scope of the Foundation to cover the Mediterranean countries in response to the conclusions of the Barcelona EuroMediterranean Conference of November 1995 , confirmed by the Madrid European Council of December of the same year .
On the basis of the Foundation 's first three years of activity , the Commission considers that it offers an exceptional institutional framework with which to enable Community experience to be made available to our Mediterranean partner countries .
In fact , it can provide a flexible response to the different needs in the area of vocational training , one which will constitute a solid basis for the socio-economic reforms of the MEDA programme .
The Commission 's current proposal also includes certain accompanying measures which are drawn from experiences gained over the course of the Foundation 's work to date .
The Council has already adopted a political agreement , on 7 October 1997 , which retains the principle outlines of the Commission 's proposal .
The Economic and Social Committee also gave a favourable opinion on 29 October 1997 and the Council should take its final decision before the end of the first half of 1998 , during the British Presidency .
I would like to thank the different Parliamentary committees which have examined this proposal for a Council Regulation and for the welcome the Commission 's text has received .
I would like to highlight the significance of , and political interest in the comments which the Commission will take great note of when implementing the modified Regulation . We would , however , not wish to take them up in the form of amendments to the Regulation .
The Commission will draw the attention of the Governing Board and the Director of the European Training Foundation to the approaches proposed by Parliament and will try to assure their follow-up on a practical level .
As regards Amendments Nos 1 to 9 concerning the political direction to be followed by the Foundation , its mission and the way it operates , I would like to underline that the points emphasized in these amendments have largely already been taken into consideration in the development of the Foundation 's modus operandi within the framework of the current regulation .
To give specific follow-up to the priorities expressed by Parliament , both in eastern Europe and the Mediterranean countries , the Commission and the Foundation intend to draw up a declaration of objectives .
This declaration will be subject to the agreement of the Foundation 's Governing Board in October 1998 and will then be forwarded to Parliament so that it can be debated by the relevant committee .
The Foundation 's work will draw its inspiration from the Community 's vocational training policies , in particular those relating to access to training and equal opportunities .
The Foundation will prioritize innovative actions and transfer of experience and good practice , in particular pilot projects set up jointly with other Member States .
As regards Amendments Nos 10 and 16 relating to the Foundation 's budgetary procedures , specific measures have already been taken in response to Parliament 's requests .
Particular emphasis will be placed on setting up close links between the Foundation 's work programme and its budget .
Between now and the autumn , the Foundation will carry out a detailed analysis of the costs of its activities .
The 1999 work programme will take into account the results of this analysis and the budgetary constraints .
The Foundation 's budget already states the number of staff employed .
With regard to Amendments Nos 14 , 15 and 17 , which deal with the way in which the Foundation operates , we consider that the Commission 's proposal already largely takes into account the amendments suggested by Parliament .
Amendment No 14 concerning the procedure for appointing a Director and the definition of his or her mandate , corresponds to existing practice .
Amendment No 15 , concerning the Foundation 's complementary nature with other Community actions , has been considered within the enhanced strategy for cooperation between the Foundation and the European Centre for the Development of Vocational Training .
Similarly , Amendment No 17 , concerning evaluation of the Foundation , corresponds to current practice .
The Commission proposes to bear in mind the doubts raised by Parliament and to report to it on the results of any future evaluation .
The Commission is not entirely convinced of the appropriateness of Amendments Nos 11 to 13 which aim to modify and reduce the composition of the Governing Board of the Foundation and to divide it into regional groupings .
On the other hand , the Commission has proposed strengthening the role of the Board through the participation of experts designated by the Commission in order to lay greater emphasis on relevant Community actions .
Although the Commission shares Parliament 's concern to see the Governing Board functioning effectively in spite of its size , we consider that the Board has already carried out fruitful work to date .
Furthermore , the exchange of views and dialogue between experts from different regions has been shown to be a valuable asset .
I hope I have demonstrated that the Commission is giving a great deal of attention to Parliament 's recommendations , and that it will draw inspiration from these recommendations when drawing up the declaration of objectives , which will be forwarded to you in October 1998 .
I am convinced that the new Council Regulation will enable the Foundation to take on new tasks within the Mediterranean region .
Mr President , I thank the Commissioner for her response , but I would like to reserve the right to have another thorough look at what exactly she said .
We now have the problem that much seems to have been promised , but a number of issues have not really been taken on board , and I wonder if the Council still ultimately has to decide whether a number of aspects can be positively incorporated .
Mrs Boogerd-Quaak , I think that Mrs Cresson has noted your comments .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12.00 noon .
Action plan and subsidies for Ukraine
The next item is the joint debate on the following reports :
A4-0059 / 98 by Mr Gary Titley , on behalf of the Committee on Foreign Affairs , Security and Defence Policy , on the communication from the Commission to the Council on an action plan for Ukraine ( COM ( 96 ) 0593 - C4-0103 / 97 ) ; -A4-0063 / 98 by Mrs Magdalene Hoff , on behalf of the Committee on Budgetary Control , on the Court of Auditors ' Special Report No 6 / 97 concerning TACIS subsidies to Ukraine ( C4-0350 / 97 ) .
Mr President , the British historian , C.V. Wedgwood , wrote in her definitive account of the Thirty Years War that in the 17th century Germany was the keystone of the arch of European politics .
I submit that in the new Europe which is evolving the keystone of the arch of European politics is now Ukraine .
And the one message I want to get across this evening more than anything else is that Ukraine is important to the continent of Europe and it is an area which we will take very seriously .
Enlargement of the European Union would give us a common border with Ukraine .
The population of Ukraine is 52 million .
It is a big state in population terms .
It is also a big state geographically .
Therefore , amongst other things , it represents a very big market .
Its agriculture made it once the bread basket of the Soviet Union and it is therefore the potential source of future wealth .
Its geographical position puts it on the border between the Black Sea , Belarus and Russia and is therefore strategically very important .
Gas and oil pipelines to the West pass through the territory of Ukraine .
The questions throughout history have been : Where does Ukraine belong ?
What is its identity ?
It has only fleetingly been independent in modern history .
It has had two periods of independence : firstly , ironically , after the Thirty Years War and , secondly , in 1918 .
Both those periods failed because Ukraine was unable to establish itself outside the sphere of Poland or Russia .
This time the government is looking for a European identity , a European reference point .
It does so , notwithstanding the fact that at least half its population believes that its future is linked with Russia .
Therein lies the challenge for Europe .
We must provide Ukraine with the opportunity of building a bridge to the West should Ukraine wish to have such a bridge .
We must do so without unnecessarily antagonizing Russia and without causing a reaction among the population of Ukraine .
That is why the Commission in its action plan makes the point that one of its objectives is to give a signal of strength and political support to Ukraine and it is doing that at the request of the Ukrainian government .
It has to be said that the rest of the action plan contains nothing new .
Rather , it is concentrating on deepening and widening existing contacts with Ukraine and developing greater synergy between the action of the EU and its Member States in Ukraine .
Clearly the European Union has already done a great deal in this area .
Since independence , technical and financial assistance amounts to something like US $ 4.6 billion and that is compared to the United States ' assistance of some US $ 2.18 billion .
We now have a partnership and cooperation agreement with Ukraine which has recently been ratified .
As an aside , the European Union must get to grips with the question of ratifying these important agreements .
It takes far too long for Member States to do so .
We have also set out previously an overall strategy for support for the transition process in Ukraine .
As the Commission points out in its action plan , Ukraine has made a lot of progress since independence .
Politically , progress towards democracy has been very real , as we have seen through the admission of Ukraine to the Council of Europe .
Economically , after an extremely slow start , we are now beginning to see progress in macroeconomic stabilization policy , progress with administrative reform , tax reform and privatization .
We have seen in Ukraine the consolidation of independence and its ability to resist the fragmentary pressures which we have seen elsewhere but which nonetheless , as recent events show , remain very real .
In foreign policy Ukraine has emerged , as the Commissioner says , as an element of stability in the region .
It has pursued a policy of nuclear disarmament .
It has adhered to a policy of preventative diplomacy , participating in I-FOR and SFOR , an international police task force .
It is also participating in the UN force in eastern Slavonia .
It has pursued a policy of conciliation towards Russia and a policy of rapprochement towards the West , signing the charter for a distinctive partnership between NATO and Ukraine , and recently refusing to supply turbines to Iran 's nuclear power project .
But weaknesses remain , without a doubt .
As the Commission has indicated , Ukraine is at a crossing on the river . Unfortunately , during the time of my report 's production that crossing is getting ever wider .
More work needs to be done on the consolidation of democracy .
We look forward to the elections at the end of this month to reinforce the consolidation of democracy in Ukraine .
But the real challenge remains in economic transformation where progress , quite frankly , has been much too slow .
For Ukraine to make a decisive step forward it has to offer a more inviting environment to foreign direct investment , and failure to get to grips with economic reform is undermining that process , as we have seen from recent statements by the Americans .
In agriculture we need to step up reform .
Only 7 % of land in Ukraine is in private hands , not least because the sale of land remains technically illegal in Ukraine .
That means that farmers are often in the hands of private trading companies who charge excessive prices for their services .
We still have a state monopoly control of storage and distribution which maintains very high prices .
There are enormous problems in the energy sector reinforced by the fact that Gasprom has recently presented Ukraine with a US $ 900 million bill , which represents in excess of 40 % of Ukraine 's foreign resources .
The EU must , therefore , continue to support the reform of the economy .
We must continue to support the transformation of society , particularly legislative and administrative reforms .
We must continue to associate Ukraine with the European security framework .
Tomorrow 's launch of the European Conference represents another opportunity for us to offer the hand of friendship to Ukraine because we could offer it a future role as observers or associated partners in the European Conference .
Indeed we could offer it a role in the Petersburg Task to be pursued by the Western European Union following ratification of the Amsterdam Treaty .
We must deepen our existing contractual relations .
Ukraine is important to the continent .
The European Union has a major role to play in the stability of Ukraine and its future .
Let us not miss that opportunity .
Let us deepen our relationships .
Let us move forward towards a new future , a new relationship between the European Union and Ukraine .
Mr President , Madam Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , first of all I shall say a few words on behalf of Mrs Magdalene Hoff who unfortunately cannot be here this evening .
She is in London and sends her apologies for her absence . I am sure you will excuse her .
On 15 May 1997 , the Court of Auditors presented to the European Parliament its Special Report concerning TACIS subsidies for Ukraine .
If we look at the application of the programme in Ukraine during the period 1991 to 1996 , we can see that of the total earmarked budgetary resources of ECU 342.62 million , only 37.5 % were paid out .
If we go on to examine the programme within the framework of nuclear safety , the sum disbursed is only 25 % .
However , it does look as if the disbursement of resources for 1997 will be considerably better .
The reasons for this poor implementation of the programme lie partly with Ukraine itself , but also partly with the Commission .
For example , the Court of Auditors claims that in all the Commission offices involved , in the national offices , and in particular at the Commission 's delegation in Kiev , personnel resources are inadequate and unstable .
It also criticizes the distribution of resources to a large number of relatively small projects resulting in increased bureaucracy .
Furthermore , it complains that in the assessment of strategies and priorities , the Commission and the Ukraine recipients are not using the same criteria .
The coordination and division of responsibilities between the Commission on the one hand , and foreign aid organizations and Ukrainian partner organizations on the other , also leave much to be desired .
Of all the Court of Auditors ' recent reports , none has made such a lasting impression as the Special Report on TACIS subsidies for Ukraine .
I should like to say a few brief words on behalf of Mrs Magdalene Hoff about the sections relating to nuclear safety as well . The Court of Auditors report reveals that the greatest weakness in the TACIS programme for Ukraine lies in the area of nuclear safety .
Some of the accusations are shocking : unpaid wages , unauthorised absences from duty , missing spare parts and the neglect of day-to-day maintenance .
The situation becomes dangerous when , for reasons of political sensibility , information on nuclear energy and Ukraine 's energy policy are withheld and , as a result , experts form diverging opinions .
The Commission claims that it is hardly able to have even a small degree of influence on the country 's technical developments .
The conclusions to be drawn from this situation are unambiguous .
The Commission needs a clear strategic vision of what it wants to achieve .
It also needs the necessary technical , financial and administrative preconditions and a programme which can be implemented by an appropriate project manager on the basis of technical rather than political criteria .
In the view of the rapporteur , Mrs Magdalene Hoff , the nuclear situation and safety are so important that the Union must continue to allocate considerable budgetary resources to them .
In general terms , the Court of Auditors report concludes that the delays and inefficiency revealed , in conjunction with frequent differences of opinion on methods and priorities , led to spending that was not commensurate with actual requirements and to the formulation of plans which could not then be realized to maximum effect .
It should , however , be noted that the Commission itself does not escape criticism .
Its office in Kiev is hopelessly understaffed and as a result unable to assume a major role in the implementation of the programme or project development .
All this has far-reaching political consequences .
In terms of Ukraine , at least , TACIS is failing to provide in the transition process the assistance originally intended by the budgetary authorities . This is particularly true in Ukraine , where there is still so much ground to be covered in the difficult and much needed programme of political and economic reforms , and with its help , the European Union should be striving to achieve the greatest possible level of effectiveness .
Mr President , firstly I should like to deal with Gary Titley 's report on behalf of the Committee on External Economic Relations , then I should like to move on to Magdalene Hoff 's report .
The most important issues before us at the moment - and Mr Gary Titley has drawn up an excellent report to which we shall be able to refer again in the future - are the three elements covered by the action plan .
Firstly , the action plan advocates the strengthening of the support provided by the European Community .
The second element in the action plan is the further development of existing reforms of Community aid .
Thirdly - and most importantly of all - it highlights synergies between , on the one hand , the individual programmes and treaties and on the other hand , to an increasing extent , the measures implemented by the European Union , the measures implemented in Ukraine by the Member States and the measures implemented in Ukraine by third countries .
This means that there should be far more cooperation , both between the European Union and its Member States and between the European Union and third countries .
As Gary Titley has indicated , the action plan is not a new tool , it is not a new programme . It is instead a package of initiatives and represents a coherent tool and a coherent concept in its own right .
Nonetheless , it does have some failings .
These failings lie in the fact that it contains no vision .
It has no strategy , it has no underlying structure beyond being an enumeration of the various programmes and initiatives already undertaken .
It does not show the logic of a pan-European policy in relation to the countries of central and eastern Europe .
It does not go any further than our present enlargement plan .
It does not indicate what will come after that , what will follow the first phase of enlargement , what will follow the second phase of enlargement or what will happen once we have new borders . Nor does it indicate what will happen if Ukraine and Poland suddenly clash and Ukraine finds itself in a situation in which the borders have changed completely and in which we seek to apply our border policy to Poland .
This situation has already arisen .
What happens if the centres of power in central and eastern Europe suddenly shift ?
At the moment we have no response .
We have no outline of a pan-European economic and trade policy .
We have hinted that we intend to set up free trade zones .
When will we start the negotiations for them ?
Do we already have a plan to work with ?
We advocate the inclusion of Ukraine in the WTO , naturally .
But what are we doing in terms of preparation ?
And what are we doing about letting Ukraine join the European Conference ?
We know that it has applied for observer status .
Where does the Commission stand on this ? What are its views ?
What we need is a realistic and effective energy policy , a concept which goes beyond the closure of Chernobyl .
I have just read the new aide mémoire submitted by the Mr van den Broek 's office ; it is excellent .
Nothing it says is wrong ; but it does not say anything about energy policy , or anything about energy policy in the field of nuclear safety in Ukraine .
All it refers to is what we are already doing .
It does not say anything about the future , what the new strategies are to be , what the new development trends are .
That is what we need .
What I would really like is for us in this House to arrive at a new assessment which goes far beyond what we have on offer today .
Mr President , as a member of the Delegation for relations with Ukraine , I would also like to thank the rapporteur for his excellent report , and to focus particularly on one point , point 23 , in which he urges us explicitly to pay greater attention to the particular conditions of the process of economic transformation in Ukraine .
Ladies and gentlemen , Mr President , Madam Commissioner , as Western Europeans we should not lose sight of the fact that what we are dealing with here is a unique - certainly a first and perhaps even unique - transformation process which has a dimension different from any that we in Western Europe have hitherto experienced .
This is the first time that a process of this type has taken place and none of us can predict or define it with certainty because we are experiencing it for the first time .
Since experts estimate that the national economy of Ukraine is characterized by the existence of a black economy accounting for at least 30 % , and probably even as much as 40 % of commercial activity , the question arises as to how we can move peacefully and sensibly towards its successful conversion - and its success is imperative - into a legally operating social market economy .
We do not know either exactly how to proceed .
After several visits there I feel I may suggest that on no account can it be a speedy procedure .
We need patience and our priority must be to ensure that any development is lasting and stable .
To follow on , I would like to say something about the problem of Mrs Hoff 's report , in other words , the problem concerning TACIS .
Once again the agricultural sector is involved .
I have had the opportunity to visit with other colleagues several TACIS farming projects in Ukraine .
It is true - and I should like to highlight this specifically in the interests of those people who are the ultimate beneficiaries in Ukraine - that , for the reasons already mentioned , the start-up phase was so lengthy that now there is quite simply no longer the time required to implement the projects in a sensible and lasting way , particularly in the case of farming projects .
At this point I should like to sound an urgent warning . Farming projects at least must be extended and constantly promoted or they will never reap any significant benefits .
I should also like to say something about the manner in which some projects - naturally not all of them - are structured .
We were somewhat disconcerted by the fact that in a region like Ukraine where businesses have operated on a large scale for three quarters of a century , emphasis was being placed specifically and almost exclusively on the setting up of one-man businesses with twenty stalls for pig fattening .
Ladies and gentlemen , Mr President , Madam Commissioner , it is my belief that we would be ill-advised to continue solely with such projects .
Undoubtedly it makes sense to promote other projects which are better suited to the prevailing conditions in Ukraine .
I should like to emphasize this point once again .
Mr President , Madam Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , anyone who wants a preventive and stabilizing policy in and for Europe must give their full support to the action plan for Ukraine , to Mr Titley 's clear and intelligent report and to the opinions of the committees .
The current situation in Ukraine remains complex .
It is an impressive political achievement that the Partnership and Cooperation Agreement signed between Russia and Ukraine in May 1997 succeeded in ending or easing years of continuous tensions .
This provided Ukraine with better conditions in which to make its contribution towards stabilization in a large and very sensitive region .
In contrast to this , there are still a number of continuing internal political difficulties to be resolved .
Although the tensions caused by the ethnic composition of the population have eased , they are still very much in evidence .
There are still massive secessionist movements in the Crimea .
Cooperation with the European Union is a natural desire in the west of the country , but a topic rarely discussed in the east .
Economic reforms need to be implemented more consistently than has been the case to date .
The pace of reforms must be accelerated , not only in the economy , but also in relation to administration , legislation and the legal system .
It is undoubtedly due to the balanced and rigorous policies favoured by President Kuchma it has been possible to maintain a balance in this difficult situation and that it was even possible to make some gains in terms of external policy .
It is also a result achieved in part by the people of Ukraine , a result which bears witness to their ability to improvise , but also , let me be blunt , to their ability to endure suffering .
In a few days , on 29 March , the people of Ukraine go to the polls once again .
This will lend our opinion greater topicality and greater weight .
Aid was and still is urgently needed ; it should be given in the simplest manner possible .
The aid proposed in the action plan can be structured more efficiently .
But this aid should also be provided quickly .
The current procedures raise several questions in this regard .
It took the Commission only two days to submit the plan to the Council and to inform Parliament .
The Council needed only two weeks to confirm the plan but it took almost four months from the date on which the plan was sent to Parliament for the President to announce that the committees were addressing it .
We have squandered a little too much time but the task can still be accomplished punctually .
Mr President , first of all I would like to thank the rapporteur , not only for his report as a whole , but also for his contributions today in which he has so clearly highlighted Ukraine 's great significance for the economic and political stability of the whole of Europe .
It is for this reason that we must be prepared to give aid to Ukraine , despite the fact that there are serious problems there as Mrs Hoff 's report has shown , and that we also have problems of our own here in the European Union .
In this context , I think it is very important to look in greater detail at two of the points made in the report .
The first point concerns the death penalty in Ukraine .
I find it unacceptable that Ukraine signed the Convention on Human Rights , indeed that it promised to abolish the death penalty and that despite this , as the report clearly shows , 13 death sentences were carried out last year .
It is simply a situation which we should not accept .
We are judging Ukraine by different standards too simply because it wants to look European .
This point is also particularly important because we are currently witnessing a renaissance of the death penalty in many countries in eastern Europe where there is political pressure either to retain the death penalty , or to reintroduce it for certain cases .
It is important that we bring the European Union 's role in setting standards to bear in our dealings with Ukraine .
My second point relates to the energy policy .
I am convinced , as point 18 of Mr Titley 's report states , that we must help to make Chernobyl reasonably safe .
But I am quite adamantly against point 19 because it is simply an attempt to replace one evil by another , that is , to close Chernobyl but to build new nuclear power stations .
That is completely the wrong route and in my view it is a waste of every ECU invested in this misguided energy policy .
I hope that the amendments which have been tabled on this point will prove successful in tomorrow morning 's vote .
Mr President , it is reassuring to note that the Commission and the rapporteur affirm their desire to put an end to the " East-West ' division of our continent , whilst taking care not to place the former Iron Curtain a little further to the east .
Mr Titley 's report , however , calls for several reservations .
Firstly , I deplore the obstinacy of the majority of politicians in Western Europe to acknowledge the expressed desire of many central and eastern European countries to join NATO .
When will we understand that it is in the interests of all Europeans that our military defence should no longer rely on the President of the United States of America ?
Secondly , the obligation imposed on Ukraine to abolish the death penalty leaves me baffled when we know that in Belgium , for example , capital punishment - recently removed from the penal code - can still be used on innocent children by monsters like Dutroux .
One final remark seems necessary .
Ukraine belongs to the Commonwealth of Independent States , which celebrated its sixth anniversary last week in Minsk , the capital of Belarus , and I was honoured to be invited to participate .
Since the creation of the CIS , the twelve member countries have largely contented themselves with declarations of intention , in spite of constructive proposals on the part of the Belorussian President , Alexandre Loubachenko , and evident good will on the part of the participating states .
Ukraine 's commendable intention to close the Chernobyl power station quite obviously deserves international and , in particular , European aid , but that must not allow us to forget the suffering of the Belorussian people since the terrible accident at the Ukrainian power station .
I consider it imperative that the inter-parliamentary dialogue , unjustifiably broken with Belarus , should be resumed again as soon as possible alongside , and in harmony with , the good relations we fortunately enjoy with Ukraine .
Mr President , the inappropriate use of European grant aid is doubly damaging , firstly for those in receipt of it , and secondly for those who are providing it .
In the case of the several hundreds of millions of ECU of TACIS resources for Ukraine referred to in the Hoff report , the damage is crucial .
In Ukraine , the objectives which are to be achieved with the help of European aid are not being achieved .
Much of what was planned , and is essential , remains undone .
For a significant part of the TACIS programme for Ukraine , namely the issue of nuclear safety , the gap between the " near ' standstill in nuclear safety mentioned in the report and a " near ' catastrophe is not too wide .
As for the European citizens whose money is being inappropriately spent here , they are justifiably displeased with the situation .
As a result Europe is losing credibility .
What are the failings which are listed so clearly and so impressively - unfortunately in the negative sense of the word - in the Hoff report ?
What can , and must , be done to change things quickly ?
Apart from the failings related to the recipient country , the rest of the catalogue of failings unfortunately reads exactly like the catalogue of failings for which the European institutions , and above all the Commission , have been reproached in other contexts on the same subject of grant aid for many years . These include a lack of clear decision-making procedures , excessive scattering of resources across a range of small projects , excessive and technically counterproductive efforts to involve local partners , a lack of technical expertise within the Commission except in relation to the process itself , administrative overloading of the project manager , time-consuming bureaucratic procedures and , as we have already heard today , a lack of any proper European concept for a nuclear safety policy .
What do we have to do in order to remedy this situation ?
SEM 2000 is one of the new slogans of the moment . It stands for sound and efficient management .
Less is more . It advocates a few clear goals with short implementation timespans , a sensible personnel structure , well managed and motivated staff , good coordination with all partners involved .
SEM - " sound and effective management ' - yes please ! But not starting in the year 2000 , starting now so that the two programmes which the European Union is offering to our neighbours in eastern Europe and beyond , TACIS and PHARE , can contribute to positive developments both in the immediate European vicinity and further afield , and so that the process of European integration can become a process which we will be able to regard with confidence in the years to come rather than having from the outset to worry about damage limitation .
Mr President , Mr Titley 's report gives a good picture of relations between Ukraine and the EU , for which I sincerely thank him .
The Commission issued a communiqué on the subject some eighteen months ago , and so it was high time Parliament dealt with it .
Many thanks too to Mrs Hoff for her report .
Ukraine is a large country which is an important partner for the EU and , owing to her geographical situation , a major crossroads in Europe .
One problem is that Ukraine has nuclear power plants in poor condition .
The accident at Chernobyl was the world 's largest single catastrophe of the decade .
The big question on the agenda is how to improve nuclear safety .
Merely to demand that Ukraine should shut down its nuclear power plants cannot be the only political line to adopt .
Ukraine sorely needs all her energy supplies , whatever the means of production .
That is why the aim repeatedly mentioned in the report to diversify energy production is important and relevant .
But we must approve their interim goal of completing the two plants which are almost ready , Khmelnitski 2 and Rovno 4 , while the run-down plants at Chernobyl could be closed down as soon as possible .
This , which was mentioned both by the Commission and Mr Titley , should be done immediately .
With these remarks I am prepared to give my support to the report .
Mr President , Madam Commissioner , would you please tell your colleagues in the Commission , in particular Mr van den Broek , that there will be no respite for the Commission in April , and that one of the reasons for this is Mrs Hoff 's report which we are discussing today .
I should like to make it quite clear to them that personally I am more involved in Bosnia .
But TACIS in Ukraine is not the only problem .
Reconstruction in Bosnia is not the only problem .
The underspending of PHARE appropriations is not the only problem . In fact , the main problem is GD Ia and the Commission 's complete inability to deal with the constraints of time .
Allow me to quote from Mrs Hoff 's report , " ... motivation is at a low ebb in GD Ia ' .
I could say the same thing about Bosnia when I see how my colleagues are working in Sarajevo .
There is no strategic vision .
The same is true of Bosnia !
The Commission has a hopelessly unrealistic approach to the problems of Ukraine . I can only agree !
And not only on that point , but also on may other aspects of external policy for which Mr van den Broek is responsible .
I want to tell you what the consequences are .
It is damaging not only to the reputation of the European Union ; it is damaging in terms of both nuclear safety in Ukraine and reconstruction in Bosnia .
But much worse , it is damaging in very concrete terms to the people on the spot who are hoping for our help and who are expecting specific and effective help .
Please , Madam Commissioner , would you be so kind as to ask Mr van den Broek to tell this House when and how he intends to accept responsibility , without making the excuse that the Council of Minsters also has a certain level of responsibility to bear , just like any other project partner anywhere else in the world !
That is certainly the case , but ultimately he is responsible .
Mrs Müller , we said that we would be understanding , but you have doubled your allotted time . I cannot allow you any more time , unfortunately .
What can we do ?
As I have said , the political groups should not allocate a time of one minute .
And they allocate one minute !
I confess that I am ashamed to interrupt a speaker after one minute .
But from now on , I cannot unfortunately give you double time .
Please tell your groups to allocate sufficient time to their speakers .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , perhaps I can pick up where Mr Müller left off .
It really is a very interesting story . Today we have heard in Mr Titley a very passionate rapporteur presenting a good report on the action plan for Ukraine and at the same time we are discussing what is actually happening to all our good intentions for Ukraine .
It is just as Mrs Müller said . These external policy reports which we get from the Court of Auditors have become interchangeable .
Regardless of whether it is PHARE , TACIS , humanitarian aid or the former Yugoslavia , the story is always the same : much ado about nothing !
Hardly a week goes by without some ostentatious announcement or other from the Commission about where they intend to get the money from on this time .
Then , some time later when , as the budgetary authority we look at what has become of these announcements and this money , we find - just as in this case - that only a fraction , and a small fraction at that , has actually been spent on what it was allocated for .
What is particularly frustrating is - as Mrs Müller was quite right to point out - that not all the blame lies with the recipient countries but that it is essentially a state of affairs in which the Commission is conspicuous mainly for its incompetence .
I quote point 2.12 : " At the delegation ' - in Ukraine , that is - " there is only one local agent responsible for monitoring the nuclear safety projects , yet this involves over 100 projects which take up half the national TACIS allocation for Ukraine ' , and so on .
Madam Commissioner , is this how we spend European taxpayers ' money ?
How would you justify it to anyone , let alone to our own electorate .
In terms of staff motivation , the European Parliament cannot be dependent upon whether or not Commissioner van den Broek finally manages to motivate his staff in GD Ia !
Please take these points into consideration .
Soon we will have another of these external policy matters to discuss .
It is not the Council , it is not the Member States , it is not Parliament , it is an entirely internal matter which I hope you can solve to our satisfaction and once and for all in the interests of the taxpayers of this Union .
Mr President , I would also like to congratulate Mr Titley , Mrs Hoff and Mrs Mann on their excellent work and I will just make a few comments .
Firstly , I would like to mention the issue touched upon by Mrs Mann concerning the non-participation of Ukraine in the European Conference which begins tomorrow . I think this is a big mistake .
Because of its geographical position , that is , because of the fact that it forms a bridge with Russia , Transcaucasia , and Central Asia , it is a key geopolitical player and should participate , especially when this European Conference is debating the issue of enlargement . Such an issue cannot be debated fully if it is not accompanied by a European Union policy with respect to third countries .
Secondly , in terms of the enormous issue of nuclear safety , the debate centres on Chernobyl , since Ukraine has already taken a series of steps in relation to the military aspect of nuclear arms .
However , with Ukraine at its centre , it will touch on the wider question of the future of nuclear energy , since we must not forget that Chernobyl was a catastrophe resulting from the peaceful use of nuclear energy .
Thirdly , the actions of Ukraine in the field of air transport in support of the Petersburg missions is a sector of activity to which the European Union attaches a great deal of importance .
For Ukraine to play its part it must be given special assistance in this area .
Fourthly , as regards the issue of European Union representation in Ukraine , I agree that European Union representation in Ukraine must be improved and that there must at the same time be more rational use of the resources that are available for Ukraine within the TACIS programme .
For this reason , Mr President , while the action plan of the European Commission constitutes a basis , I would stress that it is only a starting point .
We need an enhanced proposal , a global proposal , a proposal with vision and with objectives concerning future relations between the European Union and Ukraine .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I would first of all like to thank the European Parliament for its keen interest in relations between the European Union and Ukraine .
The reports we are discussing today are to be commended , as is the work of the two rapporteurs .
Let me comment firstly on Mr Titley 's report regarding the action plan for Ukraine .
The partnership and cooperation agreement with Ukraine , which came into effect on 1 March 1998 , has opened a new chapter in relations between the Union and that country .
It should enable a strengthening of cooperation in many spheres , not least political and economic .
The Partnership and Cooperation Agreement is a way of bringing the European Union and Ukraine closer . This requires substantial effort on the part of the latter in order to harmonize many legislative and administrative practices .
Closer association with Ukraine could take the form of a free trade area , as provided for in the PCA , when structural reform in Ukraine is sufficiently advanced .
The first meeting of the Cooperation Council between the European Union and Ukraine will take place next June , and that of the first interparliamentary committee as soon as possible .
An independent Ukraine is faced with three major issues : sowing the seeds of democracy ; establishing its independence and unity ; and putting a market economy in place .
The balance sheet so far is encouraging with regard to the first two aspects and worrying regarding the third .
Ukraine has put in place the foundations of a democracy and strengthened its international position .
The signing of a Friendship Treaty with Russia in May 1997 has contributed to a stabilization of relations between these two countries , whilst the signing of a special partnership charter with NATO in July 1997 has helped the integration of Ukraine into a Euro-Atlantic security bloc .
Nevertheless , Ukraine is at a crucial stage in its economic transition .
The European Union and international donors as a whole are concerned about the blockage in economic reforms and hope that the outcome of the elections on 29 March will enable an essential revival of such reforms .
The many commercial problems between the European Union and Ukraine illustrate the inadequacy of its economic restructuring .
A team from the Commission is in Kiev this week to discuss these issues , particularly the situation of the motor market , which runs the risk of being closed to foreign producers .
The action plan for Ukraine was above all a political document in response to a Ukrainian request and its implementation is progressing satisfactorily .
The actions being developed by the Commission largely match the recommendations in the Titley report .
In particular , the Commission is in complete agreement with the importance of the development of civil society in Ukraine .
That is the second recommendation . A joint mission with the United States is currently working on the preparation of a support programme for Ukrainian civil society , thanks to Parliament 's amendment to put ECU 2.5 million aside for joint actions with the United States in the former USSR .
Politically , it is extremely important to move the Chernobyl issue along .
As you know , the agreement with Ukraine anticipates the closure of Chernobyl in the year 2000 .
The implementation of this agreement is progressing .
Last year , the Commission proposed additional financing of ECU 100 million for the sarcophagus and we hope that the European Parliament will support us at the next part-session by giving its assent .
At the same time , the Commission continues to provide aid for the reform of the energy sector in Ukraine , which has been a priority for Community assistance right from the start .
This position fits in well with that of the G7 , which established a link between actions supporting the closure of Chernobyl and the long term reform of Ukraine 's energy sector .
I would now like to share with you our reaction to Mrs Hoff 's report , presented by Mrs Mann , which is primarily concerned with nuclear safety in Ukraine .
I would first of all like to thank Mrs Mann for all the attention that she - along with Mrs Hoff - has given to the situation of the TACIS programme in Ukraine .
I can assure you that this report has caused us to reflect internally on both the substance and the management procedures of our programmes , particularly the nuclear ones .
Our reflections have led to the following conclusions .
Firstly , as regards substance , actions that are more targeted towards sites must be undertaken , with priority given to the nuclear plants which pose the most problems . Greater emphasis must be placed on the management of radioactive waste .
The Commission is thus in the process of developing a specific programme for radioactive waste in north-west Russia , along with its Euro-Arctic Council partners of the Barents Sea . We are also in the process of supporting the transfer of know-how and technology through strengthened promotion of industrial cooperation .
At this stage , we can already state that , within the framework of this reorientation , the Commission is firmly committed to the closure of Chernobyl in the year 2000 , in accordance with the G7 Memorandum of Understanding .
On a procedural level , with regard to management procedures in particular , Mrs Hoff 's report has led to a certain number of measures which will enable an improvement in the coordination of the programme .
The Commission will increasingly make use of framework contracts with a view to reducing programme fragmentation .
This approach will have the added advantage of reducing delays in the implementation of projects which are attributable to Commission departments as well as reducing the number of contracts to be managed .
The Commission has also taken on other accompanying measures .
It has created a group of high level advisors , whose main task will be to provide independent advice on the direction and implementation of programmes , as well as on the nuclear risks in partner countries and , furthermore , it has taken measures to strengthen internal coordination in the area of nuclear power .
In conclusion , with regard to the Titley report I would emphasize that there is agreement between the Commission and the rapporteur on the broad outlines of our strategy towards Ukraine . With regard to the Hoff report , the Commission is paying particular attention to the rapporteur 's observations , with the aim of improving our assistance .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12.00 noon .
Consumer protection
The next item is the recommendation for second reading on behalf of the Committee on Legal Affairs and Citizen ' Rights , on the common position adopted by the Council with a view to adopting a European Parliament and Council Directive on injunctions for the protection of consumers ' interests ( C4-0585 / 97-96 / 0025 ( COD ) ) .
Mr President , we are now at second reading of a directive which is of great importance despite its modest title .
Consumers have been paid special attention by the European Union and there are many directives granting rights to consumers .
Nevertheless , these have always concerned with what I would call substantive rights , in other words , basic rights which have always been obstructed by the fact that there is a significant deficiency in this respect in the European Union . Judicial proceedings are not unified and there are very different legal and procedural systems throughout the various Member States .
This directive regulates procedural law for the first time and allows consumer associations to bring actions in any country of the Union .
It sets out that as long as these organizations are recognized as such in a country , they can bring an action against the infringement of the directives on substantive rights of consumers in any country .
This , in my view , is a very significant step forward which should be emphasized since I believe it is a great surprise .
The second aspect I would like to point out is that this directive has involved at different levels a high degree of cooperation between the Commission - which drew up the first draft - , the European Parliament at first reading - in close cooperation with the Commission - and , finally , the Council 's common position . The common position has recognized the spirit of the work carried out by the European Parliament and , Mr President , I do not mind saying , has improved the technical aspect of this directive .
The Council has carried out serious work and when it does this , we must recognize its efforts in the same way as we usually criticize it at times for its inefficiency in other areas .
Therefore , given the serious work carried out by the Council , I proposed , and the Committee on Legal Affairs and Citizens ' Rights approved this with a majority , not to introduce amendments at second reading and to accept the second reading as presented by the Council with its important aim , taking into account that the directive is acceptable , of speeding up as far as possible its implementation .
Nonetheless , some amendments have been tabled , in spite of this request , in reference to the fact that traders and industrial associations , amongst others , are not included in the directive . It is true that their interests could be defended in the same way as consumers ' interests , but they do not in fact form part of the group we know as consumers , which is the subject of the list of directives in the Annex .
For these reasons , Mr President , I recommend to the House that we adopt this directive and reject the amendments tabled , since I believe that it is an acceptable directive and Parliament should be satisfied with the work it has done in cooperating to ensure that this directive progresses .
Mr President , I would like to thank the rapporteur for his excellent work on an important Commission proposal .
It is an important plank in the protection of consumers and consumer associations .
It is an important project for the third pillar on cooperation on judicial affairs .
Up until now we have had very few proposals in this area and therefore I particularly welcome this one .
It gives consumers the possibility of obtaining an injunction for an infringement of certain Community directives .
I am pleased that the Commission recognizes the sagacity of Parliament 's work and accepts 17 out of 20 amendments tabled by Parliament in the first reading and thus avoids the need for conciliation .
I agree with Mr Verde that the sooner this directive is implemented the better .
With the increased mobility of tourism , educational visits and business travel , the need for cross-border consumer rights is magnified .
There is just one particular point that I would like to flag up .
I know that the Consumer in Europe Group is disappointed that one amendment was not re-tabled .
However , I agree with Mr Verde that it was better to progress this directive as quickly as possible .
However , the directive , as it currently stands , is only applicable to directives listed in Annex 1 and there are a number of directives they would have liked to have seen within the ambit of this directive , such as toy safety , low voltage gas appliances and personal protective equipment .
I would therefore respectfully suggest to the Commission that when this directive is fully implemented it reviews the working of this directive and looks at the possibility of extending the directive in the future to such matters as guarantees and distance selling of financial services , so that the very maximum benefit can be obtained for consumers .
Mr President , I am speaking tonight on behalf of my colleague , Mr Añoveros Trias de Bes , and on behalf of the Group of the European People 's Party .
I would like to begin by highlighting , as the rapporteur did , the work carried out by the Council .
In many ways , the common position improves on the ideas thrown in the ring by Parliament at first reading .
This is a fact which must be recognized .
Nevertheless , the Group of the European People 's Party has tabled four amendments , which bring together most of the ideas approved at first reading and recognized by the Commission in its amended proposal .
The Group of the European People 's Party is presenting them once again for several reasons .
Firstly , they concern respect for the field of application . Without entering into comments on what Ms Oddy said concerning the advisability of including other directives , for example on toy safety - despite the fact that we agree with her in the Group of the European People 's Party - I must point out that Article 1 establishes a limited scope , which could even be described as sectoral in nature .
Only the needs of consumers are taken into account and those of businesses , tradesmen and the professions , collective interests which are considered in the list of directives in the Annex , are left to one side .
Mr President , regardless of the legal scope of the different Member States , you will see that this will only serve to create even more legal uncertainty .
The interpretation of what the collective interest of consumers is and that of businesses is not going to be the same in Spain as in Germany . We are now drawing up a new directive on this which , rather than bringing coordination and harmonization , will lead to insecurity , and the Group of the European People 's Party is going to retain this amendment even if it is not accepted , as a token and as proof of this belief .
Secondly , also concerning the field of application , I must state that there is no sense in separating the interests of consumers and the interests of other collective organizations recognized in those directives since , in fact , its aim is to enhance the smooth running of the internal market .
Similarly , there is no sense in the other discrimination which is made whereby it is implied that the interests of consumers can only be defended by consumer organizations . This is totally false and incorrect .
Article 3 , in fact , which is legally incorrect , at least in Spanish , talks about " finalidad ' , or purpose .
It should instead use " objeto ' or object .
In Spanish law " finalidad ' does not exist .
Purpose has internal scope .
What counts when setting up an association or any kind of body is its object .
Let us take the example of the first directive listed , concerning misleading advertising .
Is it the case that an employers ' association from a country , for example Spain , cannot legitimately defend the interests of German consumers against the practice of a company from whatever country is involved , let us say Spain again , or that a German employers ' association cannot defend the collective interests of consumers from another country ?
I believe that in this case we are creating false legitimacy which will also lead to legal insecurity during implementation .
Since the ad causam interest - not the ad processum interest - , in other words , the legitimation of cause , is left to the Member States , nor will we interpret in the same way what the interest of a certain association is .
The third amendment concerns paragraph 1 ; the fourth amendment concerns Article 6 and is related to the two previous ones .
Mr President , the Group of the European People 's Party is in favour of this directive . We agree with this report but we must remember that there are problems involved and these will become evident over the next five years .
Mr President , our group also welcomes this directive .
As Ms Oddy and the rapporteur said , this directive on legal cooperation is great news for us .
Personally I have become increasingly frustrated by the fact that we get quick cooperation in the first pillar to protect economic interests , but when we need protection through legal cooperation , often for the express purpose of protecting the citizens , it is difficult to bring about , which sometimes contributes to creating a false picture of the Union and its aims .
I believe , as the rapporteur said , that it is important that the directive can come into force quickly .
Apart from the situations mentioned by Ms Oddy , the whole issue of telemarketing , for example , is important .
The few times when I have the opportunity to watch television , I am increasingly surprised by how even in Scandinavia , in Finland , where such misleading advertising is banned , I can see , for example , advertisements for things which can turn any old clumsy oaf into a nymph using the most fantastic fitness concoctions .
I think it is important for consumer organizations and the authorities , for example , to be able to do something about this .
It is also important for us to include the applicant countries in this process , because I see that marketing of this type also comes via these countries .
However , I regret that the European consumer organizations are not getting the right to represent consumers in the way we proposed , and that the field of application was restricted .
In order to push this directive through quickly , we are supporting the rapporteur .
However , our group does not support the amendments proposed by the Group of the European People 's Party .
I also think that we would have just as many legal difficulties defining what type of organizations were taken into consideration in the proposal .
We are therefore going to support the rapporteur 's report .
Mr President , on the subject of consumer protection and its legal possibilities , I should like to address a wider issue : the current situation with regard to animal feed .
Since 1 April 1997 it has been obligatory to administer animal feed in accordance with a specific regulation .
Although this is a matter of Community law , it is not being applied by the Member States .
Our view - which I would like to discuss for the first time this evening - is that where consumers ' health is threatened the Commission must have the right to intervene and withdraw from circulation any product that might prove dangerous .
In the case of BSE it is clear the origin lies in contaminated animal feed .
However , the Commission is unable to intervene .
We have asked the legal service of the European Parliament and the Commission to do something in this regard so that we can take a political initiative , so that the Commission can take action against the Council which is failing to observe its own laws in the Member States , to ensure that consumer protection measures can be implemented in the various areas .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , yesterday during the debate on the MAI , I emphasized that the economy must first and foremost serve the people .
Naturally , this applies to the directives we issue .
At first reading , the European Parliament accepted several amendments to the specific directive which went beyond the remit of consumer interests to include the public interest and the interests of persons carrying on activities in commerce , industry and trade .
However , it is unacceptable that , where legal action brought by organizations is permitted , if negative behaviour has an effect in another Member State , only consumer interests are taken into account .
Such negative behaviour , as the Commission established two years ago , is detrimental to the smooth running of the internal market and leads to a distortion of competition to the disadvantage of the great majority of businesses which respect national legislation .
These distortions , in turn , have an adverse effect on consumer confidence and therefore run contrary to the interests of the public .
Time and again in the various reports we see that it is in the interests of the Union , in other words , of the public , to formulate regulations in the general good .
Nevertheless , we are quite resolute in our objection to any form of interference in national codes of procedure under the cover of consumer protection policy .
Various countries , not least Germany , have decided against legal action brought by organizations .
For this reason we wish to ensure that the aim of this directive is the harmonization of regulations in the interests of consumers , persons involved in commerce , industry or trade and the public interest .
However , in order to secure the trust mentioned previously , it is also necessary to include unfair effects on competitors in the definition of infringements against this directive .
To use the language of political opposites , it is not a question of consumer interests in the spirit of the theory of class struggle , but a definition of the consumer as it is used in business where total quality management is the order of the day .
And it is not only a one-way street , everyone involved is included .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the Commission is extremely pleased with the progress regarding the proposal for a Council Directive on injunctions for the protection of consumers ' interests which , only two years after its presentation , has arrived at a part-session of the European Parliament for second reading .
It is also pleased with the extremely positive results of the inter-institutional cooperation , which have enabled the drawing up of a common position by the Council and its approval by Parliament 's Committee on Legal Affairs and Citizens ' Rights , which shows a high degree of consensus on the protection of the collective rights of consumers .
Considering the innovative character of the mechanism the directive aims to introduce , an initial evaluation of its impact is anticipated two and a half years after its implementation by Member States .
It will thus be possible to plan for the adjustments which will be necessary in the light of specific experience .
With regard to the last eight amendments , I have to say that they are the same as some of the amendments which have already been discussed within the Committee on Legal Affairs and Citizens ' Rights .
Some of these amendments , in particular Nos 1 , 3 and 5 , hark back to the debate which has already taken place within the said committee .
They could well challenge the extremely realistic conclusions reached by the committee .
Indeed , as the Committee on Legal Affairs concluded , the two-stage mechanism of the common position is balanced and realistic .
This mechanism consists of considering the possibility of including the collective interests of others as well as consumers in the injunctions : businesspeople , tradespeople , craftspeople and so on . That would take place two and a half years after the implementation of the directive and on the basis of a Commission report , in order to take into account both the current reticence of some Member States and the experiences gained during the first phase of the directive 's application .
That is why , on behalf of the European Commission , I consider it appropriate to keep to the conclusions of the Committee on Legal Affairs and Citizens ' Rights , which has already rejected these amendments , thereby demonstrating an understanding of the importance of a rapid approval of this proposal for a directive .
With regard to Amendment Nos 2 , 4 , 6 and 7 , insofar as they aim to establish links between national law and the capacity of qualified entities to act , as well as apprehend offenders , these amendments are less drastic than the common position .
Firstly , I find it difficult to believe that Parliament would be less favourable to the protection of consumer interests than the Council .
Secondly , these amendments bring into question the very purpose of the proposal for a Directive , that is to say , the mutual recognition of qualified entities to bring an action against an offender .
Furthermore , the notion of a breach of the measures for implementing European directives cannot be left to national law alone to deal with .
That is why the Commission recommends that you retain the text of the common position , as approved by the Committee on Legal Affairs , by rejecting the amendments in question .
In conclusion , I would like , firstly , to thank the rapporteur , Mr Verde I Aldea , for his excellent work and for his contribution to the rapid progress of this proposal and , secondly , to invite you to follow the move initiated within the Committee on Legal Affairs by approving the common position .
This will enable us to reach an important stage in European consumer protection and to give a significant response to the protection of collective interests which is targeted through this European legislation .
Approval of the Minutes
The Minutes of yesterday 's sitting have been distributed .
Are there any comments ?
Mr President , there was quite a bit of commotion yesterday due to the way your predecessor chaired yesterday 's sitting .
I freely admit that even I myself took part in the protests , with the result that I was not able to follow what was happening .
I therefore wanted to tell you that I inadvertently voted " yes ' in the vote on the Cornelissen report on the first part of recital 0 , when I intended to vote " no ' .
Please correct this .
Mr President , I have a comment regarding the Minutes .
Yesterday during my speech on the ASEM , when I asked Mr Henderson to reply to a question I had for the Council , I suggested that the date of the end of World War II was 15 May .
It was 15 August , of course .
I would be grateful if the correct date could be added to the Minutes .
Mr President , yesterday I raised a point of order , which is on page 16 of the English version of the Minutes .
I raised two points .
It says here that I asked the President to consider his interpretation of the Quaestors ' decision .
I asked him to consider that re-interpretation which is confirmed in the Verbatim Report of Proceedings .
The second point I raised was the suggestion that during what could be called a ' tumult ' or ' disturbance ' , the recorded votes should not count within the system .
If you look at page 15 of the English version of the Minutes it is quite clear that 30 fewer people voted on paragraph 5 and 28 fewer voted on Amendment No 4 , against the general pattern of the debate .
It would seem that some people were either preoccupied doing something else or we were not able to hear what was going on .
Mr President , the full report on Tuesday night 's sitting , which I only received yesterday , included my speech on the oral question on Alzheimer 's disease .
At the start of the speech , I said I regretted the fact that health issues are always discussed at night and this was excluded from the full report .
If it is a full report , I fail to understand why parts should be omitted and who has the right to censor a speech made by a Member .
With regard to yesterday 's debate , I would like the Presidency to explain what happened in yesterday 's uproar , when he failed to allow a Member to speak on a point of order .
This is a serious fact and the following uproar demonstrates this .
I want an official explanation .
Mr President , before we move on to today 's business , I would like to inform Parliament that we still have a Social Democrat government in Denmark .
( Applause from the Group of the Party of European Socialists )
Thank you very much , Mr Sindal .

Mr Gutiérrez Díaz has the floor .
Mr President , as regards the Minutes , under Question Time it states that Question No 2 had been withdrawn , and that it was a question by Mr Carlos Carnero .
In fact , Mr Carnero was not responsible for that question , but for Question No 3 , and it was I who had asked Question No 2 .
Therefore , I would ask for this section of the Minutes to be corrected .
It will be corrected .
( The Minutes were approved )
European voluntary service action programme
The next item is the recommendation for second reading ( A4-0077 / 98 ) on behalf of the Committee on Culture , Youth , Education and the Media , on the common position adopted by the Council with a view to adopting a European Parliament and Council Decision establishing the Community action programme " European Voluntary Service for Young People ' ( C4-0007 / 98-96 / 0318 ( COD ) ) ( Rapporteur : Mrs Fontaine )
Mr President , firstly , on my own behalf and on that of the entire Group of the Party of European Socialists , I would like to congratulate Mrs Fontaine on her excellent work , which has our full and firm support .
We should be aware that we are discussing a programme which has been at the pilot stage in the last few months and has given rise to enormous interest and great expectations among thousands of young people , associations and local communities throughout Europe .
In the last few months , while in the Council several governments of Member States were vehemently opposed to decent financing of the programme , thousands of young people in their countries were asking for information , getting enthusiastic and submitting their applications to do voluntary work in another European country .
The European Voluntary Service has been strongly desired by the European Parliament and the Commission , but it might not be possible to set it up and it could certainly not be tested without the proposal and support of European cooperation .
If adequately organized and financed , it is destined to become one of the great reference points for the specific development of citizenship and the sense of belonging to the European common house .
It enables the mobility and training of young Europeans to be developed .
It enables the energy and intelligence of thousands of young Europeans to be utilized in projects of general interest relating to social solidarity , environmental protection and the utilization of cultural wealth .
The European Voluntary Service can be used to strengthen the ability of young people to understand new realities and to increase their inclination to work , among other things .
At first reading of the European Parliament , we amended the draft programme submitted by the Commission , while essentially sharing its approach .
While accepting some of our amendments , the Council did not want to include a series of developments and suggestions of great importance .
So we did well to have a second reading and concentrate on the amendments to the three basic questions that remain open , on which there is a clash with the Council at the moment .
As rightly recalled by the rapporteur , the first question relates to the status of young European volunteers .
Unfortunately , the Council has so far chosen not to make a choice on this point .
The European citizens should know that some of their governments do not intend to specifically apply the principle of freedom of movement of citizens within the Union .
Without a specific legal status , it would be more difficult for volunteers to exercise their rights and there is the risk of situations arising , concerning tax for example , that would be difficult to tolerate .
The Parliament is asking for a specific proposal to be drawn up on this subject as soon as possible .
Secondly , we need to explain clearly the possibility of developing relations , cooperation and , where possible , integration between the European Voluntary Service and the national civil services .
This will obviously depend on the will of the individual countries , but it is clear to everyone that there is the potential of being able to start outlining a " European system of voluntary participation ' , which integrates the European dimension with the national one .
Finally , with regard to the programme budget , several governments demonstrated to the Council an " ideological fury ' against the idea of having the programme of the resources required for its operation .
Once again , young people are not a priority for everyone .
What is the point of establishing a limit of ECU 35 million for two years when we have already allocated ECU 25 million of the 1998 budget ?
For these reasons , we support the amendments submitted by the Committee on Culture , that outline the position on which Parliament will most probably reach agreement .
Nevertheless , we hope that the Council does not wish to assume responsibility , vis-à-vis the European citizens and young people , for sabotaging the specific establishment of the European Voluntary Service .
Mr President , I would like to thank Nicole Fontaine for the work she has done in preparing her report and also as an active supporter of the European youth movement .
The action programme is a fine example of a practical project in the construction of a citizens ' Europe .
It would be useful to consider how the Union 's various youth programmes might be given a more solid and broader scope .
One solution is to combine the youth programmes planned for the years 2000-2006 .
In that way we would gain considerable benefits .
Many of the programmes come to a halt at the end of the year .
It would be well worth discussing the possibilities of combination very soon .
The young persons ' voluntary service programme must aim to bring together young people in Europe through cooperation .
The programme should not operate as an extension of the youth employment programmes other than as a way of accruing skills and knowledge in readiness for working life .
As voluntary work projects tend to be in the no-man 's-land between training and employment , their large-scale operation in some countries clash with the Inland Revenue and matters to do with social security .
Because of these kinds of problems the European Parliament must plead the case of the joint-funding of programmes .
The fund of ECU 35 million , born of the common position the Council has taken on this matter , is not enough to ensure that the programmes will remain operational .
The idea of coupling voluntary service schemes with the civil services that young people can opt for in lieu of military conscription is in itself an interesting one , but it seems unlikely to come about , especially in EU countries where there is national service .
At least as far as Finland is concerned , considerations of defence and historical factors make the two incompatible in practical terms , let alone desirable .
Mr President , I too wish to congratulate Mrs Fontaine on her excellent work as rapporteur .
Special thanks should also go to the Commissioner , Mrs Cresson , because the European Parliament and the Commission are working together for young people .
At the moment , young people are suffering a great deal in Europe . They are experiencing a great identity crisis and this programme is drawn up at an important time .
I would also like to thank the Council , which has accepted the extension of the age limit , which now covers young people aged 18 to 29 , which gives us the possibility of operating in a vast field , as young people really need to have a special interest , whether in the social , environmental or cultural world .
It is important at this time to offer young people the opportunity to carry out activities of general humanitarian interest by giving them training , recognized in terms of social , vocational and occupational inclusion .
The programme , which is intended for young Europeans , except for students already benefiting from the SOCRATES programme , and in particular for those without qualifications and the young unemployed , aims to commit them to activities on the spot , relating to European citizenship and the construction of Europe .
Our political group is supporting this programme with great interest and , obviously together with all of Parliament , believes that the financial allocation should be increased to 80 ECU million .
An effort should also be made by the Commission which , in turn , wished to increase that allocation to 60 ECU million .
The issue of the financial allocation is of great interest to us , because it is not possible to develop coordination without it .
We also believe that the Member States should adopt the necessary measures to ensure coordination between the European Voluntary Service and the civil services existing at national level , facilitating the access of young European volunteers to the national infrastructures and contributing actively towards the essential synergy between transnational activities and national voluntary measures .
Mr President , Commissioner , the European Voluntary Service action programme has already aroused , in its pilot stage , much interest and great expectations , which we must now try to satisfy .
Mrs Fontaine 's report cleverly focuses on key defects the Council now has to put right if it wants a workable and successful programme .
We really cannot afford to disappoint our European youth by coming up with a long-awaited scheme that , despite good intentions , does not actually work .
I should also like to appeal to the Council to take seriously the demands of the rapporteur and the Committee on Culture , which are all basic preconditions for a viable youth programme .
The first requirement for viability is obviously an adequate budget .
Naturally you can say that there is always a need for more money , but we are not asking for the impossible when we insist on a figure of ECU 80 million .
With a budget any smaller we simply will not be able to meet the targets of the programme even modestly .
Another requirement concerns such things as the social status of participating young people , social security , labour laws , tax exemption , and so on .
In other words , the status of the young has to be organized clearly , and standardized accordingly .
Otherwise they will be prevented from participating .
Voluntary service , however , is only one aspect of EU youth policy .
I am convinced that we are in need of a comprehensive framework for policy on youth , in which valid initiatives may be viably coordinated .
That is why it is also important to set up a tracking scheme so as to document the experience we gain from voluntary work and employ it usefully in future youth programmes .
We should also exploit the expertise that the various current youth organizations already have , when developing EU policy on youth .
But , above all , we should try to raise the value in real terms of the activity planned for our youth so that it will stand out in the budget , because these programmes , at their best , will have an added European value and will increase understanding and support for European integration .
The establishment of the Community action programme " European Voluntary Service for Young People ' is essential and must be welcomed as a very important initiative . However , we regret that the Council only took up 18 of the 40 amendments tabled by Parliament at first reading .
The amendments which were not accepted lend the programme more effectiveness and transparency . These include the amendments the rapporteur reintroduces with a view to extending the resources devoted to the first stage of the programme 's development as well as the amendment which proposes coordination on social security and tax relief applicable to the allowances the young people receive for accommodation , transport and subsistence .
These amendments are aimed solely at improving the conditions for the young people who carry out voluntary service , rather than discouraging them from getting involved .
In the same way , we should strengthen the complementary nature of national civilian services and European voluntary service . This is particularly important because we must guarantee that the young people who are conscientious objectors can receive social-welfare benefits anywhere in Europe and that this is based on a legal certainty .
If this is not the case , the alternative of voluntary service for military service would be impossible , and what we are trying to do is in fact to ensure that it is possible .
In some countries it is very difficult to choose between one possibility and another , and young people who would prefer to perform community service are often discouraged from doing so .
We must support the mobility of young people and motivate their efforts of solidarity , while always maintaining respect for the principle of subsidiarity .
We therefore congratulate Mrs Fontaine on her tremendous work and we support the amendments , because they encourage work of solidarity on the part of young people in Europe and they contribute to the construction of Europe in general .
Mr President , we would like to thank our untiring colleague , Mrs Fontaine , and the Committee on Culture , Youth , Education and the Media for their excellent , fast work .
The Green group , which supports this programme , supports the idea of concentrating the European Parliament 's action on a few fundamental amendments , particularly those giving body and development to this very important programme .
I would mention here the social status of the participants and the complementary nature of national civil services and the European Voluntary Service .
I wish to point out that the European Voluntary Service naturally relates to young women as well .
The information provided on the programme in the various countries should , in particular , focus the attention of all young on the planned work experience which is at the centre of our priorities : environmental protection and cultural wealth .
Mr President , the Voluntary Service tends to assume an ever greater role in favour of the integration of consciences , abandoning any competition with the State .
The launch of the pilot " European Voluntary Service ' action has been an important step forward by the Community institutions .
Young volunteers will have a constructive experience that may be useful to them to favour their integration into active , social life .
We hope that with these initiatives , based on enhanced cooperation between the Member States , young people will acquire valid training experience , based on acquiring skills and capacities while exercising responsible citizenship , to strengthen their love for a citizens ' Europe .
All this will be useless , however , if we fail to provide a specific legal framework , recognized both in the country of origin and in the host country , aimed at giving volunteers the security they can expect with regard to the right to a residence permit , social security and taxation .
We support the amendments proposed by Mrs Fontaine once again , because there is an urgent need to establish a European status for young volunteers and to coordinate tax and social security systems .
Moreover , we believe it necessary to increase the financial allocation from ECU 35 to 80 million for the first two years of the programme , otherwise we risk frustrating the entire project owing to a lack of financial means .
Moreover , the role of the European Parliament should be increased with regard to information , giving it a right of appeal throughout the programme 's implementation period , particularly during the assessment process .
At the moment , with an ever greater separation between the institutions and the citizens , there is a strong need to use as far as possible the legislative means available in a generous way to favour the citizens ' participation in the political and institutional choices .
Mr President , the European Voluntary Service is a part of the process of integrating young people into the bigger process of integrating Europe .
It is critical to involve young people because they will be dictating the success of the EU in future years .
Whilst on the face of it exchanging young people for a period of up to a year to undertake voluntary work may seem simple enough , there are major practical difficulties to overcome , as was highlighted during the pilot programme .
Identifying projects and matching them with volunteers is a major task in itself .
It is critical to ensure support facilities should anything go wrong whilst the young person is miles away from home .
Preparing the volunteers linguistically , psychologically and socially , ensuring that they are not exploited , and that they are not taking paid jobs away from local people - all these problems need to be smoothed out .
But at the end of the process the volunteers will have gained a rich experience .
They will perhaps be more fluent in another European language , they will have encountered a new culture and created new contacts .
They will have changed perceptions when they return home , and hopefully will share their new intercultural experience with others .
Most importantly , the process will give volunteers more confidence and experience to find a job on their return and go some way towards tackling the disaster of youth unemployment .
But we have further problems to overcome and I want to concentrate on the issue of finance .
In order for the programme to be a success we need to ensure a critical mass of participants .
This will provide economies of scale in administrative terms and will ensure greater participation , which is why Parliament will be holding out for ECU 80 million for this project .
The European Voluntary Service has not been well advertised as yet , and perhaps at this stage that is not a bad thing : the last thing we want to do to the youth of Europe is to raise their expectations and then dash them due to a lack of resources .
The Committee on Culture will therefore be fighting for more resources during conciliation so as to meet the growing demand for this excellent programme .
Finally , can I thank and congratulate Mrs Fontaine and Mrs Cresson on their continued enthusiasm for this programme .
Mr President , exchange programmes are the most effective means of letting young people experience how enriching it can be to participate in other people 's cultures at a personal and even political level .
A major focus of this programme is also to train young people to develop their interpersonal skills .
I would therefore like to thank you , Mrs Cresson , for this initiative .
This programme is attracting an extraordinary amount of interest from young people .
For example , there are 10 000 applications in Germany alone as against a total of only 2 100 available places throughout the EU .
What is striking is that 90 % of the 223 German participants were women .
However , we have to be clear about one thing . The resources provided to meet such a lively interest from young people must be backed up by an infrastructure which can cope with this amount of interest .
This is not yet the case .
In many countries this infrastructure is practically non-existent .
Although it does exist in countries like Germany , as for example in the compulsory civilian services , the traditional providers of the established social services have initially been very reluctant to get involved , with the result that the existing infrastructure could not be used by the European Voluntary Service .
Previous experience has shown that if we want to make the European Voluntary Service a success , it has to be done within a realistic financial framework .
The infrastructure must be further expanded and better employed .
To achieve this it is vital that volunteer services be coordinated with national civilian services .
Parliament 's renewed call for the programme to be funded to the tune of ECU 80 million in the period 1998-1999 takes this view into account .
I would like to thank Mrs Fontaine for her commitment .
However , it is only when Parliament succeeds in carrying through these demands that the European Voluntary Service will be able to make the long-term contribution to European integration that we would like to see from it .
Mr President , it seems to me that since 1996 , when the European Voluntary Service was first discussed at the Florence Council , great steps forward have certainly been taken and we have to thank Mr Fontaine and Commissioner Cresson , as always , for their untiring work in tandem to obtain significant results .
However , this programme is still inadequate in certain respects , as shown by Mrs Fontaine and all those who have preceded me .
As Mr Baldi also said , the Union for Europe Group will certainly support the amendments proposed by Mrs Fontaine once again . These relate mainly - to give you an outline once again - to the principle of establishing a European status for young volunteers and , something that seems very important to me , the coordination of tax systems for social security .
Other important points are the integration of the civil services into the Voluntary Service , naturally only if the Member States so desire , and an increase in the financial allocation , which is of course of a fundamental issue . This was mentioned a short while ago : ECU 35 million for the two-year period is verging on the ridiculous , particularly since it concerns a series of programmes that , according to all Members - and many other people - , needs to provide young people with importance , belief in themselves and belief in cultural programmes .
This is becoming a more obvious example of how much attention is actually lacking .
Among other things , increasing the financial allocation for this programme - which , we must remember , is an alternative to SOCRATES , and included in the other programmes which have already been accused of being elitist - will manage to disprove the accusations that are constantly being made against the cultural programmes that they are in fact purely elitist programmes .
Why is this the case ?
It is because they are aimed at young people who have no qualifications or who are unemployed : socially excluded young people .
Consequently , accepting this type of basic request to ensure adequate information and training within the programme itself would finally give a different idea of the trend of the European Parliament and all the Community institutions .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , although the idea of a transnational European Volunteer Service is to be welcomed - and I should like to express to the rapporteur my appreciation of all the work she has done - , I fear that the objective set out in the report will not be achieved due to a lack of funds .
I am now in the strange position of having written down several more points which all the previous speakers have already dealt with .
Everyone has been so unanimous on these points that I should perhaps concentrate on points that have not yet been addressed , as it is seldom that there is such unanimity in this House and such a positive attitude .
The only proposal that we could add is that a system which can be verified objectively should be worked out to define selection criteria which will ensure that each young person has the same chance in all the applications in the various countries , regardless of the country they apply in .
It should not be the case that preference is given to young people who already work in existing organizations and have been prepared for the selection criteria .
To sum up , I should like to point out that - if we are to take the words of the American President seriously - America is preparing for a training explosion . In other words , if these programmes proposed here are not given adequate financial support , in ten years ' time we shall be lagging a long way behind the USA .
We therefore support this proposal and appeal to everyone to support it along with us .
Mr President , I would like to thank Mrs Fontaine for her excellent work .
We really cannot blame her for the fact that we have not got any further than we have .
That is due instead to the hesitance of the Council , as we have heard in earlier speeches .
Long before the Cannes Summit people said that one of the EU 's absolute priorities was to create good conditions for increased employment .
But what is being done ?
Each time we in the European Parliament 's Committee on Culture , Youth , Education and the Media , or even DG X or DG XXII of the Commission , make innovative proposals in the cultural and educational sectors , which are among the most dynamic areas for future business life , the gentlemen on the Council shake their heads and say : ' yes , of course that is good , but you cannot have any money . '
I therefore ask the question : how does the Council intend to create employment without investment ?
How do you intend to shape our common future if you consistently undervalue what provides body and soul ?
When are you on the Council going to realize that money which goes into the cultural and educational sectors is vital investment ?
I would also like to take this opportunity to thank Commissioner Cresson for her splendid support for this work .
Mr President , this debate is at risk of becoming boring but I will operate on the principle that if you say something often enough and clearly enough you might get the same message through .
It is clear that all of us in this House and , indeed , I suspect in the Commission and Council as well , support the cliché that we want to build a Europe for the future , a Europe for our young people .
It is our job to make that cliché reality .
Somebody once said to me that if you want to see what someone 's real priorities are , look at the cheque stubs in their chequebook and you will then see what they really believe in .
If we look at the European Union 's cheque stubs we discover that 40 % of our expenditure goes on agriculture for less than 5 % of the population .
You run out of noughts to get to the 0.1 decimal percentage point to work out how much goes on young people , 40 % of the population of Europe .
We must make this a reality .
The finance here is critical to everything .
In Britain we say ' you must put your money where your mouth is ' .
We hear fine words from the Presidency , fine words from the Council but we do not see the money .
And that is what we want to see .
I represent Portsmouth in the United Kingdom , the home of the Royal Navy .
There is another saying in Britain : ' do not spoil the ship for a ha 'p'orth of tar ' .
That is what we are in real danger of doing here .
I would remind the Commissioner and the Council that this Parliament showed its resolve in the conciliation with SOCRATES .
We have heard the cross-party agreement right across this Parliament this morning . I am quite sure that we will show exactly that same resolve when this goes to conciliation as I am sure it will .
The money has to be there . Let us have proper funding .
I agree with what Mrs Fontaine has said about the attention to detail .
If we get that right , we will have a scheme that is worth shouting about .
At the moment it is only worth a whisper .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the only response politics can have to the political upheavals in Europe , the greater transparency that the euro will create , the expansion of the EU , greater cultural diversity , increased mobility and the sensitive treatment of minorities is to boost education and mobility throughout Europe .
What is needed is intercultural learning and extracurricular education accompanied by opportunities for service and study abroad for longer periods .
This includes greater opportunities for youth exchanges than we have at present and strengthening the necessary infrastructure .
Ladies and gentlemen , I am proud that it was this House that took the initiative .
It was not the Council and it was not the Commission .
Rather it is they who have latched on to this House 's initiative which Alexander Lange and I introduced here five years ago .
I am very proud that we were able to bring the Council and Commission on board at that time .
Of course , the right conditions for this have still not been created , even now .
I support everything that Nicole Fontaine has said , but I should like to mention one point in particular .
We need a specific statute for this important service . The service will be unacceptable for most people unless it guarantees , in a binding manner , a residence permit , work permit , social security entitlement , tax exemption arrangements and the continuance of any national allowances and benefits .
If it does not , we cannot expect many young people to become involved in this service .
Ladies and gentlemen , a certificate must be issued on completion of the voluntary service for young people .
However , society also has to get to a stage where this voluntary service to the community is rewarded by giving participants preference when taking on employees and not looking at how quickly a person has done something , how quickly a person has studied , but whether a person has also rendered a service to the community .
We can take a leaf out of the USA 's book : there anyone who has carried out voluntary service is always preferred over a person who has not .
Let us therefore follow that example and this can become a good achievement .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to begin by complimenting the rapporteur of this exemplary report .
Nicole Fontaine is precise and economical in her words , and bold and pragmatic in her proposals .
I am taking the floor to make merely obvious points .
However , in politics it is the obvious that is least readily accepted .
We have a saying in my home town that " what is born crooked will take a long time , if at all , to grow straight ' .
For this reason , I believe it is essential that we should guarantee four conditions regarding European voluntary service from the outset .
Firstly , a programme addressing the situation of young people should be designed to radiate outwards in such a way as to reach all young people , without exception , in the shortest possible period of time .
For this , a generous budget is necessary .
ECU 35 million is neither here not there ; it is not worthwhile .
Secondly , the programme 's success depends on how it is launched .
From the outset , as opposed to little by little , we need to establish the conditions which will ensure its success .
This includes an immediate consensus between Member States regarding the creation of a common social security and taxation status , and that should be done now , and not in two years time when the experiment has failed .
Thirdly , a programme cannot be created outside the context of other Community actions and those of Member States .
It should seek to link and enhance the effects of other connected programmes .
Therefore , a method must be found to connect it to national civic services , merging it with the " Youth for Europe ' programme and linking it with new programmes such as that to create a European apprenticeship status which is currently being debated by Parliament .
Finally , I would like to emphasize the importance of incorporating language learning and support for young people when they finish voluntary service , in order to ensure that , in the context of their daily lives , they find ways of lending continuity to the experiences they have had ; these are essential aspects of the programme and a condition for its success .
Thought might be given to creating a European volunteer card which would provide a permanent special status , thereby creating a natural network - I would even say mafia - of transnational citizens who are ready to create the bridges that Europe needs .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , it is thanks to the European Parliament that the youth of Europe have been able to benefit from this new training experience I would like to thank in particular Mrs Fontaine for her report and her support .
Thanks also go to Mrs Pack , Mrs Morgan and many others .
Ladies and gentlemen , you understand the aspirations of our citizens and the reality on the ground in the different Member States .
Your support and your aid thus continue to be essential to the development and promotion of the European Voluntary Service .
The concept of this service , which the European Parliament has long encouraged , is now established and accepted by all the Member States .
This was not easy to begin with .
There were some doubts , as there always are when a new idea is put forward .
But there is now unanimity and everyone is delighted .
The pilot phase enabled European youth , public opinion and the institutions to familiarize themselves with this new concept and to subscribe to it .
This support varies from one state to another , because the degree of information varies and because the media in some countries willingly publicize the issue whilst others are more reticent to do so .
On the other hand , the organizations responsible for this programme are more or less efficient .
I would like us to achieve a certain level of homogeneity in this respect and that is what I am trying to do by explaining the interest and concept of this project to the various Ministers for Youth .
Thanks to the pilot phase , we are now able to improve the mechanisms for implementing the voluntary service and can open it up to a greater number of people .
In this respect I would like to thank those of you , in particular Mr Vecchi , whose contributions to the different aspects have been most useful .
The Commission is happy to note that the European Parliament shares its general analysis of the Council 's common position .
It is in this spirit that it has studied the amendments adopted by the appropriate Parliamentary committee and I am happy to inform you that we can take some of your concerns into account in the amended text that will be submitted to the Council for adoption of a final decision .
Let me refer to a number of precise points .

Firstly , as regards obstacles to the mobility of young volunteers , the experience of the pilot phase confirms that it is not a lack of interest on the part of young people , nor a lack of potential projects , which delays the establishment of European Voluntary Service projects . It is quite often a lack of necessary protective measures and systems within Member States which prevents young people from participating in existing projects .
Why should a young unemployed person have more difficulty in participating in a European Voluntary Service activity than anybody else ?
We know very well , however , that an unemployed person who has to go and sign on at the Job Centre every two weeks can clearly not be in another European country at the same time .
Why should social cover cost more for some young people than others ?
There are therefore still many obstacles to the mobility of young volunteers .
Nevertheless , the Member States have been able to find solutions within the framework of the pilot phase , if on a small scale .
Lessons consequently need to be drawn from this experience in order to find larger scale solutions within the framework of the new programme .
I was able to draw this to the attention of the relevant ministers during the Youth Council in Luxembourg on 28 October last year .
I also let them know that , whilst recognizing that these issues largely fell within the scope of the domestic policies followed by each Member State , I hoped that these problems could be ironed out .
Respect for the jurisdiction of Member States does not permit the Commission to accept Amendments Nos 1 and 5 , in particular the introduction of a European status of young volunteer .
Nevertheless , the Commission is able to accept the principles behind Amendment No 1 , if it is worded slightly differently .
With regard to the link with national civilian services , which several of you have mentioned , in the current context of development of national civilian services in the different Member States , the Commission cannot adopt the sections of Amendments Nos 2 and 4 which relate precisely to the link with national civilian services . This is on the basis of advice from its Legal Service .
I would like to emphasize that in Article 7 , subparagraph 1 , the common position of the Council does encompass the spirit of the European Parliament 's amendments .
With regard to the composition of the programme committee , the Commission is able to accept Amendment No 7 , in accordance with committee procedure .
Concerning the amendments which have been rejected for legal reasons , apart from the ones already mentioned , Amendments Nos 5 , 7 , 8 , 9 and 10 cannot be accepted by the Commission for strictly legal reasons .
I now arrive at a crucial issue , the budget .
I am sure you are aware how sympathetic I am to Amendment No 3 with regard to the two year budget for the programme .
However , the Commission has settled on an amount of ECU 60 million , which represents the minimum amount required to cover the necessary number of people and to achieve the objectives of the programme in the light of the experience of the pilot phase .
We still have a final battle to fight , but I am confident in this respect because the basic idea of a European Voluntary Service is now fully accepted by the Member States .
The common and shared objective is now to enable the development of a Community action which will contribute to the construction of Europe from the roots up , calling on the personal initiative of our youth regardless of their social , cultural or educational situation .
The Commission hopes that this programme will come into line with its proposal as soon as possible and that it will be possible to take a final decision in time to enable its rapid and adequate implementation on behalf of young people , who are the primary beneficiaries of this programme .
The adoption of this new programme will be just one stage in the process and I will soon be here once again to speak to you of the prospects for an integrated youth programme beyond the year 2000 .
In any case , I would like you to know that I have taken your thoughts and suggestions into consideration .
With regard to the problems of a certificate which I believe Mrs Pack just mentioned , there is in fact a document which is presented at the end of the period of voluntary service .
In this , those responsible in the host country comment on their observations regarding the youth 's behaviour , whether he or she lived up to expectations , and how he or she benefited from the period of voluntary service in the host country .
I know that you regularly read the " Newsletter ' which is published every two months and which lists a number of precise and specific examples .
It is a booklet of around four or more pages ; it is extremely simple and not very glossy , I have to say , in comparison with the Commission 's other publications , but this is deliberate .
It is widely distributed and specifically shows what voluntary service is all about .
I would like to request that you support its distribution within your own countries in order to raise awareness because nothing speaks louder than example .
I would like to add that I have available , in typed form only , a number of case studies taken from the different Member States on how the young people tackled their period of voluntary service and how they benefited from it .
You will see that the examples are extremely diverse and go much further than you would imagine .
Some young people wanted to stay on in the host country , some found a job there , some set up their own small business with support from the host structures .
They benefited by being able to commence new initiatives , even new or professional activities .
Thus , in qualitative terms , the results are extremely good , but we cannot yet tell in terms of quantitative results as we have not yet reached this point .
There has only been a 2 % failure rate , which relates to young people who do not finish their period of stay , or who do not adapt well and decide to go home .
In qualitative terms , therefore , the results are extremely positive , if on a small scale . We wanted to start modestly and seriously .
In fact , we did not have the resources to do anything else .
But it is encouraging for everyone who , like me , believes that Europe must be built from the base up , from culture , education and exchanges between citizens . This is probably a more productive way than through vast programmes in which huge amounts of money are spent without any real recognition on the part of the people who take these programmes for granted , who often do not even realize that the money comes from the European Union .
Alongside these ambitious experiences and these large programmes , I think we have something extremely interesting and very promising here .
This is why I have decided to do all I can at Council level and I would like to thank you once again for your support , your aid and your backing .
I have noted Parliament 's sensitivity to the situation of the youth of today and their difficulties , which is completely normal .
You represent your citizens , the population of the Member States .
Their daily concerns , such as the definitive construction of Europe , are your concerns - and this is both legitimate and normal - , rather than grand speeches and vast programmes with phenomenal budgets .
It is often the case that when young people in difficulties - for it is not only the elite who are concerned - find other young people in their host country faced with different problems they understand that , by leaving their home environment , they learn something and broaden their horizons .
I have noticed that this experience , which I have always considered to be an excellent one , is better than I could ever have imagined .
This must encourage us all to continue this battle together , in order to convince the Council to give us the resources necessary to lead it to its natural conclusion .
Thank you once more for your support .
Mr Morris , do you have a question or a point of order ?
Mr President , I would like to ask a question please .
Can I put a very direct question to the Commission , and possibly also to the rapporteur ?
Have any enquiries been made of Member States as to whether or not European youth voluntary service could be regarded as an alternative for those young men and those young women who have a genuine conscientious objection to military service ?
I think that there are many young people within the Community who would in fact welcome that opportunity .
Mr Morris , this question has already been raised and has been given a response .
However , if Mrs Cresson wishes to answer again , she may do so .
My answer is a straightforward one since this has been a subject of consideration from the very beginning .
It is not within the Commission 's capacity nor its competence , nor would it desire to give an opinion on whether there should or should not be military service .
Conscientious objectors come under the jurisdiction of the military authorities .
Why are they conscientious objectors ?
For a thousand reasons , most probably good ones ; they do not want to be involved because war " is a bad thing ' .
Personally , I believe that the only circumstance justifying war is that of the defence of national territory .
Thus , although conscientious objection is a frame of mind which I respect in itself , I cannot subscribe to the point of view which consists of immediately saying , " I do not want to learn to use arms to defend my country ' .
Secondly , conscientious objection comes under the jurisdiction of the military authority of each Member State . It is they who decide whether a particular young person is truly a conscientious objector or not .
Conscientious objectors undertake civil service in place of military , for a longer period .
In France , for example , they clear the forests for a period of eighteen months , after which they are released from this citizen 's obligation .
It is clear that in countries where military service exists it must be imposed on all young people .
If a young person does not want it , he may be able to benefit from a special dispensation , imposing some form of civil service in its place .
But its motive is not the same as that of the European Voluntary Service which consists of going to another Member State to carry out tasks of a social nature , getting to know a different culture and a different way of life and gaining personally from this , at the same time as dedicating oneself to a general cause .
This philosophy thus has nothing to do with that of the conscientious objector .
Let us consequently leave the military authorities to deal with their conscientious objectors and let us avoid taking sides in countries where military service exists .
This is the Commission 's point of view .
Thank you very much , Mrs Cresson .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place at 12.00 noon .
Support measures for a Mediterranean Partner
The next item is the report ( A4-0055 / 98 ) by Mr Colajanni , on behalf of the Committee on Foreign Affairs , Security and Defence Policy , on the proposal for a Council Regulation amending Council Regulation ( EC ) No 1488 / 96 ( MEDA ) as regards the procedure for adopting the appropriate measures where an essential element for the continuation of support measures for a Mediterranean Partner is lacking ( COM ( 97 ) 0516 - C4-0635 / 97-97 / 0298 ( CNS ) ) .
Mr President , representatives of the Commission , ladies and gentlemen , as my text is very brief , my speech should be as well .
There is no need to digress too much ; it is a brief but clear document and deals with a political and institutional problem that is highly sensitive for the European Parliament . It relates to the duty and role of Parliament and also the balance between the institutions in fields in which the structure of the functioning of the European institutions is progressing .
It therefore deals with providing guidance in one direction or another . This is a problem found not only in the case I am dealing with , but also in cases brought to the attention of Parliament , the Council and the Commission .
These include cases where the Council adopts sanctions against a third country , where resolutions passed by the UN Security Council must be complied with , where agreements are suspended or where regulations introduce an embargo .
Today , Parliament is discussing a similar problem with regard to the development of relations with the countries of central and eastern Europe . It is therefore a series of problems relating to the role of Parliament and the balance between the institutions on highly sensitive points on the development and future physiognomy of the European Union .
In our case , it relates to Article 3 of the MEDA Regulation which states that the programme is based on respect for democratic principles and the rule of law , and for the human rights and fundamental freedoms that are an essential aspect of them , violation of which justifies the adoption of appropriate measures .
The proposed regulation sets out the means for adopting a decision where such an eventuality is confirmed .
This subject relates to one of the most politically complex and difficult areas in the world and that is why the debate has continued for many months .
I would point out briefly that a previous proposal made by the Commission had received a text drawn up by Mr Barón Crespo from the European Parliament tabling amendments which were not accepted and which were postponed until after the conclusion of the work of the Intergovernmental Conference .
The new Commission proposal , drawn up in accordance with Article 16 of the MEDA Regulation , reintroduces the qualified majority decision-making procedure for the adoption of appropriate measures when an essential element for the continuation of support measures for a Mediterranean Partner is lacking .
We are happy about this , because the initial text did not provide for qualified-majority voting but for decisions to be taken unanimously . We believe this is a very important step forward for the Commission 's proposal .
However , the proposal still disregards the role played by the European Parliament , both as initiator of the procedure and as an internal factor .
My proposal is very simple : the Commission 's text should be adopted with the addition that the Council may establish appropriate measures , deciding by a qualified majority on the Commission 's proposal or on the basis of a recommendation made by the European Parliament , adopted in accordance with Article J.7 of the Treaty on European Union and , at all events , after hearing Parliament 's opinion .
I believe that this then totally protects the Council 's prerogative to decide and enables Parliament to intervene in a matter in which the judgment of possible measures to be made is an overall political judgment , relating to the consideration of many aspects of the matter in one country or another in one of the most complex and difficult contexts in the world , as I mentioned at the beginning .
Mr President , I would like to begin by stating that the Group of the Party of European Socialists supports Mr Colajanni 's report .
I am not only speaking for the Socialists but also , as Mr Colajanni already pointed out , as a person who has been involved very directly with this report , since I had the privilege of being rapporteur on the report on the MEDA Regulation and , at the time , put forward proposals - without success , however - which would have given our policies a more European character .
I am also pleased that after the Intergovernmental Conference , the Commission took a step forward , and that we have moved from requiring unanimity to needing only qualified-majority decisions on a topic as important as this which forms part of our overall political philosophy . In other words , it is a step forward in supporting the consolidation of the rule of law and respect for human rights which , at the moment , is of great importance within our increasing responsibility in terms of foreign policy .
Evidence of this could be seen yesterday when , in this very Hemicycle , we held a debate on the enlargement of the Union towards central and eastern Europe .
It was a timely debate , because the London European Conference is now beginning and this precise criterion regarding respect for human rights , laid down in Copenhagen , is a criterion which the Treaty of Amsterdam has consolidated as one of the elements which forms the image of the European Union .
Therefore , the Commission 's step has been a positive one , but it is not enough .
I would like to refer once again to yesterday 's debate because , in terms of enlargement , the Council and the Commission yesterday seriously committed themselves - through letters from the Presidents of both institutions - to consulting Parliament and allowing it to put forward recommendations throughout the process . In Parliament we always persevere and are constantly prepared to fight for our principles .
I therefore believe that it would be logical for the Commission and the Council to take on the commitments in this field that it formally promised in this House ; in other words , it should grant Parliament the right , and the obligation , to give its opinion on topics in this area . We must also realize that Parliament is playing an important role in terms of the development of dialogue in the Mediterranean .
This must be taken into consideration and is clearly evident through the experiences of our Delegations for relations with the Maghreb countries , with the Mashreq countries , with Israel and with the Palestinian Legislative Council . It is therefore appropriate that the role Parliament is playing in the Mediterranean context should be recognized by our own institutions , particularly at a time when the MEDA programme is experiencing significant success in that , in spite of many difficulties , the fixed amounts for the last two years have been completely allocated .
Mr President , the Group of the European People 's Party supports the Colajanni report .
It serves two fundamental principles and insists that the improvement of the regulation on the running of the MEDA programme must be incorporated .
Firstly , this programme is ambitious yet vitally necessary for the approaching 21st century and it must contribute to the establishment of the rule of law in all the countries surrounding the Mediterranean , the cradle of Europe .
Consequently , violations of human rights and basic freedoms , which constitute a virulent rejection of democracy , are unacceptable in European Union cooperation .
Secondly , a proper evaluation - free from self-seeking , opportunistic expedience - of whether this basic condition for cooperation with a country is to be promoted and respected , should come first and foremost from a democratically elected supranational body which expresses the combined understanding of the European people , namely the European Parliament .
This does not mean a reduction in the competence of the Commission to carefully monitor developments and to introduce necessary measures if and where problems occur .
Nor does it dispute the final decisive role of the Council in the enforcement of necessary sanctions . However , it introduces two important parameters into the operation of MEDA .
The first is that final decisions must be taken by a simple majority vote in order to prevent an isolated national policy from hindering the exercise of the imposed common policy through special interests . The second is that not only is it necessary that the European Parliament gives its opinion before decisions are taken , but it should also have the right to recommend the implementation of measures and what these measures should be .
This essential improvement towards a more general strengthening of the common foreign and defence policy , which the Commission omits in its proposal , is introduced by the amendment tabled by Mr Colajanni .
The Committee on Foreign Affairs , Security and Defence Policy unanimously requests its approval .
Mr President , the MEDA funds have been frozen for far too long .
It has had the opposite effect of what was intended ; it has meant unfortunately that the serious achievements of the Barcelona process have been entirely undermined .
The Colajanni report has arrived far too late , but better late than never .
I would like to congratulate Mr Colajanni on the way in which he has interpreted the opportunities offered by the Convention .
With his proposal he has not only increased the role of this Parliament where it concerns taking suitable measures in case a Mediterranean partner fails to comply with the agreements on human rights ; he has accepted all institutions for what they are , but he has also done the Mediterranean partners a service , and in doing so made a practical interpretation of the Barcelona Convention possible again .
I hope that his proposal will be adopted by the Council and the Commission , and that Parliament will approve it in full this afternoon .
Mr President , I also agree with what has been said and I wish to emphasize the constructive points contained in Mr Colajanni 's amendment to this Commission proposal .
It is not simply that it goes towards restoring the balance of the three institutional bodies , in favour of the democratic body par excellence , that which is directly elected by the people . It also has a fundamental significance which goes beyond this .
This proposal touches on the subject of MEDA , fundamental issues concerning the relations between the Community and third countries .
In essence , it is about foreign policy . It is also about the availability of European Union funds , that is , money earned by the sweat of the European tax payer .
Consequently , in these circumstances the European Parliament has both the right and the obligation to intervene in the process .
I could have wished for this amendment to be somewhat more consistent , somewhat stricter as to the fact that the opinion of the European Parliament must in all events be obligatory for the Council and the Commission and not simply academic , as is now the case . The European Parliament gives its opinion but from that point on the Council and the Commission usually take the final decision according to their own wishes .
A second issue is that of qualified majority voting .
I agree as far as it goes but there is another side to the issue . If a measure is taken and MEDA support is withdrawn for a particular country on the grounds that it is violating human rights , in order for MEDA support to be reinstated would a simple majority be sufficient or would it require unanimity ?
Nor must there be any cheating for reasons of expediency , because , under this provision , we know which will be the only Mediterranean partner with a give and take relation with MEDA - Turkey .
Mr President , I find Mr Colajanni 's proposal extremely clear , and it has the full support of the Green group .
We think it is the only way to manage the fund properly , and we think the only way to have a suitable procedure is if the Council decides effectively by qualified majority , if Parliament is consulted and if Parliament is given the chance to draw up a proposal pursuant to Article J.7 of the Treaty on European Union , and obviously if the Commission has the right of proposal , which it can use whenever it so desires .
Those three points therefore seem completely acceptable to us .
However , the reality is that there was not even consensus amongst the Council on whether voting could take place by qualified majority .
I think it is important that Parliament makes it very clear that this is what we prefer , because otherwise we might end up in a situation in which one country with opportunistic or major political objections is able to obstruct the entire process and that would be a bad state of affairs .
Secondly , I would like to take this opportunity to raise the alarm over the way the Barcelona process was conducted .
What Mr van Bladel said about that was correct , of course , namely that finances brought it to a standstill . But we should add , and this is much worse , that the entire political significance of the Barcelona process has lost considerable importance because of the fact that the peace process had reached a deadlock , since it was always seen more in line with the peace process , and moreover as the result of a lack of political input at ministerial level .
Since the declaration of Barcelona there has really been no further decisive political input on a ministerial level . It is sad to note that we are jogging along the bilateral channels whilst the regional dimension , which was a much-wanted extra addition , is not coming into its own at all .
I therefore believe we in Parliament will have to take a clear stand on this .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , members of the Commission , the report we are discussing today in Parliament is very relevant since it involves completing a regulation which has the ambitious aim of promoting democratic liberties in the Mediterranean and bringing together the people of North Africa , the Middle East and the European Union .
Before continuing , I would like to emphasize that our group agrees with the report drawn up by Mr Colajanni and with the amendment tabled to the Commission 's text .
This amendment is aimed at ensuring that the European Parliament 's voice is heard when that forum considers that an essential element is lacking in order to continue with the support measures for a Mediterranean partner .
The MEDA programme , which has received ECU 3 500 million for this five-year period , is the most ambitious initiative ever adopted by the European Union to promote security and political stability in the Mediterranean .
To ensure that it has its desired effect , it is essential that the European Union 's cooperation with the countries involved in the MEDA programme is based on total respect for democratic liberties and human rights .
Nowadays , the countries of the European Union are separated from North Africa and the Middle East by little more than the waters of the Mediterranean .
But there is an enormous political , cultural , social and economic abyss between the societies on the two sides of the mare nostrum .
We certainly do not believe it is necessary to standardize cultures and social traditions , but it is important and essential to ensure that all of the countries which hope to have close relations with the European Union show permanent respect for democratic liberties and human rights .
The tense situation in Algeria and in Israel 's Occupied Territories , not to mention the tensions in the Aegean Sea , sufficiently prove how necessary it is to encourage the countries to move towards a greater respect of liberties .
When the regulation on the MEDA programme was drawn up , Article 16 did not determine the definitive procedure to be followed in adopting measures regarding a Mediterranean Partner and one essential element is lacking .
That deferment showed how delicate and difficult this matter is for the Member States of the European Union .
The delay , among other things , has meant that the MEDA programme has developed slowly .
The initial expectations have been frustrated because of the slowness with which it was implemented , due in particular to obstructionist measures taken by certain Member States whose names I would , at the moment , prefer to forget .
With the adoption of this report , we want to give new impetus to the implementation of the programme and to achieving the desired objective : that the Mediterranean becomes a conflict-free area where all the coastal countries have harmonious relations .
I would like to conclude by congratulating Mr Colajanni .
Mr President , on the one hand , the Group of the European People 's Party must congratulate the Commission on the amendment to the MEDA regulation but , on the other , it must point out the right held by Parliament to make its own recommendation or express an opinion pursuant to Article J.7 of the Treaty and the advisability of doing so .
When the Council can give an opinion by a qualified majority and when Parliament can state its thoughts on the nonobservance of human rights , freedoms and democratic principles , then , and only then , will we finally be able to open a serious debate on a country such as Syria which , with European economic backing , accepts an inappropriate blessing for a political system that is totally undemocratic .
There is no risk of the Euro-Mediterranean talks dying because of the exclusion of a country that is failing to respect the rigour established in Barcelona , nor will they die because of the often unfounded exclusion of other applicant countries .
The talks will only fail when Parliament and the other European institutions give their tacit consent to the non-observance of fundamental democratic rights .
Today 's discussion on the MEDA programme is included in the problems of the MED programmes and it seems advisable to me to take the opportunity today to confirm that , through the Committee on Budgetary Control , Parliament is not boycotting the unfreezing of the MED programmes , as the Commission leads us to believe .
In fact , this Parliament truly wishes to resume talks on decentralized cooperation with the countries bordering the southern Mediterranean as soon as possible .
Parliament is demanding the Commission 's full cooperation , however .
Luckily , this process is already being implemented and , during a recent public hearing , the Commission provided us with a whole series of information .
To conclude , I hope that the interministerial preparatory conference in Palermo next June , and the Euro-Mediterranean forum itself that should be set up shortly , will revive a Euro-Mediterranean policy that started off full of expectations but that has lost its polish and political tension , disregarding the basic problem , namely the blocking of the peace process between Israel and Palestine .
Mr President , this is an opportunity to make a further assessment of the validity of several rules on social and civilian protection present in the MEDA Regulation , that lay down different procedures for the application of the programmes and the possible suspension of cooperation for countries failing to observe the democratic principles and the rule of law .
The violations of human rights and democratic rights in some regions of the Mediterranean are not a cause for concern but , unfortunately , a dramatic reality .
Globalization itself , which has produced significant changes in the market making it easier to match supply to demand and which has established new economic frontiers with the use of new computer technology , risks favouring economic interests and suppressing civil and social rights even more in the developing countries .
The European Parliament has not only confirmed its necessary commitment to the rights of freedom and democracy , but also , and more specifically , emphasized , at first and at second reading , the requirement of a specific direct role in the penalizing procedure for any non-observance of the principles of democracy and freedom in some Mediterranean countries .
I am therefore expressing my full support for Mr Colajanni 's amendment , which confirms the role of the European Parliament as initiator of a penalization procedure , but also as a decisive factor in the procedure itself .
Finally , I would like to make one more point .
The launch of the MEDA programme should presuppose the EU 's strong commitment to southern Europe .
In fact , a full development of the Mediterranean European community may be the true vehicle for a partnership policy with third countries .
I therefore intend to confirm the need for infrastructural intervention to create new entrepreneurial measures and , above all , to provide employment , so as to avoid the serious economic and social repercussions in the European areas of the Mediterranean that really give rise to delays in the difficult path of the MEDA programme .
Mr President , the proposal for a regulation which Mr Colajanni 's report deals with is aimed at supplementing the MEDA Regulation which entered into force just under two years ago .
This additional regulation concerns how the MEDA Regulation should be applied to human rights .
It is a question to which both the Commission and Parliament attach great importance .
Under the MEDA Regulation , the Commission should present proposals for a decision-making procedure which would make it possible to adopt measures when violations of human rights or other fundamental rights occur .
It is this decision-making procedure that the current report considers .
The partnership between the EU and the Mediterranean countries began at the Barcelona Conference in November 1995 when the foreign ministers of the EU 's Member States and the twelve countries in the southern Mediterranean met .
The partnership is based primarily on the strategic importance of the Mediterranean area .
It also reflects the mutual dependence which has long tied together the EU and the Mediterranean countries politically , economically , socially and culturally .
Our ties are therefore based on a partnership instead of on aid and a relationship of dependency as before .
After the Barcelona Conference , Parliament approved the Commission 's draft MEDA Regulation .
The proposal was then adopted by the Council of Ministers in July 1996 .
The partnership thus obtained a financial instrument which was well-suited to the new goals and principles of the cooperation .
The aim of the MEDA Regulation is to supplement the measures which the partners themselves adopt to increase competitiveness , prosperity and social stability .
Lasting prosperity and stability can only be achieved if democratic principles , the rule of law , human rights and fundamental freedoms are fully respected .
The regulation clearly points out that respect for these fundamental principles must form the basis of the MEDA programme .
However , the regulation does not yet contain any specific rules on how measures could be adopted if these fundamental principles are not respected .
The Commission has proposed that decisions should be taken by qualified majority , and this has also been approved by the Council of Ministers .
The idea is to convey in a powerful way the message that , when necessary , Europe will not hesitate to adopt measures to protect human rights and other fundamental principles .
The introduction of qualified majority voting also ensures that necessary decisions can be taken quickly and effectively .
This strengthens the Union 's credibility .
The rapporteur also proposes that it should be possible to adopt these measures on the basis of a recommendation from the European Parliament .
In addition , it is proposed that , in any event , Parliament should be consulted before any measures are adopted .
Unfortunately , the Commission cannot accept the rapporteur 's amendments .
The MEDA Regulation does not mean that the European Parliament should be consulted .
Article J.7 of the Maastricht Treaty concerns the common foreign and security policy .
It cannot therefore , as the rapporteur proposes , be applied to the MEDA Regulation , which belongs to the acquis communautaire .
However , on the basis of Article 138b of the Treaty of Rome , Parliament can always call on the Commission to put forward proposals in this area .
Against this background I hope Parliament will support the Commission 's original proposal .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place today at 12.00 noon .
Judicial cooperation in criminal matters
The next item is the report ( A4-0059 / 98 ) by Mr Bontempi , on behalf of the Committee on Civil Liberties and Internal Affairs , on judicial cooperation in criminal maters in the European Union .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the report submitted this morning for the Chamber 's attention includes in its principal objectives that of dealing fundamentally with a problem that has existed for some time : the problem of the weakness of judicial cooperation in the international fight against organized crime .
Judicial cooperation is the Cinderella , the weakest and most backward form of cooperation .
Even police cooperation , with which we still have many problems , is more advanced than judicial cooperation .
Faced with a situation that is known and regretted by everyone , the report proposes to draw together the opinions and facts at the basis of this archaic , antiquated situation , to try and radically improve it .
We know that it is very difficult today to explain convincingly to the citizens that , while two minutes is more than enough to transfer enormous sums of money from one financial market to another , and maybe these sums are often the result of the laundering of income from various types of crimes , two judges in two EU countries will hardly talk through months and months of work .
This situation should therefore be changed , and the report proposes to define an operating attitude for the Union .
I would like to point out this aspect : the Parliament is not stating just the principles , not indicating just the problems , but pointing out a very specific path through two types of objectives : one medium- and long-term and the other with shortterm or even immediate measures , that can only be adopted with the political desire of the national governments and parliaments .
With regard to the medium- and long-term measures , I would like to recall here the points that are also offered by the new Treaty of Amsterdam .
We note that interesting points of progress are made in the Treaty : for example , the common minimum rules on several crimes such as organized crime , terrorism , drugs and so on ; significant improvements in the ratification and entry into force of agreements ; and strengthened cooperation .
Unfortunately , however , we also need to note that the integration of the actual role of democratic control by Parliament and the Court of Justice is still very weak .
We are therefore making positive but also critical assessments which we are renewing with force because the democratic and control aspects are absolutely essential in such delicate and sensitive matters .
A further section relates to the Agreements .
We know that the entire subject is governed by agreements and that most of the Agreements that have been approved for a long time have not entered into force .
Several paths are therefore proposed in the report : one is that of the undertaking to ratify the agreements that have already been established and , from this point of view , we hope we can make use of the Treaty of Amsterdam soon as well .
It should also be pointed out that one of the times obstructing the operation of the agreements consists of the exceptions , of the reservations made by the various States , and it is very clearly recalled that the principle of double accusation , which is now out of use and only valid as a principle , would be definitively abandoned .
Finally , perhaps the most significant part of the proposals relates to the agreements we are proposing .
We are proposing agreements for a direct communication between magistrates , for establishing specific times for letters rogatory , and for the automatic circulation of evidence .
In fact , this is a problem that occurs a great deal in Italy , for example , but I think it applies to all countries , judging by the alarming figures .
The figures indicate answers to letters rogatory in the various countries , even over a long period , of around 15 % : a judge or a bench of magistrates ask for 100 % and 15 % reply .
Frankly that is too few , because the agreement we have and the relations between the judicial authorities of the various countries , to achieve appreciable results against international crime , cannot now be radically removed from relations between magistrates in the same country .
This is a point of quality , a leap in quality .
Other proposals then relate to the approximation and harmonization of legislations .
We have already cast votes , on which we are waiting to receive confirmation from the Council , on participation in common organized crime and on corruption .
I think it advisable to make two points here : firstly , we need to identify several common crimes on key issues with regard to organized crime .
We are thinking of corruption , of serious tax offences and of money laundering ; with regard to the latter in particular , we need to extend the cases of origin of money laundering : there are too few offences , so dirty money from other types of crime , even those not provided for , is laundered .
Consequently , Directive 308 should be revised .
Secondly , there is the crucial question of fraud which we need to start experimenting on with the advanced forms of unification .
Finally , I would like to consider certain concerns present in some amendments , that deserve a reply .
While we are reinforcing this cooperation , we should also concern ourselves greatly with the guarantees of democracy , fundamental rights , provided for in our Constitutions .
I would like to say , however , that , in this field , it is a question of allowing the judges to cooperate rather than judge .
And I would like to recall that , very often , in this field of organized crime , it is not a question of defending one citizen but great economic forces that are managing to systematically block the letters rogatory .
We should therefore wonder about maintaining these principles , just as the work to establish whether the condition for the democratic system of guarantees respects another right held by the citizen , as well as the citizen himself , which is that of legality .

Mr President , Madam Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I should like to begin by congratulating the rapporteur , Mr Bontempi on his excellent report and I should like to emphasize that I have had a very good working relationship with him and the Committee on Civil Liberties for many years in matters concerning the legal protection of citizens .
The field I represent is limited to the protection of the EU budget and therefore the taxpayer , as is my opinion today on behalf of the Committee on Budgetary Control .
In terms of administrative law it has now been possible to get some protective measures off the ground but , as always , it will take a long time to create a legal framework to protect the Community budget under criminal law , although the need for action is urgent as surveys have shown that 70 % of Europe 's taxpayers are much more critical of the fraudulent and improper use of tax money than tax evasion as such .
Among the many obstacles in the way of protecting financial interests effectively is one in particular : the blatant lack of cooperation between the judicial authorities in individual countries , who are faced by an increasingly well-equipped criminal underworld .
As was shown in a hearing in April organized by our two committees , no significant successes have been chalked up either at a procedural level or in terms of international cooperation .
What can be done ?
Parliament has already adopted proposals aimed at protecting financial interests in a few special fields , for example in the final report of the committee investigating transit procedures , in its resolution on the Mediterranean programmes or its resolution on the combating of fraud .
In all three reports there is a clear demand for a judicial authority at European level to coordinate and cooperate with individual countries ' investigative and criminal prosecution authorities and procedures .
Whether it should be called a judicial clearing house or a European prosecution centre for fraud cases involving the Community budget or something else , as stated in the reports , is a matter of secondary importance .
Its primary objective must be to define its most likely tasks and competences in order to make up for current deficiencies , such as investigations that last years , technical and diplomatic procedures or conflicts of jurisdiction , which put a stop to cooperation .
To create a European judicial area an equal degree of protection for Community money must be achieved in all Member States .
This should be done in stages .
First , a European liaison office could be created to cross-match information and advice , conduct investigations and pass on the results to courts in the individual countries .
The new Article 280 in the Amsterdam Treaty is helpful in this regard .
In the longer term this office could be expanded to become a transnational criminal prosecution authority which would be responsible to a kind of European state prosecutor 's office , which in turn would pass the criminal case to the appropriate court in the individual country concerned .
The emotive term " European state prosecutor 's office ' , as characterized in the well-known expert study of the corpus juris , should be replaced by a designation which clearly precludes any confusion of terms and any understandable reservations that may result .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I trust we will have the courage to look to the future in this highly sensitive but very important area and would like to reiterate my sincere thanks to Mr Bontempi .
Mr President , this report deals with a very important political task for the future and I should like to thank the rapporteur for all his work .
It has been very successful .
Of course , this is a concrete political problem .
Criminals have been the quickest to benefit from freedom of movement in Europe .
Much time has already been devoted to the consequences for the police but unfortunately the accompanying constitutional and political measures will take even longer .
In the Committee on Institutional Affairs we have therefore concentrated on the main constitutional and political points of principle .
Firstly we wanted to stress that we have a major political opportunity for integration and an instrument that is much better than the previous agreements , as is demonstrated very clearly in the report .
I think it is important to highlight this .
The second point is that we need specific democratic legitimation in the area of criminal law where civil rights are involved .
We therefore believe that the role of the European Parliament in this area , if it can only act in a consultative capacity , is much too weak .
We criticized this ; it is something that must be changed .
Thirdly , I would like to mention the role of the European Court of Justice . The supremacy of the rule of law - especially in the practice of criminal law - requires judicial supervision , but also judicial progression .
We are therefore also in favour of a change in the preliminary ruling procedure , which can now only produce results if the Member States expressly submit themselves to it .
This is simply too little and must also be changed .
Fourthly , the whole political task of fighting crime is something that is of course strongly characterized as a matter for nation states .
We therefore have to exert pressure to ensure that progress is made .
Amsterdam now provides us with an opportunity and that is closer cooperation .
We have also laid particular stress on this opportunity for the further development of political integration .
In conclusion , I should like to congratulate Mr Bontempi once more .
I believe this is a task which can only really be accomplished slowly . It will take time , but this report is a step in the right direction .
Mr Caccavale , Mrs Gradin will be absent this afternoon .
She will express the views of the Commission now and this afternoon Commissioner de Silguy will appear .
It is something which is very possible .
I have listened to your views ; you are right . However , it cannot be changed now .
Mr President , first I would like to congratulate Mr Bontempi on a very good report on judicial cooperation in criminal matters in the EU .
Effective judicial cooperation in criminal matters is an essential instrument in the fight against organized crime .
In the EU we have 15 different legal systems . We have different definitions of what constitutes a crime and different penalties .
International crime knows how to exploit this fragmented situation .
This creates a need for increased cooperation and greater efficiency in the Union 's fight against crime .
Increased judicial cooperation is also important for us to be able to protect the legal certainty of individuals .
I am often asked questions by individuals about why we do not do more to combat international crime .
The citizens demand that priority should be given to EU cooperation in this area .
They have little sympathy for the fact that the relevant conventions have not yet entered into force .
They are right , of course , and therein lies the political challenge .
In order to succeed we must have a unanimous approach to how we should act effectively on questions of judicial cooperation .
I am convinced that this is possible .
Basically we share a common set of values , but it is not possible to turn this set of values into effective cooperation in one day .
I agree with Mr Bontempi that this is about a step-by-step process , a process in which we deepen the specific cooperation , and at the same time work to coordinate our rules .
The Amsterdam Treaty means that we will get a new decision-making instrument in the area of criminal matters and the police .
We will get guarantees that commitments made by the Member States in the Council will also come into effect within a certain period .
I shall try to ensure that framework decisions are mainly used .
I share the view that they should take precedence over other possible decision-making instruments .
Another change is that , in future , conventions will be able to come into effect when they have been ratified by a majority of Member States .
That is good .
That way we will get away from the double unanimity which we have today .
Here in Parliament I have often remarked that conventions which have been agreed have not been ratified .
Some examples include the European Convention on Extradition , the European Convention on the service of judicial and extrajudicial documents in civil or commercial matters and the Protocol to the Convention on the protection of the Communities ' financial interests .
I therefore welcome the rapporteur 's call to the Member States to do all they can to speed up ratification of the conventions relating to criminal matters .
Mr Bontempi points out that there are even question marks about the roles of Parliament and the Court of Justice in judicial cooperation in criminal matters in the Amsterdam Treaty .
I share that view .
My starting point is that both institutions must be given as strong a position as possible .
I am therefore going to ensure that my Commission recommendations are delivered to Parliament immediately after decisions have been taken .
It is my hope that the competence of the Court of Justice in the area of criminal matters will gradually be developed .
The rapporteur also deals with a number of problems connected with the exchange of information between courts in one and the same case .
As far as the fight against fraud involving EU funds is concerned , I have personally witnessed how delays in the exchange of information between different legal systems can directly favour criminals .
I have long argued for the simplification of direct cooperation between courts and other judicial authorities in the Member States .
It is unreasonable that in 1998 these contacts should still be referred to diplomatic channels .
I therefore agree with the rapporteur that there should be a fundamental principle that courts can communicate directly with each other .
This principle permeates the Convention on the service of judicial and extrajudicial documents in civil or commercial matters which was adopted in 1997 , but which has still not entered into force .
The principle is also true for the Convention on Mutual Assistance in Criminal Matters which was negotiated in the Council a few years ago .
Another limitation in the cooperation between courts and other judicial authorities is the demand for dual criminality .
As you know , this demand means that the offence must also be punishable in the country to which the request for assistance is made in order for assistance to be able to be given .
In his report , Mr Bontempi recommends that this possibility should be abolished in relations between EU Member States , and I agree with him .
So far we have discussed concrete measures to improve cooperation .
That will take us far , but we must also look at how our legislation could be better coordinated .
This is not about a broad harmonization of criminal law .
However , it is necessary to block the holes in the Union 's legal system which are being exploited by organized crime .
Together we must create a high level of protection in the Member States .
Our aim should be to ensure that criminals cannot evade justice because of differences in our legal systems .
We must be able to achieve results , even though the Member States have different penalties for serious crimes .
However , it is necessary for us to define certain serious crimes in the same way , and for there to be similar minimum punishments for them . Typical examples include corruption , money-laundering and the sexual exploitation of children .
There is reason to look at certain rules of procedure in the same way .
In his report Mr Bontempi points to bank secrecy as an example .
Mr Bontempi also mentions the work on protecting the Community 's financial interests as an example of what can be achieved .
I agree that there is a lot of experience from this work which could also possibly be applied to judicial cooperation in criminal matters in general .
For example , it is right that we can increasingly see a direct link between fraud in the EU and other international crime .
We should first of all determine to what extent this experience can be used in areas where cross-border cooperation is required . I am thinking of the smuggling of people , illegal arms sales and drugs crimes .
We should also examine whether this experience can help facilitate judicial cooperation in criminal matters in areas which come under EU policy .
The report also makes an interesting proposal to strengthen the role of UCLAF in the work on combating fraud against the Community 's financial interests .
UCLAF should have a coordinating and supporting role relative to the responsible national judicial authorities .
I welcome this idea .
It would mean a concrete strengthening of our ability to effectively combat such crime .
I have therefore taken the initiative to create a special unit within UCLAF which will work on these questions .
We cannot discuss judicial cooperation without also discussing cooperation with countries outside the Union .
I share the view of the rapporteur that we must work in parallel for judicial cooperation in criminal matters in relation to central and eastern Europe .
It is clear that the fight against organized crime and corruption and therefore also judicial cooperation in criminal matters will be an important element in the forthcoming membership negotiations .
The action plan on organized crime could be an important element , and we could , of course , also include the Grotius and Falcone programmes .
I therefore share the rapporteur 's view that this should very quickly be expanded to include countries outside the EU .
The Amsterdam Treaty will mean that judicial cooperation is raised to a new level , which is important .
One thing I would like to emphasize is that Mr Bontempi recommends that the Commission should take the initiative for an interinstitutional conference between the Commission , the European Parliament and national parliaments .
The aim would be to discuss how judicial cooperation in the EU can be further improved .
I think this is an idea which we should continue to work on together and discuss how it can be realized .
However , we also need a proper overview of the consequences of the new Treaty in the whole field of justice and home affairs .
I am therefore going to initiate a study which I will present during the year both here in Parliament and in the Council of Ministers in the form of a White Paper .
I hope that this White Paper will serve as an important basis for a far-reaching debate on how we could realize the vision of the EU as an area of freedom , security and justice .
Mr President , I wish to protest strongly at the way in which this debate is being conducted .
First of all , I support what Mr Caccavale has just said : the Commissioner is speaking at a time when the debate has not even started .
Secondly , there is no way of conducting a debate under these circumstances , with 150 Members coming into the Chamber without having a serious debate on an important point .
Thirdly , the Council is not even present .
Could you , please , report back to the Bureau and see whether we can change the way in which debates are held just before the vote ?
Mr Brinkhorst , you are right .
But at this time it is difficult for the debate to continue .
The debate is suspended and will continue this evening , after 6.00 p.m.
With regard to the interposition of the Commissioner , I wished to say that the Commission has programmed her presence .
We can request the presence of the Commissioner . We cannot , however , compel it .
This afternoon Commissioner de Silguy will appear , as I said earlier .
This has happened many times before .
It is not the first time .
Mr President , I fully support what Mr Brinkhorst has said .
What we are discussing here is not a trivial matter .
On behalf of all my colleagues who have worked hard on this report and attach great importance to Commissioner Gradin 's opinion , I should like to protest against the conditions under which we have to conduct our discussions here .
To my knowledge , this is the third time that Mrs Gradin has spoken in the early afternoon and hardly anyone is listening , while threequarters of Parliament are talking about other things .
I consider this unworthy of a parliament and an insult to the Commission .
Mr President , I should like to join in this protest .
For one thing , I think it is frustrating to suspend the debate like this , which has happened on a number of occasions in this area .
I appeal to the Bureau and the sittings service to arrange the times better to ensure this does not recur in future .
We are grateful that Mrs Gradin was able to speak , although under pressure of time , and some people were actually listening to her , Mr Schulz , but of course it is bad manners to have all this uproar going on all around while the Commissioner is speaking .
This must be prevented from happening in future , not just to you , Mrs Gradin , but in general .
It will not do , the way we are conducting this !
Furthermore , I am sorry that the debate has been suspended as many colleagues will quite possibly not be present this evening if there is further discussion .
All in all , this is a really unsatisfactory situation which must be remedied .
It should not happen again !
Mr President , I would also like to draw your attention to the fact that on my list the report is shown as ready to be voted on .
This will just not do !
I am sorry that the vote will take place who knows when and this debate will be suspended again as well , so that we will not be able to make a connection between the report , the debate , the Commission 's opinion and finally the vote .
I would therefore like to join this protest .
Mrs Theato , the Commissioner has listened to the protest of the Members of this House and of the Presidency .
I hope that a similar problem will not arise again and I am glad that what was said in this House reflects the present concern that the sitting will continue .
Mr President , what the speakers have said is very comforting but is not enough .
Firstly , in protest , I am abandoning my speech this afternoon because , at this point , I believe it totally useless , as I believe this afternoon 's debate to be totally useless , as it is constantly being interrupted , which is absolutely wrong .
I am asking you officially , Mr President , at this point , to postpone the entire debate and vote until the next Parliamentary sitting .
I am asking this Chamber to decide that , out of respect for the work of Mr Bontempi and all of us on this report , the entire debate should be postponed , and we should start again at the beginning at the next Parliamentary sitting .
Mr Caccavale , the debate has begun .
It will continue this afternoon at 6.00 p.m. unless at that time Parliament decides differently .
Mr President , I do like the sigh of relief when I rise in this place .
I put a question to you : has the Secretariat been advised in writing of any persons in the room who wish it to be recorded that they will be present in the Chamber during roll-call votes ?
My reason for asking this question is that I notice in the Minutes of yesterday 's meeting that Mr McMillanScott , Mr Janssen van Raay and others had put a written statement into the Secretariat , advising them that they would be present but not voting .
Does not this bypass the very procedure and intent and purpose of the original Bureau 's decision ?
I ask this as a serious point because if the Bureau 's decision was to discipline us in some manner then it is quite easy to bypass it by putting a statement in writing and then walking out that door .
The Quaestors ' note was quite clear : that it should be on the vote , and the vote means that vote which is about to take place and not to pre-empt that vote in any way whatsoever .
I trust , Mr President , you will carry out the Quaestors ' instructions in association with the Bureau 's instructions to ensure that Members are present and either voting or not voting .
Mr Falconer , we will verify what you have said .
On the other hand , however , I wish to tell you that we always follow , and I believe that there will be no departure from , the decisions that have been taken .
Mr President , I would just like to add to what Mr Falconer has said .
I think that during voting time we should be chained to our benches and the ushers would do well to make sure they lock the doors so that no-one can leave !
Mr President , I would like to come back to the point made by Mr Schäfer , Mrs Theato and Mr Caccavale .
We were all agreed that the conditions under which the debate was conducted in which Mrs Gradin spoke were totally unacceptable .
Mr Caccavale has made a proposal to delay the discussion of this report until next time .
I would like to ask you to have a vote on this point because that is the only way in which we can reasonably resume the debate on this most important report .

My question to you is : can you take a vote on Mr Caccavale 's proposal to delay discussion of Mr Bontempi 's report ?
Mr Brinkhorst , you have studied the Rules of Procedure . Rule 131 states very simply : " At the start of a debate on an item on the agenda , a political group or at least twenty-nine Members may move that the debate be adjourned to a specific date and time .
Such a motion shall be put to the vote immediately . ' This is at the beginning of the debate on an issue .
There is another point in the Rules of Procedure where it states that adjournment of the vote on the debate can be requested when that time comes .
Mr Avgerinos has given an answer .
I am sorry , but we will not continue this debate .
I think that the House has been well and truly enlightened on the issue .
I do not think we can add anything else .
It was unfortunate that such an important report as the Bontempi report had to be interrupted .
Mr President , since a topical and urgent debate on crime in Brussels is not possible and there is a petition here with 100 signatures on it , I would inform you that there is now also a petition in my office which can be signed by everybody , all assistants , staff members and interpreters , and I will pass on this petition to the petitions committee of the Belgian parliament .
Mr Rübig , the Presidency is always willing to listen to Members ' comments on the Rules of Procedure , but such comments need to be based on an actual Rule from the Rules of Procedures !
Mr President , would you be prepared to clarify the voting procedure on the Bontempi report because we do have a voting session this evening and I question why you said it would be taken tomorrow ?
I would not like colleagues to be under any illusions of when this will take place .
Mr Provan , I will answer you with pleasure .
Mr Avgerinos , who was in the chair previously , has already made a comment .
As you will have seen from the agenda , it is possible there will be other votes this afternoon , if we have not completed this morning 's votes . I hope that , with the good will of all of you and with your support , we will finish them .
If we do not finish them , the votes will continue at 6.00 p.m.
But the debate on the Bontempi report will not have been completed .
Consequence , it cannot take place this afternoon .
It will have to be taken tomorrow morning .
Votes
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I will be very brief .
I share your concerns with regard to the content , as I indicated during the debate yesterday evening , and the Commission has decided to accept officially Amendments Nos 1 , 2 , 3 , 4 , 7 , 16 and 17 , along with the first part of Amendment No 14 regarding the length of the director 's mandate .
I hope that these changes will not cause further delays in the enlargement of the Foundation 's scope to cover the countries of the Mediterranean .
Mr President , there was some misunderstanding yesterday on the Commission 's cooperation on this point , but it has been cleared up , and the report is now ready to be voted on .
( Parliament adopted the legislative resolution )
Mr President , I would like to ask this House 's permission for a very simple oral amendment .
One word needs to be altered in Amendment No 2 .
In the amendment the word Macedonia is used .
The Members of the Group of the European People 's Party have rightly pointed out to me that it should not read Macedonia , but FYROM , Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia .
Could I ask the House to make this correction ?
( Parliament adopted the resolution )
Mr President , I put in a request to the previous President .
Can you tell us if you have received notification in writing from any Members in the Chamber to the effect that , while they will be present in the Chamber , they will not be participating in any roll-call votes ?
A simple answer of yes or no to that question will suffice .
Mr Falconer , I listened to the question you put to Vice-President Avgerinos when he was in the chair .
My reasoning is very simple .
There is a practice that Mrs Fontaine followed and that Mr. Martin followed yesterday , after a comment by Mr McMillan-Scott .
I have no problem in following it as well .
If Members wish to indicate their presence verbally but do not want to vote , they have every right to do so .
I would prefer that they did it in writing so as not to take time away from the vote .
We can see and we can check who is present somehow or other and we have great faith in the honesty of all the Members .
( Parliament adopted the resolution )
Mr President , you did not really answer my question because you said ' verbal ' .
What I am asking is : have any Members indicated to your Secretariat and thereby to you , in writing , that they will be present but not participating in any of the roll-call votes ?
A simple ' yes ' or ' no ' answer will suffice .
Sorry , Mr Falconer , you are right .
I thought you were asking a question on the general procedure , which I tried to clarify .
To the best of my knowledge , the answer is no .
Mr President , before the vote I found a list at my seat .
This list contained the name and seat number of all the members who attended yesterday 's sitting .
Could you please inform me in the course of today or tomorrow who made this list , what it is meant to be for and why I found it at my seat while none of the other members of my group had possession of this list ?
Mrs Müller , at the moment I am not in a position to give you an explanation about what you referred to .
I have asked my colleagues to look into it with you so that we can see what exactly it is about and , if we need to do something , we will do it .
Our objective is both a simple and a clear one : to give a European dimension to consumer protection by removing all risk of isolation of potential victims .
European citizens currently encounter unquestionable difficulties in the consumer market , the most complex of which are of a legal nature .
In fact , if they are to be implemented , our European directives must be transposed into national law , which is becoming an ever more confusing labyrinth of measures every year .
Not all wronged consumers are certain of gaining compensation and so this report presented for second reading is an important one .
I do not want to argue further over a text which has already been the subject of great discussion , both in committee and the House .
I will simply quote a specific example of the repercussions this issue has on the daily life of European citizens .
Following a large-scale promotional campaign , many French people purchased properties in Spain .
Unfortunately for them , they were the subjects of fraud on the part of the promoter , who was from another country of the European Union .
At no time could a French consumer organization bring a court action against him .
Thanks to these new measures we are going to vote for , a victim living in another country will now be able to defend his interests through his own consumer organization .
It was time , before the introduction of the euro , to make such practices wrong , for they are not in the interests of the consumer .
I therefore support the Verde I Aldea report , which is a big step forward in consumer protection .
The European Union has a duty to work for greater equity and a more accessible system of justice .
Recommendation for second reading ( A4-0077 / 98 ) Mrs Fontaine
Mr President , I should like to make two very brief oral statements .
The first one relates to Mrs Fontaine 's report .
The voluntary service will only be acceptable to Europe 's young people if significant financial resources are made available .
In this context , " significant ' means at least enough money to allow young people from all fifteen Member States and , hopefully , in the near future , the associated countries as well , to take part in the programme .
ECU 35 million would enable , at the most , five thousand young people to do so .
That is too little .
The minimum is ECU 80 million to take account of the ECU 25 million set aside from the 1998 financial year , so that ECU 55 million will be left for 1999 .
I therefore appeal to the Council and in particular to the German Minister for Youth , Mrs Nolte , to speak out strongly in the Council in favour of the sum called for by Parliament .
The room for manoeuvre in Article 3 allows for this increase .
Lack of funds cannot therefore be given as a reason for rejecting this call .
In supporting this recommendation , I am not just defending minimum conditions of viability for the programme and of equality of opportunity for participants by increasing funding from ECU 35 to 80 million for the 1998-99 period .
My intention is primarily to express my support for the potentially powerful instrument of the European voluntary service for young people in creating a European civic awareness , through the formative experience of rendering services to society in a transnational context .
Over and above the free movement of people and the human and cultural exchange that may be offered by the programme , one of its central elements lies in working together with young people from other European countries in the voluntary pursuit of a shared civic objective .
The European civic objective prevails over the mere individual interests of participants and , for this reason , contributes decisively to promoting European citizenship .
As the youngest Member of the European Parliament , I would naturally like to give my full support to Mrs Fontaine 's report on European voluntary service for young people .
This is important for many reasons .
It is about finding new ways for meaningful employment which allow people to combine business with pleasure .
The ' business ' is that we know young people have a great interest in working in the areas to which the action programme relates , especially environmental and social issues , while at the same time we know that a lot needs to be done in these areas .
The ' pleasure ' relates to the benefit for young people of being given a chance to visit another country , to experience another culture and another society for a period of time when they also get a chance to learn a new language .
Language is important , since we are living in an increasingly globalized world .
Yesterday the European Parliament adopted a report on how to prevent suicide among the Union 's citizens .
Unfortunately it is common for young people especially to have thoughts of suicide because they feel uncertain about the future .
It would therefore be good if the EU showed evidence of creating the conditions for a number of young people to be able to face life .
In this context , voluntary service can make a small , but important contribution .
It does not solve the problem , but it can be taken as something positive .
The position of the Council with regard to funding is disappointing . While billions are put into subsidies for tobacco growing and research into nuclear power , it is not prepared to invest a few million ECU in young people .
That is , to say the least , irritating .
I cannot understand the Council 's negative attitude towards the demand that more resources should be provided so that people who get the chance to be volunteers also get an adequate grounding so that they can cope with a new language .
To me it is obvious , because it will improve the conditions both for young people to get something out of their voluntary service and for the project to succeed .
The Council must reconsider these points .
As the youngest Member of the European Parliament , I support Mrs Fontaine 's report , as does the whole of the Green group .
Mr President , given the British government 's commitment to helping our young people through the New Deal programme at home , I am glad to see this kind of work finding an echo at European level .
The governments of the EU are right to put forward the idea of a European Voluntary Service for 18 to 25 year olds .
However , this report makes some valid suggestions on how to ensure that such a programme could work successfully in practice .
For example , there should be residence rights for volunteers working in other EU countries .
These young volunteers would also need to be able to enjoy the same social security entitlements that they had before volunteering .
We should also look at granting tax exemptions for any payments or allowances made to volunteers - after all , they should not be penalised for showing the public spirit and initiative to get involved in voluntary work of benefit to the wider community - and which also makes themselves more employable .
I agree with the report 's suggestion that any European voluntary service programme could be integrated with existing national systems - perhaps a European option could be built into our own countries ' voluntary programmes ?
I hope that Parliament will give this report the backing both it and our young people deserve if we are to encourage the community spirit and enterprise of future generations .
Amendment No 3 of the report recommends that the financial framework for the implementation of the programme during the period 1998-1999 should be increased from the Council 's proposal of ECU 35 million to ECU 80 million .
It is impossible for me to vote for this amendment when at the same time I can see how the Member States are making cutbacks leading to redundancies in the public sector in their respective countries .
Boogerd-Quaak report ( A4-0032 / 98 )
The amendment to the regulation on the European Training Foundation is justified and necessary .
It is primarily a question of broadening the field to cover the Mediterranean countries .
But an appraisal of the foundation 's first three years also gives us the opportunity to explore the work of the Foundation in more detail .
The most important issue in the analysis is to achieve guidelines in how the foundation can develop to meet the increasing number of challenges that are coming .
I fully agree with Mrs Boogerd-Quaak when she says that the main task of the Foundation is to broaden its scope .
Otherwise , the importance of education and training as a tool for integration and regional development will not have been adequately addressed .
Our partner countries need the competent support and expertise of the Training Foundation in the planning and implementation of training , which is essential for the growth of market economies and democracy .
Staff development programmes , based on the work of the Foundation , for the decision-makers in the EU and the partner countries are an important part of this work .
All in all , the role of the Training Foundation in the execution of the PHARE and TACIS programmes has been significant .
However , ever greater challenges require a change of focus from overseeing partnerships and participation to inspiring further development .
Applicant countries must be able to make progress in the international sense in recognition of examinations , in new training technology , and in the transparency of standards .
In this regard , collaboration with CEDEFOP should be firmly endorsed .
Naturally , the Training Foundation must have sufficient resources to expand and strengthen its operations .
I particularly hope we can push for all instructors involved in vocational training to get further training themselves and for womens ' professional training to be encouraged in the same way .
Motion for a resolution on Kosovo
Mr President , I have now been able to vote for this compromise resolution as it has been considerably improved by the Liberal motions .
In fact , I think we are about to be hypocritical as the measures proposed by the contact group and others could have been applied over the past few years - I have brought up this subject here on many occasions - to prevent outbreaks of violence .
By doing nothing we share some of the guilt for the fact that this outbreak of violence has taken place .
We did not even manage to open an EU office in Kosovo and now we want to take the political measures that should have been taken at that time .
This must be pointed out , yet it is once more a case of too little , too late .
The idea of autonomy has probably gone down in a hail of bullets in the past few days , and we have only one more opportunity , namely the deployment of international observers and troops , to ensure that Kosovo gains autonomy under international supervision and can decide its own future in dialogue with Belgrade after a few years of peace .
Mr Posselt , I must congratulate you , not on the content of your speech , which the Presidency has no right to comment on , but on your regular presence in the House .
I wish to abstain in the vote on the joint motion for a resolution regarding Kosovo .
I am clearly in favour of condemning all forms of violence and I condemn excessive repression of demonstrations , when it is proven .
I would , however , like to highlight a number of points which have not been sufficiently considered by Parliament .
Firstly , the problems in Kosovo relate to the internal affairs of Yugoslavia , a fact which prevents us from either judging or interfering .
Yet I wonder how many states would have accepted the multiple political aggressions of which Yugoslavia , a founder member of the United Nations , has been a victim over the past seven years on the part of certain European countries or some sections of this Parliament .
Secondly , it must be highlighted again that the permanent demonization of Serbia does not help in the search for a peaceful , just and lasting solution to the problems of this region .
We have seen this Manicheism lead to war in Croatia and Bosnia , and this risks being rekindled until the Serbs are reintegrated back into decision-making processes .
Finally , it has to be said that , historically and geographically , Kosovo poses some very particular difficulties .
Firstly , you cannot ask the Federal Republic of Serbia to renounce its sovereignty over Kosovo , which is the cradle of its history and of its national unity . Secondly , the re-establishment of autonomy for Kosovo - which no-one questions in principle - risks awakening a desire for independence which would dangerously disrupt international relations between Yugoslavia , Albania and Macedonia , even , indirectly , Greece and Bulgaria .
It is a risk that no-one has the right to take without due consideration .
In conclusion , I believe that we must put greater confidence in the Serbian political forces , whether they be the Belgrade authorities or the Democratic League of Kosovo , and encourage them to renew dialogue with a view to finding an institutional solution which respects the rights of the different communities living in Serbia .
Motion for a resolution on the ASEM process
Mr President , the Greens are an international movement at a global level and therefore , of course , we think that developments in Asia concern the populations of the EU countries , just as the EU 's development concerns the populations in Asia .
We are thus in favour of cooperation within the framework of ASEM , but would like to stress the importance of involving elected politicians , including in the framework of ASEP , and referendums .
Unfortunately , the EU 's relations so far have been characterized by considerable double standards .
At the same time as public speeches emphasize respect for democracy and human rights , the practical reality is dominated by short-term commercial interests .
A flagrant example is Indonesia , which has been able to buy arms from EU countries , suppress East Timor and hold its own population outside of democratic influence and reasonable legal certainty , which recently has affected not least the Chinese minority .
Relations with other non-democratic Asian countries are also characterized by double standards .
We question the direction and forms of aid to North Korea 's suffering population , not least the investment in KEDO .
North Korea should instead be receiving aid to clean up coal mines and power stations and food aid to avert the risk of famine .
The European Parliament 's resolution contains a number of our objectives .
As well as several demands which I have already mentioned , there are also requests for a code of conduct for the sale of arms by EU countries and criteria for sustainable forest management .
Nevertheless , I have abstained from voting in the final vote because paragraph 6 shows that the EU 's underlying , extremely liberal free trade principles have been allowed to have the upper hand over other principles which are important for social development , such as democracy , human rights and environmentally and socially sustainable development .
Unfortunately , as long as the EU does not reverse its priorities , its international relations , including those with Asia , will always be treated with justified suspicion by populations around the world .
Motion for a resolution on the International Criminal Court
Mr President , I would like to begin by thanking you for your kind words and for the way in which you are chairing this sitting . On the subject itself , I would like to say that it is of the greatest importance to set up a criminal court of this kind and to introduce appropriate measures within the framework of the United Nations .
I applaud the fact that the city of Nuremberg has applied to be the location for this court ; being fully aware of its tragic history when it was mistreated by one of the greatest criminals in human history , Adolf Hitler , it is putting itself in a position to make a contribution towards the restitution of morality .
I congratulate Nuremberg for taking the initiative to apply to be the location for such an institution .
Thank you , Mr Posselt .
Cabezón Alonso report ( A4-0056 / 98 )
Mr President , we have voted in favour of the Cabezón Alonso report , but its approach to demographic issues remains far too limited .
Indeed , it is not clearly stated in this report , nor in the Commission 's text , that there is no European country which is managing to renew its population .
Has our old Europe lost its love of life and of giving life , of creating - whether it relates to families or businesses - and of procreating ?
Is this going to be a permanent decline ?
Must we adopt a new fatalistic attitude and content ourselves with this state of affairs ?
I do not think so .
There exists , for I have seen this for myself at many meetings prior to the Cairo , Beijing and Copenhagen international conferences , a real desire for children on the part of a certain number of women and couples in Europe .
Consequently , why do policies lack the necessary courage to take this desire into account , a desire which is so much in line with our lives and our countries ' economies ?
For you cannot imagine economic growth without a growth in consumption , especially that of the young .
I believe it is high time that those in charge of our politics and economics rediscovered these facts . The family , children , are essential , just the same as businesses , to economic vitality - vitality as a whole - of a country .
Let us abandon our all too abstract vision of the individualistic consumer .
Let us look on the family as a reality on an economic level too .
Why not consider parents , those who bring children into the world and educate them for many years , as the first economic investors in a country ?
At the same time they are an irreplaceable training organization .
And God knows , if you put the emphasis on training , you also put it on employability .
Children , educated in a family , become more confident , and are dynamic in life .
It is therefore very much in our interests to rediscover these realities , as well as to take into consideration the important work carried out by a mother within the home , as was mentioned at Copenhagen .
Ladies and gentlemen , I am not a fatalist .
This desire for children exists and , in view of the serious question which I raised a moment ago , the events of last summer in Paris during the World Youth Days truly give hope to us all , to all the countries of Europe , indeed not only to Europe but to the rest of the world as well , in terms of what Europe can offer it .
Thank you very much , Mrs Seillier .
I allowed you to exceed your speaking time , but I think that you certainly deserved it .
I noted yesterday - we were at the night sitting together - the passion you have for this subject and I am delighted by it .
The figures on the demographic decline and ageing of the European population have been known for years .
In this context , the 1997 demographic report is an important occasion for a thorough examination and analysis of the statistics , to find the most appropriate solutions to deal with future social scenarios in the best possible way .
The priority is to prevent the rights of the elderly , in terms of both social security and welfare , from discriminating to the detriment of young people and women : the former because , being the future active minority population , they will have to bear the cost of providing social security for the majority elderly population ; and the latter because the cost of providing social security for the elderly , and sometimes the sick and handicapped as well , is already borne by them to a greater extent .
I am pleased with the rapporteur 's opinion on the superficial way in which Agenda 2000 has dealt with the social and demographic aspects of the future enlargement of the Union . I also agree on the need to adopt a common policy on immigration and on the urgency for new social security rules that take into account the current and future demographic situation and , on behalf of the National Alliance , I will vote in favour of Mr Cabezón Alonso 's report .

Population developments in several countries are causing unrest with large movements of populations from the country to towns .
All the counties in Sweden , apart from four , have declining populations , which means that there is a great risk of depopulation in large parts of the country .
I have voted for the report , but the EU 's regional and structural policy must be designed so as to stop this unfortunate development .
The Danish Social Democrats have today voted in favour of a report on the demographic trends in the EU .
We believe the Commission 's report points to some very important problems .
If the current population trends continue , there will be 50 % more people over 60 in 30 years ' time .
This will have major consequences for the European welfare states and for the make-up of the labour market .
In other words , there will be fewer working people to finance the increasing costs of pensions and healthcare for others .
We are pleased the problem has been put on the agenda .
Quite simply , we need more people actively employed in future .
Hopefully this realization can help give an impetus for some constructive discussions on the need for family businesses which can use women and a new look at refugees and immigrants as a resource for European welfare states .
It would be absurd if there were no demographic trends at all : longer life expectancy , fewer children , changing proportions between the sexes - all of this undoubtedly has far-reaching effects on society .
However , I maintain that a debate on social policy that concentrates on the " demographic situation ' is bypassing the real issues .
These issues are bound up with the structure of an economy which forcibly " disconnects ' more and more people from its development , makes them unemployed or underemployed , thereby excluding them from society .
This adds to the fact that the economy is demonstrating an increasing trend towards social polarization and exclusion and still relies on an " invisible economy ' which distributes the burden of unpaid work according to a gender-based hierarchy . This has the consequence that hatred of women and children becomes embedded in society .
Last but not least there is the quite irrational racism on which the widespread fear of immigration is based in national economies which are growing rapidly and developing transnational links .
It is therefore no accident that all these topics are raised again and again as a matter of fact in the discussion of " demographics ' .
But could we not address these matters much more directly without the " demographic illusion ' ?
Titley report ( A4-0059 / 98 )
It is still not clear what the sum effects of the Chernobyl disaster will be for the Ukrainian people and for Europe as a whole .
It is important that we learn from our history and not have the disaster repeated .
It is for this reason that I fully support Mrs Hoff 's report concerning TACIS funding for the Ukraine .
It is unacceptable that only 37.5 % overall of the TACIS funds budgeted have been paid out , and disturbing that only 25.5 % of the funds for Nuclear Safety Programmes have been paid out as well .
I agree with Mrs Hoff 's assessment that structural changes need to be made within the Commission 's DG 1A .
The burdensome amount of work placed on those in the field means that the EU 's money is not accurately and fully tracked .
This is clearly a contributing factor to the TACIS programme 's lack of success in the Ukraine .
The Commission should remember that " an ounce of prevention is worth a pound of cure ' .
By making sure that the Union 's money is spent efficiently on reconstruction and nuclear safety in the Ukraine , Europe can avoid potential future problems .
( The sitting was suspended at 1.05 p.m. and resumed at 3.00 p.m. )

Topical and urgent debate
The next item is the debate on topical and urgent subjects of major importance
Mr President , the presidency of Michael Kovác came to an end at the beginning of March .
With his departure , however , political decisions have once more been taken in Slovakia which give us cause for concern .
Only a few hours after the official functions were provisionally transferred to prime minister Meciar as an interim measure , he had two personal assistants sacked , recalled over half of Slovakia 's ambassadors - or at least gave notice of his intention to do so - and suspended the trial of the suspected abductor of the former President 's son .
These decisions would be worrying enough under normal circumstances but they become alarming when they are taken by people who are merely temporary stand-ins .
Slovakia finds itself in an exceptional constitutional position .
Yet it is precisely in such a situation that principles such as the rule of law and democracy must continue to be adhered to and , above all , taken seriously .
We are once again confronted with the situation where a handful of people in the Slovakian government are placing the conditions in the country in a questionable light and interpreting the will of the Slovak people , the political culture and the political rules of play in a very one-sided way and are possibly shelving accession to the European Union .
At the end of the day , it is also a matter of expressing our solidarity with the Slovak people and letting them know that we are watching closely the current events in the country 's political system .
We are also heeding public opinion in the country as well as in the EU .
In particular , we support the efforts being made to push through the referendum on the presidency as planned , a referendum which was judged to be permissible and constitutional by Slovakia 's constitutional court .
All we can hope for is that Slovakia will be accepted as a candidate for accession as speedily as possible , as soon as the democratic situation in that country has moved in a satisfactory direction .
Slovakia has always been a part of Central Europe and we trust that our support here is also strong enough in future to underpin the partnership .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I think it is the fourth time since I have been chairman of the Delegation to the EU-Slovak Republic Joint Parliamentary Committee that we have tabled or conducted a topical and urgent debate in connection with developments in Slovakia , so it is not very original .
It is precisely today , when a new stage in the integration and overcoming of past obstacles in Europe is being introduced at the European Conference in London , that we should be reminding the Slovak Republic that this House was largely responsible for the fact that the Slovak Republic , in the person of its acting President , is able to sit at that table in London at all .
We did this out of a sense of responsibility because we thought we understood perhaps a little better the difficulties that a new sovereign state has to overcome .
However , we also expected the Slovak leadership to understand what it means to be the only country to be portrayed by the Commission ahead of this Conference as a politically immature democracy which is not equal to the task .
We are now learning precisely the opposite .
Obviously this Slovak government did not seek consensus but attempted - probably in the run-up to pending national elections - to achieve the objective of polarizing opinion .
And I can already hear the reactions from the Slovak public and the Slovak government who will say , " we have done everything in accordance with our constitution ' .
But today it is not about us somehow being better jurists than the Slovaks , but it is up to us to find out from the President and Prime Minister Meciar if they still want to lead their country into the European Union or do they want to prevent Slovakia 's accession for many years to come ?
One man alone is in fact responsible for the fact that the present government , under the constitutional arrangements in Slovakia , can acquire even more power for itself , and that is Mr Meciar .
We would like to take this opportunity to remind the government of this .
The European Parliament and in particular European integration do not generally lend themselves to internal political games which are aimed solely at keeping certain politicians in power from one election to the next .
Mr President , amidst all the fuss about Turkey , Slovakia got off lightly in Luxembourg in December .
It is true , the country has lost its place in the leading group of applicants , but it is allowed to join the European Conference .
To be honest , since then Meciar has done his best to betray the last bit of confidence we had in him .
Cancelling referendums , sacking half of his ambassadors , obstructing the course of justice against the people suspected of kidnapping Kovác junior , Meciar 's behaviour can only be characterized as increasingly totalitarian .
It is a pity that the passage referring to this in the Green motion for a resolution did not find its way into the joint resolution .
But this is perhaps sufficient reason for me to repeat it once more .
Under Meciar Slovakia is slipping into , or should I say slipping back into , a totalitarian regime .
Mr President , two resolutions criticizing Slovakia was clearly too much of a good thing .
Regrettably , the motion for a resolution on the Gabcikovo-Nagymaros dam did not make it onto the agenda .
The Hungarian population 's massive protests against this dam thankfully achieved results even without the support of the European Parliament .
Prime Minister Horn will not sign the agreement with Slovakia , it was announced this week .
Quite rightly too , because these works would be another heavy attack on the ecosystem of the Danube and its surrounding area .
The entire agreement between Hungary and Slovakia demonstrates that Slovakia is not prepared to do what the International Court of Justice had imposed on both countries , namely to respect modern environmental standards when sorting out their dispute over the Danube works .
It is about time that a country like Slovakia , which still wants to be considered - or so it says officially , in any case - for membership of the European Union , starts casting a serious glance at European environmental legislation .
Mr President , President Meciar is playing with fire .
A sure sign of this is the cancellation of the planned referendum and the brutal shake-out of over half of his ambassadors .
Although he may well be acting within the framework of his formal powers , he is revealing a problematic relationship with the culture of the constitutional state and democracy in general .
What we want is for the elections to be prepared properly from now on and to be conducted fairly and for the media to have all the freedom they need to cover such an important situation .
Otherwise we would have to join the other groups in calling for the complete suspension of European Union aid to Slovakia .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the Slovak Republic 's request for accession to the European Union gives us the right to remind our Slovak friends , as often as necessary , of the political and economic criteria that were set at the Copenhagen Summit for the accession of central and eastern European countries to the Union .
This does not , however , give us the right to interfere in the internal political affairs of this country .
Yet it seems that by having this debate today we have crossed the line of non-interference in the internal affairs of an independent and sovereign State .
What are we criticizing the Slovak government and parliament for ?
The Slovak parliament is criticized for not being able to reach a majority to enable the appointment of a new President of the Republic which , in terms of the constitution of the country , means the government must exercise part of the functions of Head of State .
Do I need to remind you that in France , in 1954 , thirteen ballots were needed to appoint President Coty , the last President of the Fourth Republic , and that whilst France now has a new constitution - on the initiative of General De Gaulle - it achieved this on its own , with no outside interference ?
Of course , the concentration of power in the hands of one man is a potentially dangerous situation , but it is for the Slovak citizens alone to find solutions enabling this political and constitutional crisis to be resolved .
To ask them to organize a referendum which envisages the election of the President of the Republic by universal suffrage , as the paragraph in the compromise resolution proposes , is clearly interference on the part of the European Parliament in Slovak internal affairs .
The head of the Slovak government is also criticized for having undertaken a significant diplomatic shake up , but no-one has mentioned that the nomination of ambassadors is normally the role of any government and that the difficult " cohabitation ' between Prime Minister Meciar and President Kovac had blocked all ambassadorial nominations for two years , with the exception of a few posts such as Paris .
The head of the new government is also criticized for having used his new powers of amnesty on behalf of the State departments suspected of having participated in the incredible abduction of ex-President Kovac 's son , but no-one has mentioned that before leaving office President Kovac himself had amnestied this very son who was involved in a criminal affair in Germany .
The sole justification was to enable him to recover his passport and to give himself up in Germany , which he did , although he was immediately released on bail .
In these circumstances , it seems that the presentation of the facts which have prompted the European Parliament 's resolutions has been only a partial , even biased one .
I fear that this inappropriate interference in Slovak life on the part of the European Parliament may only cause to exacerbate the conflict between government and opposition instead of placating it , which would have been the most desirable .
In these circumstances , the Union for Europe Group cannot support the joint motion for a resolution , nor the resolutions tabled by the various groups .
For our part , we subscribe to the recommendations adopted unanimously by the members of the Joint Parliamentary Committee at its last meeting .
We passionately wish the recommendations to be effectively followed up so that the Slovak Republic may join the European Union as quickly as possible , which is what its people and leaders , both government and opposition , desire .
Mr President , may I say that this discussion once again shows that we have a strong responsibility for the situation in Slovakia .
I would also like to remind you of the discussion held in December , when the majority of this House rejected a proposal on the taxation of newspapers .
We know that this question of taxation of newspapers is not solved .
We have so many times heard that something is going to happen and nothing has happened .
The same is true of the JPC recommendation .
The question and the message I want to give to the Slovakian people is that they must understand that the Union is a political union where you respect certain rules : the rule of law , the independence of the judiciary and also free and fair elections .
The fate of the Slovakian nation and its way to the European Union depend on the decisions that the people are taking .
Our responsibility is to see that the elections will be free and fair , and our main concern is that Meciar is now trying to manipulate access to the media in every possible way so that he will keep power .
It is not only a question of one person .
We also know that in the Slovak National Party very many people hold the same opinion as Meciar ; we know that people have also been expressing anti-semitic opinions in the government parties , and we cannot accept that .
Nor can I accept the situation when the European Union has been urging the need for legislation on minority rights and nothing has happened so far .
In this respect , Commissioner , I think that the standpoint of the Commission has been more honest , more straightforward during the whole process than that of this Parliament , which believes in vague promises and does not give a clear message that we support Slovakia 's entry into to the European Union by free and fair means .
Mr President , as second Vice-President of the Joint Committee with Slovakia I regard myself as a friend of Slovakia and the Slovak people .
I had hoped , in the deliberations that Mr Bösch referred to within the JPC , that across our political divisions we would be able to temper some of the toughness of the strictures directed by the EU towards Slovakia .
I am happy to repeat today that I still look forward to Slovakia joining the EU at the earliest possible opportunity .
The Slovak government must show that it is truly committed to a pluralist democracy .
The failure to elect a President to succeed Mr Kovác is a clear signal that the government of Slovakia seems determined to ignore our genuine worries .
The people of Slovakia have every right to choose their own government .
Elections are due there in the autumn and I think it is the clause in this urgency that deals with those parliamentary elections that is the most critical .
Those elections must be genuinely free and fair .
Should there be any doubts we would have to say to Slovakia that it is not yet a member of the family of democratic nations .
The people I know in Slovakia - in Mr Meciar 's party included - do not deserve that judgement .
Mr Meciar must show that he , too , values our good opinion .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the Commission shares Parliament 's concerns regarding the development of the political situation in the Slovak Republic , particularly those voiced by today 's speakers .
The Prime Minister , Mr Meciar , who is temporarily acting as President , has decided to put an end to the procedures which were initiated when problems occurred in the preparation and supervision of the referendum on 23 and 24 May last year .
He has also given an amnesty , as some of you have noted , to those responsible for the abduction of President Kovac 's son .
These are worrying decisions .
The Presidency of the European Union has , moreover , sent a declaration to the Slovak authorities as recently as 48 hours ago , on 10 March , insisting on the need to respect the essential rules of the smooth functioning of a rule of law . This was , of course , done without interfering in the country 's internal affairs .
In addition to these decisions is the persistent violation of the Constitutional Court 's ruling regarding Mr Gaulieder 's reintegration as a Member of Parliament , a violation condemned by the House during a previous urgent debate .
These decisions are evidence of the Slovak Republic 's lack of respect for the Copenhagen criteria for accession to the European Union .
The Commission supports the Slovak people 's aspirations to advance along the path of integration into the Community , but the Commission will remain particularly vigilant with regard to the need to respect fundamental rights .
The joint debate is closed .
The vote will be taken at 5.30 p.m.
The next item is the joint debate on the following motions for resolutions :
B4-0320 / 98 by Mr Goerens and Mr Bertens , on behalf of the ELDR Group , on Cambodia ; -B4-0333 / 98 by Mr Habsburg-Lothringen , Mr Rinsche and Mrs Oomen-Ruijten , on behalf of the PPE Group , on Cambodia ; -B4-0343 / 98 by Mr Swoboda , Mr Titley , Mr Harrison and Mrs Pollack , on behalf of the PSE Group , on the situation in Cambodia ; -B4-0351 / 98 by Mr Pasty and Mr Azzolini , on behalf of the UPE Group , on the situation in Cambodia ; -B4-0364 / 98 by Mr Hory , on behalf of the ARE Group , on the situation in Cambodia ; -B4-0367 / 98 by Mr Pettinari and Mrs Sierra González , on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group , on the situation in Cambodia ; -B4-0376 / 98 by Mr Telkämper and Ms McKenna , on behalf of the V Group , on Cambodia .
Mr President , the Commission has announced the allocation of ECU 9.5 million to the Cambodia elections .
We cannot remain silent over the fact that this is our taxpayers ' money and that , on that account , we , as their representatives , have not only the right but also the duty to ensure that this money is well spent .
The donation of this amount should therefore be strictly subject to compliance with the many conditions listed in paragraph 3 of the draft joint resolution .
Otherwise , there would be no reason for allocating money to achieve aims , such as , for example , the training of independent local journalists and observers which , in view of the current situation in Cambodia , would be difficult to achieve .
Mr President , on 11 February this year the vice-president of the Cambodian parliament , Mr Son Soubert , let slip in a private conversation that he thought the way the present prime minister seized power last year amounted to a coup d 'état .
The result was soon in evidence . Legal action was taken against him , his immunity was removed , the case is being heard and he will soon be on his way to prison .
Today we have learned that the Cambodian government led by Hun Sen has also decided to do more to exclude the smaller parties from the election .
This is the situation we currently have in Cambodia and it is , unfortunately , in the very sad tradition of this country . However , it would be very questionable if we now took a risk and said that the Commission , and therefore the European Union , was willing to give Cambodia a sum of ECU 10.5 million in aid to fight the elections .
It would be questionable firstly because in practice we would not be maintaining solidarity with a lot of other countries who say that they could not give out money to this kind of dictatorial regime - most other countries do not give out money anyway ; and secondly , we would be skating on very thin ice as this could be seen as setting a precedent for other countries . However , the main reason is that the Commission has let it be known that the money will be paid out in any event , even if certain parties - including the party of democratically elected Prince Ranariddh - are not allowed to take part in the elections .
We could be establishing a very bad precedent here and we should be careful .
We should be trying to get the Commission to reconsider the allocation of this money or to write a report on Cambodia in the course of the next one or two months to see whether it is sensible to actually pay this money .
Mr President , it is now two years since Parliament 's delegation visited Phnom Penh during a rare period of political stability in Cambodia .
A rise in military and political violence has since ensued , including the flight of some 65 000 civilians to safety in Thailand .
Now a new window of opportunity opens , encouraged by the Japanese : a peace plan signed in Manila .
We can only hope this new initiative succeeds , especially because the EU will be providing ECU 9.5 million to help prepare for the proposed elections in Cambodia later this year .
We have to be sure that we are not being taken for a ride by Second Prime Minister Hun Sen , whose supporters have been largely responsible for the recent violence and political instability .
In this respect it is crucial that EU support for the electoral process is conditional : the elections must be free and fair , with opposition politicians allowed to return and participate ; with equal access to the media guaranteed for all parties who wish to participate ; with the infamous media sub-decree annulled which outrageously defines any critic of the government as a traitor ; with the displaced fugitives able to return freely to Cambodia from Thailand ; with the repatriation of Prince Norodom Ranariddh , as provided for by the Manila peace plan .
If these conditions are not fulfilled , then we should be prepared to call for a second postponement of the elections .
It is more important to ensure that these elections are meaningful than to hold deformed elections which ratify the Hun Sen coup .
Peace ' comes dropping slow ' to Cambodia .
We can only hope that the Manila peace plan can be made to work .
Mr President , on the eve of the negotiations for a cooperation agreement with Cambodia two years ago , I expressed the hope here that our support would take on a kind of conflict preventative role in the country .
But , as you know , Mr President , the international efforts were of no avail .
The situation is escalating ; there are summary executions , and refugees .
Clearly there is no future in trying to influence from the outside a country which is still struggling to recover from genocide and which is suffering from a trial of strength between members of the royal family and those of a different political persuasion .
That is why , under the current circumstances , it is not a very good idea to allocate ECU 9.5 million for the elections .
This strikes me as throwing money down the drain .
It would be much better if , at the coming summit in London , the leaders of ASEAN give a signal together with the EU .
This does not mean that the human rights organizations and the refugees do not thoroughly deserve our support , however .
Mr President , if the recent history of Cambodia had not been so terribly tragic , you could be tempted to say that its political life has truly reached the heights of exoticism . A former dictator disappears , then reappears .
An exiled monarch refuses to pardon his son .
A neighbour who not so long ago made itself out to be the victim of imperialism establishes a protectorate over Cambodia . A joint Prime Minister drives out the other with spells , muzzles the press , puts his opponents in prison and nevertheless claims to be organizing democratic elections .
And hovering in the background is the memory of the excesses of the Khmer Rouge , there to remind us that at any moment Cambodia could slide once more into the worst of horrors .
The Group of the European Radical Alliance considers that the European Union must demand the return , or the unconditional liberation , of opponents , the organization of free and fair elections and the strict respect of agreements concluded in Paris in 1991 .
We would like to say to the Commission in particular that , without the unambiguous agreement of the current authorities on these three points , any aid to the organization of elections would merely be a ratification of Mr Hun Sen 's dictatorship .
Mr President , as stated , Cambodia is experiencing an extremely worrying time in its history .
After the violence of recent months , that has led to the replacement of Prince Ranariddh in the government of Phnom Penh , the country is currently committed to an electoral process in which the international community holds great hopes .
The 26 July elections should be the real test for the political desires of Hu Sen to allow room for democracy in his country .
For this reason , I wish to express my concern at the political climate in which preparations are being made for these elections .
We are witnessing threats and violations of human rights which are certainly not the best premise for a fair and free election and , at any event , any delays may make the situation worse .
The work carried out by the Commission in Cambodia has been positive , as has been the support plan for the elections .
This is probably not enough , however , so the Commission should contribute towards ensuring that , both technically and politically , the elections are transparent and democratic and ensure a balanced access for all the Cambodian political forces , for the national mass media and for the means of propaganda .
The Phnom Penh authorities should be reminded that the full inclusion of Cambodia in the international community and the approval of the Cooperation Agreement between the European Union and Cambodia for which I am the rapporteur , an approval which was rightly suspended while awaiting further developments in the situation , depends on the organization of the legislative elections of 26 July .
I also believe that the Japanese peace plan for Cambodia , adopted in Manila , should be supported , particularly with regard to the military truce that would restore a certain amount of peace to the country and thereby favour the elections .
I therefore hope that the Commission can continue to work to this effect and , if democratic elections are held , the money , which is of such concern to my colleagues in this debate , will be well spent .
Mr President , elections should be taking place in Cambodia on 26 July 1998 and perhaps they still will .
The Commission has set aside ECU 9.5 million by way of aid .
Cambodia signed the peace agreement in 1991 .
I think we all hoped that these elections would become democratic elections .
Over the past few months we have discussed Cambodia a lot , condemning the increasing violence and condemning the fact that the second prime minister , Hun Sen , seized power .
As things stand at the moment , it looks to me as if he is leading the country into a new dictatorship .
We therefore have to ask the Commission what it intends to do with the election aid , this ECU 9.5 million , which after all is presumably tax money .
We in the budgetary authority had hoped - just as the Commission had hoped - that this money would be used to ensure fair and free elections .
Will this money still be paid , Commissioner , or not ?
In my opinion , we should link it to political conditions to the effect that the political leaders of all parties can return , their return is permitted , free elections are held , there is freedom of assembly , independence of the judiciary is guaranteed and a debate is held at the ASEM summit among the ASEAN countries and between ASEM members and the governments of the European Union on the future of Cambodia and these elections or the pace of democratization .
Mr President , I will not repeat what other Members have already said , that would be of little use to you , but I have grave misgivings about that fact that the European Union is allocating ECU 9.5 million to elections of which we do not even know whether the authorities have the political will to hold them in the way we wish to hold them .
What are these ECU 9.5 million for ?
To train people , to install equipment in order for the elections to be held smoothly .
I think this is putting the cart before the horse .
During the gigantic operation of four years ago , at which I was an observer together with former Commissioner and Member of this Parliament Mr Cheysson , Mr Cheysson and I made a plea for Europe to continue monitoring and for it not to assume that once the elections were over , everything would automatically be fine afterwards .
I believe we failed in this .
And we will most definitely fail if , a few months before the elections - for which we are laying down some conditions - we think that they can be held simply because we donate money to them .
I am an optimist by nature and in attitude , but I think it will become an extremely difficult task , and I fully agree with Mr Telkämper that we must ensure that the neighbouring countries discuss what should be done with Cambodia .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the European Union firmly condemns the Prime Minister 's forced expulsion of Prince Ranariddh , along with the violence perpetrated in July 1997 .
May I remind you that the Commission consequently decided to suspend all aid programmes with , of course , the exception of actions directly benefiting the people .
However , in order to stabilize the situation , free , transparent and democratic elections are clearly needed , as Mr Pettinari states .
That is why the Commission and Member States have anticipated a one-off action of support for an amount of ECU 9.5 million .
These funds are aimed at enabling the Cambodian authorities to bring the elections planned for 26 July to a successful conclusion .
If the conditions under which this is carried out do not respect the principles of liberty and equality , the European Commission , after consultation with Member States , could suspend this aid .
The conditions which I have just mentioned are an integral part of this financing convention , as signed and ratified by the Cambodian authorities last January , at the time of its official signing in Phnom Penh .
Furthermore , may I remind you , Mr Telkämper , that the European Union is already working in cooperation with the group of friends of Cambodia , the ASEAN troika and the United Nations in order to set up a system for monitoring the pluralist nature of these elections .
Finally , particular attention will be given to Prince Ranariddh 's second trial , which starts on 17 March . Developments in the political situation will be assessed and , if need be , the directions adopted with regard to the organization of legislative elections will be revised .
In any case , I can assure you of the goodwill and desire of the Commission to be scrupulously vigilant regarding the implementation of the conditions linked to the disbursement of aid .
The joint debate is closed .
The vote will be taken at 5.30 p.m.
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , once again Colombia is on the agenda and once again this is very painful for us in Parliament given our good relations with Latin America and Latin American politicians , including those in Colombia 's .
Let me make two brief remarks on yet another tragic case of a human rights worker being murdered , this time even in his own office .
This is really one of the most dramatic instances of contempt for human rights .
A short time ago , Colombia elected a new government - senate and parliament .
I do not know all the individual results but I do not think there are any significant changes .
At this point we should be clearly saying to the newly elected members that we here will still be watching to see how they support an independent judiciary in their country , capable of prosecuting this crime since that does not just depend on the government , it also depends on the parliament .
They should know that we are monitoring events very closely here !
Yesterday I read in an article in a serious German daily newspaper that the subject of Colombia is also on the agenda in the Commission on Human Rights in Geneva .
The mandate of the United Nations Observer Mission there , which the EU supports , is to be extended and the number of staff doubled .
While that is a positive move on our part , it unfortunately bears out the negative findings .
All we can say is that the government must be called upon again and again to take action against these murders , as whoever is committing them must know that violence only begets more violence , particularly in a country where violence is a daily event .
The defenders of human rights must be better protected if human rights in Columbia are ever to be given the status they deserve .
Mr President , I know that governments like the one in Colombia follow this kind of debate with great interest , with more interest than they would be followed in my country .
As far as Columbia is concerned were are faced with the problem of who is exactly doing what ?
We have a country which is really governed by the drugs mafia , which is controlled , in the military sense of the word , by paramilitary groups and which is run , for better or for worse , by the government .
The murder of the chairman of the permanent commission on human rights , Valle Jaramillo , whom I knew personally , is of course , terrible .
It is going too far to say the government is guilty , but the government is in fact guilty of everything they have not been able to monitor , of what they should have stopped .
But let us at least say from within this Parliament to the Columbian people , the Columbian government and above all to the Members here in this Parliament , as Mrs Lenz has said , that we are holding out our hand , we are trying to help you , so let us help you .
Mr President , on 27 February three people claiming to be members of the Brigade broke into the Medellín office of human rights lawyer Jesús María Valle Jaramillo .
The gunmen tied him and his wife to a chair and , as she pleaded for their lives , the Brigade member told her : ' His time has come ' .
Dr Jaramillo was then shot in the head and killed .
Local human rights groups believe Dr Jaramillo died because he had evidence that the army and top politicians sponsor paramilitary death squads in Colombia , a belief backed by the findings of Colombia 's own Fiscalía or Prosecutor-General 's Office , and that this was an extrajudicial execution undertaken precisely by them in order to silence him .
We welcome the condemnation already issued by the government of Colombia .
But we ask it to note that Dr Jaramillo had been denounced by the Governor of Antioquia for his criticisms of the military and that no local politicians have publicly lamented his death ; that the human rights groups recorded 796 cases of extrajudicial executions in just nine months last year and that , despite the welcome bringing forward of the military penal code reform bill and the setting up of the Bloque de Bósqueda to combat paramilitary groups , military courts continue to acquit members of the security forces implicated in crimes against humanity .
In addition to our condemnation of human rights abuse , of violence on all sides , there are two areas where we in Europe must take specific action .
First , we must press to support the work of the United Nations Human Rights Commission Office in Bogotá , to consider its reports , to extend its funding and to request consideration of the appointment of a special rapporteur to work with the office in Colombia itself .
Second , when Commissioner Marín replied to my parliamentary question last year that human rights groups could not contribute to the ending of violence in Colombia , I hope that he and his Commission colleagues have further reflected on that answer .
It is only by rigorous , free and independent monitoring on all sides in Colombia , to which human rights groups provide a courageous and unique contribution , that impunity will be challenged and that a climate of respect for peace and for human rights will be created .
The European Union can , and must , provide more financial support for this work and , in doing so , we will honour the work of Dr Jaramillo and ensure that his death was not in vain .
Mr President , as the last speaker said , the brutal killing of this human rights activist is unacceptable , and the fact that the government there seems totally unwilling to do anything to protect the lives of its citizens is appalling .
The paramilitary groups have to be dismantled , the crimes have to be investigated , and those responsible have to be held accountable .
An average of ten persons are killed per day in Colombia because of socio-political violence .
The strategy of the government is completely unacceptable . It says that there cannot be respect for human rights as long as there is armed conflict .
These two processes cannot be linked - it is just not acceptable .
Paramilitary groups are a result of clandestine military strategy , and that has to be taken into account .
Parliament also has to insist that the Council and Commission must do more than just send recommendations : they have to state clearly that the Colombian government puts into danger the relations between the EU and Colombia .
As there is a human rights violation suspension clause in cooperation agreements , we should think about sanctions .
It is something that has to be addressed .
The EU Member States present at the Human Rights Commission in Geneva this month should take a clear position in order to undermine the material profits of those who help to undermine the lives of defenders of human rights , trade union groups and environmentalists .
We really have to do something more than just adopting resolutions .
This has come up over and over again and it is about time action was taken .
Mr President , we have received petitions from non-governmental organizations who work on the spot in Colombia and they tell us that 1 900 people were killed between October 1996 and March 1997 .
Most of the victims are farmers , trade unionists and human rights activists .
Today we are talking about Jesús María Valle Jaramillo , and we must remember that both he and Josué Girardo have been here in this Parliament explaining the human rights situation in Colombia to the Members . Now they are both dead .
I must admit that I am becoming very frustrated since we continue to condemn the events that are taking place yet we are unable to prevent the deaths of two human rights activists .
Moreover , there is no doubt - according to our friends in the NGOs who work there , in farmers ' organizations and in human rights organizations among others - that there is total impunity , and that the paramilitary groups are responsible for 76 % of the murders there .
Mr Samper had said that the paramilitary groups were in fact going to be disarmed . We have also received a note from the Colombian Embassy informing us of the creation of a peace council in Colombia .
However , if the European Union cannot prevent the continuing murders of human rights activists , that will only turn into a jungle .
In the last resolution adopted here , we remembered the murder of a couple , Mario Calderón and Elsa Alvarado , as well as her father who was also killed . They were young university students , and human rights activists who belonged to the CINEP , a very prestigious Centre for popular education and research in Colombia .
I do not know who is going to try to defend human rights in Colombia with all these murders .
I believe that the European Union has ways of exerting pressure and that , as Mr Howitt and others pointed out , it should increase the funds available to our office there and we should appoint a special rapporteur to promote human rights .
In addition , the European Commission should do all in its power in the context of its agreements with Colombia to ensure that no more events like these occur in the future , because every time somebody comes here to tell us about the situation , he is immediately assassinated .
Mr President , we have all followed the violent events that have taken place recently in Colombia , and I mean all .
Of course , we regret the death of Mr Valle Jaramillo , but yesterday 90 soldiers were buried with their faces blown off , and we should also regret the violent acts carried out by military and paramilitary groups .
I remember that the Colombian Minister for Foreign Affairs displayed before this Parliament her government 's commitment to combating the impunity there and to arresting all those who encourage and promote the actions of the paramilitary organizations .
This commitment has been confirmed through a series of actions , Mr President . An office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights has been set up in Colombia , agreements have been signed with the International Red Cross , a special section has been created within the Office of the Public Prosecutor to combat paramilitary activity , and finally , a national commission for human rights has been set up .
It is evident , Mr President , that all this is still not enough . The European Union must follow this process very closely and we need to ensure that one of the oldest democracies in Latin America puts an end to this conflict which has lasted 40 years .
We naturally regret this situation and must show our solidarity with and support for the victims and their relatives , in this case , those of Mr Valle Jaramillo .
Nicaragua
Mr President , despite the fact that a large proportion of the population of Nicaragua is desperately poor , Nicaragua has the highest debt per head in the world .
Last year 38 % of the annual export earnings of US $ 700 million was pre-empted for debt servicing .
The Nicaraguan government spent US $ 17 on health and US $ 16 on education per head of population , but about one-and-a-half times the combined total , US $ 47.40 per head , was spent on debt servicing last year .
Meanwhile , tax increases caused by the implementation of the IMF structural adjustment package have increased poverty and , to save money , much-needed credits previously available to poor farmers have been cut .
It is an outrage that people who can barely scrape together enough to keep body and soul together should be squeezed to pay back loans to the rich .
The fact is that Nicaragua cannot possibly meet the interest of capital repayments on its debt in the long term , and its commitments are almost double the 20 % of export earnings set as a ceiling by the World Bank in its highly-indebted countries initiative .
Earlier this year I wrote to the British Foreign Office to ask that Nicaragua should be included in the heavily-indebted poor countries initiative , particularly in view of Nicaragua 's success in meeting structural adjustment targets , and to ask that this should be pressed at the Consultative Group meeting in April this year .
This particular resolution follows up that initiative , and pressure must be put on all the parties at the Consultative Group meeting to give relief at last to this long-suffering country .
There are many other needs which need to be fulfilled , particularly in the social sector , and aid needs to be continued .
But the first step is to deal with this question of debt , and action must be taken on that at the earliest possible date .
Mr President , three years ago we visited the European Union 's projects in Nicaragua : a health centre in a village for those demobilized from the war , and a school .
And both the Nicaraguan authorities - the government is currently headed by Mr Violeta Chamorro - and the leaders of the opposition talked to us about the terrible debt problem they face .
Our resolution states that 38 % of development cooperation is used to pay the external debt .
They told us that at that time the figure was in fact 40 % .
Moreover , and we do not know why , some countries are fashionable for a while and then they go out of fashion .
The general aid that Nicaragua received from countries throughout the world has now been more than halved .
Nicaragua is one of the poorest countries and it has the highest per capita debt in the world .
We know that the European Union is already taking action in this respect and that the development cooperation from the United States and Japan , to name just two world powers , is much lower that than provided by the European Union .
Nevertheless , we believe , when discussing democracies with such energy and Latin American democracies in particular , that democracy will not be possible if , as both the leaders of the government and the opposition told us , 70 % of the population in Nicaragua lives in absolute poverty and there is 50 % unemployment , without any aid or subsidies .
As long as 50 % of the population is unemployed and does not receive any assistance , and as long as 70 % of the population experiences such extreme poverty and the country has such a high level of external debt , democracy there will be purely nominal .
Real democracy is what can and must solve the population 's problems .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , as Mrs Álvarez has just pointed out , Nicaragua is one of the poorest countries in the world .
60 % of the population is unemployed , many people are no longer able to afford a doctor , hospital care , and so on .
What is more , the country is burdened by such an enormous foreign debt that the greater part of most of any new money coming in goes towards paying the interest on the debt .
A meeting is to be convened in Geneva in the near future during which , under normal circumstances , it would be possible to negotiate the cancellation of that debt .
Everything now depends on the spirit in which this happens .
If it is only a classic offer along the lines of this and that debt will be cancelled , but instead you will have to introduce heavy adjustment programmes , it will lead to less money for schools , hospitals , and so on , and that does not get us any further .
Which is why we are making a clear plea to link cancellation of the debt to social aid programmes , so that the real problems can be tackled simultaneously .
Mr President , there is no doubt that of all the Central American countries Nicaragua has long been one of the most pleasant and one of the most tragic .
I myself have been to Nicaragua and have seen the situation there for myself .
Nicaragua suffered a really terrible civil war , of which we were very often shown a misleading picture here .
In spite of this , the people of Nicaragua have actually managed to bring a responsible liberal democrat party to power in the form of the present government and in particular its current head of state , President Alamán .
What is more , the relatively revolutionary Sandinista party have now chosen the way of democracy and freedom , which became evident during the current crisis surrounding Ortega .
From this perspective we can say one thing : it is simply not logical for Nicaragua to be one of the world 's poorest countries .
Anyone who has been there knows that there is massive potential there ; anyone who has been there knows that the people there are precious and we should do everything in our power to help the Nicaraguans out of this situation , especially under the leadership of its current president .
The only way we can achieve this is by relieving the burden of debt .
I am not saying that it should be written off completely as that would be wrong but we should do all we can to give the Nicaraguans the opportunity to actually build up their country , to develop the great resources that exist there - and these are first and foremost human resources - and , above all , to pursue policies that are consistent with this country 's great cultural Spanish tradition .
Mr President , capitalist , oligarchic families and romantic , revolutionary Marxist elites have impoverished Nicaragua .
All the country has is coffee , and that does not get you very far on the world market .
I sincerely hope the donors will save the country .
But this is not the subject we should be giving priority to this morning during the debate on human rights .
It is my view that we should be talking about classic human rights .
That is why my group had wanted to speak about Cuba .
There are over 500 political prisoners in Cuba , and yet this Parliament continues to flirt with the líder maximo from a completely misplaced feeling of solidarity .
If Havana puts it a little bit more effort into it , it will actually manage to join the Lomé Convention with the 500 prisoners still behind bars .
Small wonder the voters have no confidence in this Parliament , which is highly selective in its judgement of human rights violations .
North Korea
Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I think we simply have to recognize that a massive human tragedy is taking place in North Korea .
It is irresponsible of the North Korean government , in the face of the famine which has long been on the cards , to continue to try to prevent the international community from learning about the suffering of its people .
It is simply a tragedy beyond understanding that at a time when there are food surpluses throughout the world , a people , and in particular small children and elderly people , have to suffer a famine which need not have arisen in the first place if the regime had simply been open about its internal problems .
The North Korean government will eventually have to allow a delegation to enter the country to investigate the extent of the famine and find the best way of helping the people in the country , not only in the large cities but also in the countryside and in the remote regions , as the emergency may be even worse there than in the showpiece regions which the North Korean government is always inviting us to visit .
I also believe that the Commission - and I hope , Commissioner , that the Commission sees this as we do - along with the Member States should provide additional food aid for North Korea and increase assistance for medical care for children and elderly people .
I am not sure that we can use threats to get North Korea to comply with our notions of human rights and accept our normal humanitarian offer of assistance .
However , it is vital that we make it clear to the North Koreans that their country is a country which can and must receive assistance from all over the world and that we find the suffering of its people unacceptable .
Mr President , we are going to help North Korea .
Let us say first of all that the origin of the disasters , the natural disasters which have taken place there , can be partly found in the way the North Korean dictators rule the country .
The Group of the European Liberal Democrat and Reform Party is of course in favour of humanitarian aid for North Korea .
This should be increased - food , primary medical aid - and I hope the Commission will in any case be able to give me an answer as to how this will be monitored , not in order to be a busybody , but to ensure that the people of North Korea - as Mr Jarzembowski has already pointed out , the children and the needy - do indeed have access to this aid .
I would like to ask the Commissioner to insist that , in future , some kind of cooperation agreement is set up with the government of North Korea .
In relation to this I wonder if I could point out to you the three amendments submitted by the Liberal group , by Mr Cars .
For the future the Commission should lay the foundation for more structural assistance .
Strengthening the agricultural sector , for instance , is extremely important , and stable development of North Korea will contribute to this .
Mr President , part of the reason why this subject is back on the agenda again - we discussed the matter as recently as October - is that two things have changed : firstly , it is very clear that the 1997 harvest was as bad as the 1996 harvest ; and secondly , for the first time the North Koreans have actually admitted the full extent of the food crisis .
At the end of February the North Korean News Agency announced that , even with the daily cereal ration cut to a starvation ration of 100 grammes per person per day , cereals would be completely exhausted by the middle of this month .
Already prior to this the UN figures suggested that 17 % of the children in North Korea were suffering from malnutrition .
It is true that they have suffered an unparalleled series of natural disasters - flood , tidal waves and drought - yet we are all aware that one of the problems is the systemic failure of the country 's economy .
Without Soviet aid and Chinese countertrade the economy is in severe difficulty .
The economy is winding down - lack of fuel means energy blackouts . That means industrial production is falling .
Fertilizer production is down by 60 % , which means that less food is produced and round the vicious circle goes again .
If we are to avert a natural disaster more help is needed .
Emergency food aid needs to be channelled into North Korea , not only from the European Union - we were the biggest single donors last year - but also from South Korea , Japan and the United States .
One of the problems is that North Korea is still effectively a closed country .
We need to make sure that people are allowed in there - a delegation from Parliament to give some assessment of the needs , both in terms of food , medical supplies and energy .
The Foreign Affairs , Energy and Budgets Committees are currently in the process of preparing a joint report on the KEDO project , in which the European Union is participating with Japan , South Korea and the Americans in helping provide two nuclear reactors to generate power for North Korea .
With Kim Dae Jung taking office in South Korea and with a new leader recently installed in post in North Korea , there is a window of opportunity to heal a political sore which has been festering dangerously for half a century .
We should make sure we exploit it .
Mr President , once again we are discussing North Korea here in the European Parliament .
Unfortunately this will not be the last time , because the report which came recently from the German Red Cross is horrifying .
That organization estimates that 10 000 children under the age of seven are dying of hunger each month , and tens of thousands more are suffering from severe malnutrition .
The situation is more than serious .
The North Korean committee for the restoration of food losses has said that current stocks of cereals are going to be exhausted in the middle of March , in other words , this weekend .
There is no doubt that greater humanitarian efforts are needed in the form of food , and also in the form of medical aid , in order to reach the base level for the existing needs .
At the same time the reality of the EU 's actions in North Korea is that while all these people , especially children , are suffering from malnutrition , the EU through Euratom , together with other countries , is going to build two new nuclear power stations in North Korea for a sum which in this case is substantial .
How are we going to justify ourselves to the children who are suffering from malnutrition and are even dying of hunger and who need emergency aid ?
Where are the social , humane aspects of these double standards from the EU ?
The Green group wants the construction of new nuclear power stations through KEDO to be stopped , or at least suspended temporarily until it has been possible to relieve the acute human catastrophe in North Korea .
The Green group supports the text of the joint resolution .
However , we do not want this text to say that we support KEDO , which is not in fact in the text .
We simply accept and recognize that there is an energy problem in North Korea which we do not however think can be solved through nuclear power .
Instead there is a need for other energy sources which can represent the future .
Mr President , the Group of the European Radical Alliance wanted to raise the following question through the initiative of this motion for a resolution . Must hundreds of thousands of Koreans die of starvation so that the international community can judge the North Korean regime for what it is , that is , one of the worst dictatorships the world has ever known ?
We now know , by admission of the Pyongyang authorities themselves , that the population of this country is hit by a terrible shortage of food which forces them to eat bark and other vegetable waste and , if rumours can be believed , in extreme cases , even human flesh .
We pretend to put this human drama down to the weather .
The floods of 1995 and 1996 certainly worsened the structural shortages being caused by the political , economic and social regime of North Korea .
Yet at the same time , the authorities continued to squander exorbitant sums of money on the military budget and on ceremonial expenditure .
Today , it is only the North Koreans ' intransigence , verging on autism , which prevents the international community from coming rapidly and effectively to the aid of a civil population which has literally been taken hostage .
In all parts of the world , communism has been finally and categorically judged by history and overwhelmingly held responsible for the ruin of the countries subjected to it .
However , North Korea continues along the path of international isolation , state control of the economy and arrogant warmongering with regard to South Korea .
In the interests of the Koreans themselves , the international community must no longer tolerate this .
I would like the Commission to keep us informed with regard to the initiatives it is taking both to help the United Nations intervene rapidly on behalf of the civil population affected and to break with this logic of collective suicide to which the sinister North Korean regime has committed its people .
Congo
Mr President , the so-called Congo Brazzaville risks no longer being a state , and even , in some ways , risks never having been one .
Since power was forcibly seized by Sassou-N 'guesso , the country is , in fact , in a paradoxical situation , to say the least .
On the one hand , the government has essentially become a one-party government and , on the other , many private forces , formed on an ethnic basis , are dividing the territory and fighting interminably between themselves : a situation elegantly described in French political terminology as " un chaos borné ' , limited chaos .
The Commission therefore needs to block any aid to Congo not intended for humanitarian aid or the development of the weaker sectors of society until the situation changes in that country .
I am appealing to your prudence , Commissioners , for the necessary , useful and appropriate measures to be adopted to achieve this aim .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , Commissioner , last year Mr Sassou-Ngesso seized power once again , after heavy fighting .
Angola gave him considerable support in this .
Meanwhile , the constitution has been suspended , parliament and the constitutional court have been dissolved , the constitutional council no longer exists , and so on and so forth .
It is obvious that there is a move towards further dictatorship and less democracy .
Well , I would like to point out that one of the biggest economic changes which have been implemented by the new president is the lowering of the oil taxes , which Elf Acquitaine have to pay .
So they benefit .
It will come as little surprise that the President of the same country , Congo - and this has evolved entirely as a result of dictatorial practices - has meanwhile been warmly received at the Elysée .
But , it is essentially clear that the European Union , if it wants to be serious , should make a stand . It is also remarkable that there was very little reaction to the coup which took place last year .
That is why the resolutions before us state very clearly that free elections must be organized , that the Council must be able to speak with one voice - although we are quite used to the fact that it is often a cacophony - and that financial aid from the Union to Congo must remain frozen , except for that part which affects people directly , humanitarian aid , so that we are doing something for the poorest sections of the population .
I hope we will manage to obtain a clear position from this Parliament , and that the Commission and the Council will act in response to this .
Mr President , could I remind Mrs Aelvoet that , last year during urgent and topical debates , Mr Hory and I did indeed draw attention to Congo-Brazzaville , but at that time the other Members clearly did not think it was particularly worthwhile .
It is extremely sad that there is so much oil around the equator .
Foreign companies are quick to exploit it , and are particularly keen to do so in conjunction with dictators .
It is the case in Congo-Brazzaville , it was and is the case in Luanda , in Angola , it is the case in the former autonomous region of Kabinda .
The resolution on Congo-Brazzaville would have been useful as a signal last year .
Now we have had a change of government , the old dictator is back , and the Angolan troops and mercenaries are still present .
My group considers it very important that aid for the people of Congo-Brazzaville is intensified , and has submitted an amendment to this effect .
Since Kabila has captured the heart of Africa , a few things have changed in the region , but none of the changes benefit democracy or the people .
Although a peace process in Angola is taking place for the outside world to see , insiders know - as the Portuguese Member of another political persuasion assured me only two hours ago - that the government leader is preparing for a large-scale offensive to destroy the official opposition for good .
The oil profits in Angola are all going into buying arms , and will continue to do so over the coming years .
As far as I know a Lomé country is only eligible for EU assistance if no more than 2 % of its budget is allocated to arms .
Commissioner , could you check scrupulously whether a country like Angola , which is buying so many weapons , is complying with the Lomé Convention , and could you check whether the EU money is benefiting all people of Angola , not merely the elite .
This is a very interesting situation , Mr President .
The Group of the European Liberal Democrat and Reform Party submitted a resolution on Jamaica 's pulling out of the optional protocol to the International Convention on Human Rights .
If a protocol is optional , the Jamaican government must have thought , then we can leave it voluntarily .
This may be right , but the most important thing in this issue is that it gives out the wrong signal .
It has already turned out that the governments of Barbados , and Trinidad and Tobago , want to do the same .
I have a beautifully written note from the Minister of Foreign Affairs , or from the prime minister of Jamaica , and I can only conclude that this pulling out of the optional protocol is related to the ease with which Jamaica wishes to defend itself on the re-introduction of the death penalty .
I hope that this might be raised at the ACP meeting in Mauritius soon .
In other words , we are not condemning Jamaica , but we are asking , in the form of an opinion , was this really necessary ?
Mr President , thank God that Parliament debates the death penalty time and again , in most cases even unanimously , but not always , I am sorry to say .
The good thing about the present case is the fact that we are talking about a theoretical case here and not a practical one which we would have to prevent immediately .
However , in the debate on Jamaica 's withdrawal from the optional protocol we should not forget that people who live in glass houses should not throw stones .
There are a number of Member States of the European Union which , citing the same grounds as Jamaica , have not signed the same optional protocol which we are now calling on Jamaica to sign , for example the United Kingdom , as well as other large countries such as the United States of America , Japan and - as far as I am aware - eighteen other large countries .
I am convinced that we should be consistent in our opposition to the death penalty here in Parliament but we should not be too quick to condemn when we should actually be putting our own house in order .
Syria
Mr President , about a month ago I received a delegation of Lebanese men and women in my office in Brussels who were clearly in a distressed state .
They were men and women with relatives who had been abducted from their homes or offices and taken , apparently , to Syria where they had disappeared without trace .
In one or two cases the families knew more or less the whereabouts of those who had been abducted .
One particular case that I remember was of a lady who came along with the group and said that she had not heard anything about her son for six years until someone else had come to her home and said that particular person had been in a certain prison , possibly in Damascus .
That was a dire situation and the question is what we would do about it .
It is one of the characteristics perhaps of the European Parliament that we are able to highlight or raise the profile of cases of this sort and that is the main purpose of this resolution which has been tabled in my name and also on behalf of the European People 's Party .
Remarkably , just a few days ago we had news that quite a large number of people in this situation who had been abducted were indeed released .
I have not referred to the number of abductions by the way ; they probably , in total , amount to no less then 200 and the releases account for possibly as many as 121 .
It is nice to think that perhaps our resolution has already played a part but we will never know if that is so .
But there are certainly others waiting to be released and so one hopes that the Syrian government , not least in the light of the fact that negotiations are due to start in the near future about a possible further association agreement within the Euro-Med programme , will take note of this and act accordingly to release the people where no charge has been preferred .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I will begin with Colombia .
It was with great shock that the Commission learnt of the assassination of Jesús María Valle Jaramillo , President of the Permanent Committee for Human Rights in Colombia who , as Mrs González Álvarez has just mentioned , recently visited this House .
The Commission strongly condemns this act and notes the decision to set up a special committee within the Fiscalía general de la Nación in order to investigate this murder .
It also formally calls on the Colombian government to put all the necessary means in place to identify those responsible for this intolerable crime and to refer them to the courts for punishment .
The Commission fully shares Parliament 's concerns , Mrs Lenz , regarding the development of the situation within Colombia which , as you said , has continued to deteriorate over the last few months .
Human rights in Colombia must be tackled not only with words but also with actions , Mrs González Álvarez .
The Commission is also convinced that any initiative aimed at isolating the country would only have the consequence of increasing the violence .
This is why the Commission is providing significant support to the strengthening of the rule of law and its efforts are three-fold in this respect .
Firstly , in reply to Mr Howitt , the Commission supports the work of the local office of the United Nations Human Rights Commission , having this year taken all necessary measures to ensure the office 's continuing activity for a further year .
For reference , may I remind you that the Commission finances the costs of five international observers , who make up the majority of the staff of this office .
Secondly , the Commission supports the work of NGOs .
Colombia is considered a priority for resource allocation within the budget line " Democratization and human rights in Latin America ' .
Many initiatives are currently being carried out , in cooperation with local NGOs .
Thirdly and finally , the Commission is also currently studying the possibility of providing special aid to the Colombian government with the aim of improving the way in which its legal institutions operate .
Let me turn now to Nicaragua , whose difficulties seem to be of a more economic nature rather than relating to human rights in the strict sense .
Nicaragua 's problems therefore fall more within my own sphere of competence .
In three years , Nicaragua 's foreign debt has fallen from ECU 10 billion to 5.5 billion . This is a great success , which must be acknowledged .
Nevertheless , in spite of this strong reduction , the level of debt and the situation in Nicaragua remain extremely worrying , for the debt still represents - I am specifying this for Mr Newen 's benefit - more than 250 % of GNP and debt repayments absorb the equivalent of 30 % , that is , nearly a third , of Nicaragua 's income from exports , which by international standards is a considerable amount .
The Nicaraguan government is going to ask for a reprogramming , a rescheduling , of its debt at the Paris Club .
The Commission shares the concerns of the House regarding the effects of such indebtedness on economic activity .
A solution must be found .
The Commission also believes that Nicaragua should be eligible for the initiative set up by the World Bank to improve debt servicing on the part of the most highly-indebted poor countries .
Nicaragua could thus continue along its rediscovered path of growth , which has occurred only in the last three years , after fifteen years of decline due to the armed conflict .
I would also like to remind you that any possible decisions regarding rescheduling , or reduction of the applicable rates , is a matter for the creditor states .
In Nicaragua 's case , approximately US $ 4 billion of its US $ 5.5 billion debt comes from individual states , half of which is from Mexico and Russia .
Consequently , the major part of this debt must be rescheduled within the framework of the Paris Club which brings together the principle creditor states and which , Mrs Aelvoet , will meet during the first six months of this year .
I can reassure Mr Habsburg-Lothringen that it is not the custom of Finance Ministers to abandon debts .
They are rescheduled , that is , the payments are staggered .
The rest , of course , is down to the multilateral organizations , commencing with the InterAmerican Bank .
With regard to North Korea , the Commission shares Parliament 's concerns regarding the gravity of the humanitarian and food situation in North Korea and this , Mr Hory , is of course independent of the judgement which can and must be made on the way in which the country is governed .
Since the first serious floods in 1995 , the European Union has provided aid to the most vulnerable categories of people : children , the elderly and expectant mothers .
In 1997 , ECU 48 million was provided in food aid and ECU 20 million in aid for public health .
The Union thus became North Korea 's principle donor .
ECU 68 million is a great deal more than the KEDO contribution - Mr Ford , Mr Holm - which is ECU 15 million over five years .
It is also a way of avoiding nuclear proliferation in this region , as you know .
The volume of aid - both food and humanitarian - to be provided during 1998 is still being considered .
A decision will soon be taken by the Member States and I can assure Mr Jarzembowski that there will be both food aid and support to agriculture .
Indeed , the Commission shares Parliament 's opinion , which I have heard here today , on the need to be better informed regarding developments in the situation .
This also assumes the granting of access facilities to NGOs and international bodies .
In any case , and Mr Bertens is right in this respect , aid is not a sufficient substitute for the adoption of structural measures to liberalize the economy . These are the only way of guaranteeing a lasting improvement in the economic , health and social situation of the country .
I can assure you that the Commission is doing its utmost to encourage the North Korean authorities to move in this direction .
Fifthly , I move on to Congo Brazzaville .
A declaration by the Presidency of the European Union on 3 November 1997 set out the Union 's position regarding the bloody conflict which has engulfed Congo and regarding the resulting new political regime .
The Commission 's action falls within this framework , following developments in the situation closely and paying particular attention to respect for the directions which were set by the National Forum for Unity , Democracy and Reconstruction .
The search for lasting peace and national reconciliation assumes , Mrs Aelvoet , the return of a regime legitimized by free , fair and transparent elections .
To this end , Mr Fassa , the Commission has committed itself to dialogue with the Congolese authorities and with representatives of the main political forces .
This is with the aim of encouraging their participation in the reconstruction of the country and also encouraging them to contribute to the success of the transition to democracy .
Since the onset of the conflict , the European Union has provided humanitarian aid aimed only at the people , the poorest people , aid estimated at a total of ECU 11.5 million . Further aid will soon be mobilized , in cooperation with the NGOs .
The European Union is also preparing a reconstruction programme on behalf of civilian victims of the armed conflict .
However , any resumption of cooperation will be dependent upon progress achieved at the level of national reconciliation and political legitimization of the authorities .
In reply to Mrs van Bladel , who raised a question concerning Angola , although this is not really appropriate to the current discussion , I will say that the aid allocated is dependent on strict conditions set out in the Lomé Convention and that , there too , it concerns humanitarian and rehabilitation aid for the poorest and for the rural population .
Sixthly , I come to Jamaica .
The Commission regrets the Jamaican authorities ' decision to terminate its signature of the first optional protocol to the International Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms .
Apart from the unfortunately frequent application of the death penalty , the effect of this decision will be to take away the people 's right to refer issues directly to the United Nations Commission for Human Rights .
This precedent could also cause similar action on the part of other states in the region who are current signatories of the said protocol .
The Commission supports the declaration of the Presidency of the European Union requesting the Jamaican authorities to reconsider their position .
I will end with Syria by replying to Mr Moorhouse on the issue of human rights .
For once , we have a result and some good news , even if it is only partial .
The European Union has followed the issue of Lebanese prisoners detained in Syria closely .
The relevant working group within the Council had been asking for a report on the subject from the European Union 's Head of Mission in Beirut since 1997 .
Diplomatic initiatives taken since , on the basis of this work , have begun to bear fruit .
A settlement of the issue of Lebanese prisoners occurred on 3 March this year , with an unofficial declaration of the forthcoming liberation of the prisoners in the Beirut daily newspaper " El Nahar ' .
The information was taken up the following day by the press as a whole and officially confirmed by the Lebanese authorities .
On 5 March , after a telephone conversation between Presidents Hraoui and Hafez el Assad , 121 prisoners were freed at Masna , on the Syrian-Lebanese border .
They were taken by the Lebanese authorities to detention centres . After verification of their identity and their police record , 86 were discharged by the Prosecutor of the Supreme Court of Appeals and 15 were retained in prison on common law charges such as drug trafficking and terrorism .
They will be tried in the Lebanese courts .
This leaves - depending on your source - between 25 and 33 people suspected of breaches of national security .
Although accused of collaboration with Israel , Major Ketel Hayeck benefited from this liberation but remains charged in Lebanon , in connection with the trial regarding the assassination of the Prime Minister , Rachid Karamé .
The Commission will continue to follow this issue with the utmost attention and , of course , will take it into account within the framework of the impending negotiations of the cooperation or association agreement that was earlier mentioned .
Thank you , Commissioner .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place today at 5.30 p.m.
The next item is the joint debate on the following motions for resolutions :
B4-0322 / 98 by Mr Bertens and Mr Fassa , on behalf of the Group of the European Liberal Democrat and Reform Party , on the situation in Sierra Leone ; -B4-0334 / 98 by Mr Robles Piquer and Mrs Maij-Weggen , on behalf of the Group of the European People 's Party , on the situation in Sierra Leone ; -B4-0344 / 98 by Mr Vecchi , on behalf of the Group of the Party of European Socialists , on the situation in Sierra Leone ; -B4-0358 / 98 by Mr Aelvoet and others , on behalf of the Green Group in the European Parliament , on the situation in Sierra Leone ; -B4-0360 / 98 by Mr Hory and Mr Macartney , on behalf of the Group of the European Radical Alliance , on the situation in Sierra Leone ; -B4-0371 / 98 by Mr Pettinari and Mr Jové Peres , on behalf of the Confederal Group of the European United Left , on the situation in Sierra Leone ; -B4-0381 / 98 by Mr Pasty and Mr Azzolini , on behalf of the Union for Europe Group , on the situation in Sierra Leone .
Mr President , President Kabbah , the democratically elected President of Sierra Leone , is back .
This , you might say , means that the military action by the United Nations and Organization of African Unity was successful .
The Organization of African Unity has thus for the first time departed from its policy not to involve itself in a military way in the affairs of neighbouring countries .
The situation is now as follows .
The President is occupying his post , his seat .
Meanwhile we have seen that the military action , in particular that of a number of neighbouring countries and especially Nigeria 's , was not without bloodshed .
This should be questioned .
It is more important for the future , Commissioner , Mr President , that the Union soon starts to give support not for the things that went wrong during the past year , but during the past decades .
I thank you in advance for your consideration and understanding .
Mr President , the motion for a resolution we have tabled aims to draw attention to a small , distant country - Sierra Leone . It is a country where everything appears to be horrible , except maybe the beauty of its countryside , the wealth of its land - although this wealth hides diamonds which are often the cause of tragedy - and the kindness of many of its inhabitants .
It is this kindness which , for example , led many of my fellow countrymen a few days ago to demonstrate their desire to return to Sierra Leone as soon as possible to carry out their work there as missionaries . They still wish to do this after having been kidnapped and used as human shields for two weeks by the defeated forces of the military junta which overthrew the democratically elected president .
The missionaries ' statement was very simple : they said that they had suffered for a few days , but that the people of Sierra Leone were still suffering and were suffering much more .
When we read the terrible reports , as we did yesterday , about very young children who are able to cut off the heads or arms of their fellow countrymen with a machete , we really shudder at the hatred that has been instilled in them .
Therefore , Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , our motion for a resolution , our request to the Commission , is to ask it to grant significant humanitarian aid , including special aid devoted to retrieving and rehabilitating these criminal children , to give them back the untainted childhood they deserve .
President Kabbah has an extremely difficult task ahead of him .
We must help him , particularly in examining his own conscience , since he must decide what the causes were behind the previous failure .
It is certainly not easy to elevate democracy in Africa , and it seems to be even more difficult in Sierra Leone .
It is our duty to help them , and not only through words .
Mr President , I am sure I am the only Member of this Parliament who was once an officer in the armed forces of Sierra Leone .
Relations of mine are still active in humanitarian agencies in that country .
I give my heartfelt support to the motion from all seven political groups .
Sierra Leone was founded in freedom .
Its capital is called Freetown .
The army barracks where I once served is named after Wilberforce , the anti-slavery campaigner .
It is tragic that it has been debauched and disfigured over many years by a series of military coups . That of Major Johnny Paul Koroma is only the latest .
Sierra Leone has become a ruined country : it has the lowest life expectancy in Africa ; its extractive industries have been pillaged ; its people live in abject poverty .
So we welcome the return of President Ahmed Tejan Kabbah .
We want to strengthen democracy in this country .
But we cannot overlook the fact that General Sani Abacha of Nigeria has played a major part in this enterprise and that what has happened is not in accord with the Conakry agreement .
General Abacha made a speech in Freetown this week .
He said that for the first time in the history of the region a government that had come to power violently had been overthrown .
Some of us can think of another government in the region that came to power violently .
What does he think of his government which hangs opponents and jails election winners ?
The European Parliament should use its best endeavours to see that Abacha 's troops are withdrawn and that both humanitarian and military aid are given to enable President Kabbah to re-establish Sierra Leone 's independence .
It should also see , by immediate representation to the Attorney-General , who has returned with President Kabbah , that due process is extended to the thousand people or more who have been arrested in Freetown , to avoid old scores being paid off against those who were never involved with the Koroma junta .
Humanitarian aid is now moving toward Bo and Kenema as well as towards the capital . We in Europe should aid that .
My heart goes out to this beautiful country .
We long for its genuine independence so that Freetown can become , once more , the capital of a free country .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , if there is one country where it is clear for all to see how dramatic the effects of a civil war can be for a population when the state has fallen apart , then it is Sierra Leone .
Thankfully , there is some momentary improvement , but the question is how long this improvement will last , because it cannot be said that stability is guaranteed .
In the eastern part of the country , the conflict is continuing , and we know that the rebels are assaulting not only the local population , but also the development workers there at the moment .
Our great concern must be that in the short term the problem of hunger is tackled , because many people are now in a dire situation as a result of endless bad harvests .
Parliament is making a strong plea today for the services of ECHO to become active , and for them to ensure in conjunction with the UN that the food reaches the most needy .
For this reason alone it is useful that we are tackling this problem here today , but it is clear that , in view of the future , we will have to keep an eye on the further developments , the stability of the country , otherwise everything will start right from the beginning again .
Mr President , I echo the points Mr Whitehead made .
I did not realize he had such a distinguished past .
But it is an enviable position to have been in - the West African Frontier Force in Sierra Leone .
I would like to echo some of the points he has made about the long traditions of Sierra Leone .
It is a country which has a long and sophisticated political tradition which has been brutally interrupted by the seizure of power by soldiers in the past .
This is a pattern which is only too familiar in many parts of Africa .
What we are now seeing , though , is another example of the new wave of re-democratization , which is something close to all our hearts in Parliament .
My plea to Parliament and the Commission is this : we often make criticisms of various regimes and situations , and we are not slow to come forward with them .
That is right .
But now that we have a successful restoration of democracy in Sierra Leone let us please do something concrete to help .
Let us give some special , extra assistance to that beautiful country so that it can re-establish its democracy on a firm foundation .
Mr President , President Kabbah 's return to Sierra Leone is a positive fact of great importance .
An unacceptable coup d 'état had put an end to the country 's first taste of democracy . Its commitment to the UN and to all those countries working towards the restoration of constitutional order and the re-establishment of a civil government needs to be implemented .
It is wrong to think their problems have been sorted out , there is still a lot to be done and the European institutions have to do their part .
Firstly , we need to resume political negotiations for national reconciliation , which were suddenly interrupted by General Koroma 's coup , and we need to do this on the basis of the Conakry and Abidjan Agreements , because the military tension of today certainly cannot form the basis for a political reconstruction of the country .
Finally , I wish to express my great concern over the role played by Nigeria in Sierra Leone for , although it has partly contributed towards Kabbah 's return , it risks taking the form of a search for military political control in the region that brings out the antidemocratic dictatorial nature of General Abacha 's regime .
We hope the EU will take up a strong and clear position in this respect .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , my speech is connected with the previous one - it is a kind of photocopy of Mr Pettinari 's speech , although that was not something we had agreed in advance , because we cannot fail to mention the fact that one of the main objectives of the draft resolution we are approving in this Parliament , in connection with Sierra Leone , is , from more than one viewpoint , the current Nigerian government , which , despite the agreements excluding any recourse to force , preferred to attack the capital of Sierra Leone , threatening the delicate political balances of this region it intends to control once again .
I therefore believe that we cannot talk about a common EU foreign security policy if the primary objective is not to ensure the delicate geopolitical stability of this area and I would like to know the Commission 's point of view in that respect .
Mr President , the political situation in Sierra Leone is becoming more favourable with the return of President Kabbah . However , the humanitarian situation remains tragic .
With the exception of the capital , Freetown , the country is suffering an intolerable shortage of food and medical products .
Throughout the conflict , the Commission has continued to support humanitarian aid programmes for health and nutrition through its partners on the ground , by targeting its action towards the most vulnerable groups .
The volume of aid provided by ECHO now stands at ECU 3.8 million in one year .
It was not physically possible to do more than this because , given the conditions noted by some of you , it was completely impossible to send the necessary staff to distribute the aid .
The Commission and its humanitarian partners have now reoriented part of their current action in order to respond to the most urgent needs .
In other words , Mr Whitehead , it is reviewing its rehabilitation programmes following the military intervention which took place on 8 February , which put an end to the embargo on entry into Sierra Leone and which enabled the resumption of movement of equipment , provision of staple foods and medical products .
On 10 February , the Commission allocated ECU 1.9 million to the financing of " seeds and tools ' programmes in order to ensure that the local population are able to harvest sufficient agricultural produce over the coming months .
In the immediate future , the Commission is awaiting the conclusions of evaluations being carried out by aid agencies on the ground before deciding on the possible allocation of supplementary emergency food aid .
The level of this aid will probably be substantial and will enable the particularly tragic situation of the children , mentioned earlier by Mr Robles Piquer , to be resolved .
Existing programmes have enabled the flow of refugees into neighbouring countries to be absorbed without too much difficulty .
The Commission intends to give priority to measures aimed at encouraging the return and reintegration of refugees to their home villages .
To this end , a programme of assistance to some ten thousand refugees in Guinea should soon be approved .
Finally , Mr Pettinari , let me clarify for you that cooperation with Nigeria has been suspended since 1995 and you know as well as I that many people have said loud and clear that Nigeria has exceeded its role and should not have intervened with military force in this conflict .
Thank you , Commissioner de Silguy .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place today at 5.30 p.m.
The next item is the joint debate on the following motions for resolutions :
B4-0329 / 98 by Mr Herman and others , on behalf of the Group of the European People 's Party , on discrimination regarding the sale of tickets for the World Cup ; -B4-0338 / 98 by Mr Bertens and others , on behalf of the Group of the European Liberal Democrat and Reform Party , on the infringement of the rules of competition by the committee responsible for organizing the World Cup ; -B4-0345 / 98 by Mr De Coene , on behalf of the Group of the Party of European Socialists , on discrimination regarding the sale of tickets for the World Cup ; -B4-0365 / 98 by Mr Hory , on behalf of the Group of the European Radical Alliance , on the system for distributing tickets for the World Cup ; -B4-0372 / 98 by Mrs Castellina and others , on behalf of the Confederal Group of the European United Left - Nordic Green Left , on the distribution of tickets for the World Cup ; -B4-0373 / 98 by Mrs Roth and others , on behalf of the Green Group in the European Parliament , on the World Cup .
Mr President , we are aware that the Commissioner has had meetings with the French football authorities .
It might be useful for us to have that information before we start the debate , rather than be surprised at the end as to what has actually happened .
I would be grateful if you would ask the Commissioner if he would be prepared to speak at the beginning of the debate .
Mr President , I would like to make a similar request in view of the fact that the Commissioner considered it extremely important to be present during the debate .
The Members ' requests and the points of order they have raised are more what might be expected in a statement by the Commission .
This is not the procedure we are following .
However , I can ask the Commissioner if he is willing to open the debate .
If he agrees - although it should be noted that this is not the normal procedure for topical and urgent debate - I will of course give him the floor .
Mr President , I would first of all like to thank Parliament for this initiative . I appreciate the value of being invited to open this debate .
I want you to be the first to know the current position following the meetings and discussions of the last few days and I am now in a position to tell you exactly where we are in this matter .
Before going into a number of details , I would like to remind you that this problem is relatively new .
There have been some problems in the past , in relation to a number of sporting events . However , in general this concerned the way in which the organizers had chosen the tour operators who would sell the tickets , or the granting of a monopoly to a certain vendor , as in Italy in 1990 .
The Commission therefore intervened with regard to the sale of tickets in respect of the choice of stockists , in this instance the tour operators .
We tried to change the system .
Instead of giving the organizers the freedom to grant a monopoly , or to choose the companies that perhaps they were already friendly with , we imposed a selection procedure for stockists in the relevant countries and we also imposed the principle of not restricting the sale of tickets to any particular country .
Buyers were therefore able to contact tour operators outside their own country to purchase tickets .
There was also the problem of linking the sale of tickets to other services such as air tickets , hotel rooms and so on .
These were the sorts of problem that were occurring and which we tried to resolve .
Furthermore , last year the organizers asked what the Commission 's position was with regard to these points and we confirmed our previous position .
But now the problem is different .
It relates to the allocation system itself , fairness in the distribution and also non-discrimination .
So the problem is much wider , for we have noted - in any case this is the position of the Council - that the system is not fair and that it has a number of discriminatory aspects .
Before moving on to the current situation , I would also like to say a few words on the Commission 's reaction .
In fact , the problem became apparent in December , at the time of the draw to decide who plays whom .
It was soon noted , even by the national associations and leagues , that the number of tickets was extremely limited .
It was also noted that , especially if you wanted to buy tickets in France , you had to have an address in France .
So it was from December onwards that we began to receive an increasing number of , occasionally contradictory , complaints .
Following this , the Commission contacted the organizers in January to ask them for an explanation .
As is the rule when there is a clear complaint or information - because a letter of complaint is not necessarily based on precise facts - the Commission contacts the organizers , the company concerned , to ask for an explanation .
Several weeks later we received the information from the organizers and we recognized that there was indeed a problem , in particular one of discrimination .
We sent a letter of warning as quickly as possible .
The procedure was underway and things were being conducted as they should have been with regard to a case concerning the rules of competition .
Having established that there was indeed a problem , the Commission reacted quickly .
Where are we at now ?
Firstly , I think it appropriate to quote you the allocation of World Cup tickets , as established by the organizers .
I will give you the figures and the percentages .
To be precise , the total number of available tickets is 2 559 241 , in other words just over 2.5 million . Of these , 4.8 % are reserved for boxes and hospitality seats , as they are called .
There are apparently quite a few lucky politicians who are going to be able to benefit from these hospitality seats , 200 000 in all .
Please , I am giving you the figures as communicated to us by the organizers .
With regard to direct sales by the organizing committee : general public 22.3 % , local French football clubs 14.2 % and the disabled 1.1 % . That makes approximately 37 % which will be sold directly to the French public .
Then there are the national associations and tour operators .
Approximately 21 % will go to national associations and 5.4 % to tour operators .
So the tour operators will only be selling a twentieth of the tickets .
Then there are the partners and sponsors , who will receive 14.2 % of the tickets , and the local authorities who have contributed to the investment in stadiums and so on , 2.8 % .
You then have to take into account other ventures - for example , sporting movements , youth groups and others who are also participating in the organization - which will receive 4.3 % .
That leaves just 6.3 % of tickets available for sale to the general public .
It is all that remains , in any case .
You now have a complete picture of the breakdown of tickets .
Within the framework of the action the Commission has undertaken , we have had discussions with the organizing committee to see to what extent the tickets that are still available , about 160 000 in all , could be made available to buyers who have not up to now had access due to the limits imposed - the need for a telephone number and address in France - so that they may obtain a minimum of compensation .
We have therefore asked that these 160 000 tickets be used as compensation .
Out of these 160 000 tickets , approximately one third will be made available to national associations or federations .
This third , or approximately 50 000 tickets , will be sold by the national associations to supporters who wish to attend a match in which the team they support is playing .
The national associations will thus have a few extra tickets available to them .
That still leaves 110 000 tickets , and we have insisted , as I said previously , that they be made available to European buyers excluding France , without discrimination . This is the stumbling block .
Given that there has been clear and , it seems , unquestionable discrimination , we must do all we can to compensate this discrimination , even though the possibilities are , unfortunately , extremely limited .
We have therefore insisted that these tickets should be made indiscriminately available to buyers outside of France but within the European Economic Area .
It is on this point that there is currently disagreement because the French want to make them available to everyone whilst we claim that , because there has been discrimination , we must do everything possible , no matter how little this may be , to redress the balance .
With regard to security measures , which are very often cited as an explanation for what has happened , it goes without saying that the Commission accepts this argument when it is a valid one .
When we are told , " 50 000 extra tickets will be made available to national associations , taking into account also the blocks that have been set aside for club supporters ' , we clearly accept the argument .
But it is also clear , with regard to neutral spectators - as those of nationalities other than those playing are called - that there must be no discrimination between Union citizens unless it relates to compensation in favour of those from countries other than France .
So this is where we are at the moment .
Let me now present to you the following few conclusions and thoughts .
Firstly , I dare to hope that organizers of this kind of sporting event will in future agree to consider , jointly with the Commission and well before the sale of tickets commences , not only the strictly commercial aspects as on previous occasions such as the issue of tour operators , but also aspects concerned with a fair and non-discriminatory allocation of the tickets .
There do seem to be signals in the right direction .
I understand that the candidate for the presidency of FIFA has said that , " if I am elected , I will deal with this ' .
We have already been contacted by the organizers of the European Nations ' Cup which will be held in two years time , who told us , " we are at your disposal to discuss our system of ticket allocation because we want to avoid the current difficulties ' .
So , there are indeed signs of good will in this respect .
Of course , another obvious conclusion which I totally approve of is that we must work to avoid this sort of problem in the future rather than trying to patch up the problem halfway through .
My second observation is that I hope the organizers and sports organizations will in the future more willingly accept that it is better to discuss these problems with the relevant Community authorities than to challenge continually the authority of the European Commission and to continue to refer back to a particular government or minister to deal with problems of competition .
They must understand that we are not going along with that .
Like all the others , they must accept the rule of law in a European Union governed by law .
But once goodwill exists , we will of course be available to them to try to find adequate and justifiable solutions , taking into consideration the interests of the sport .
We are ready to take account of the specifics and the needs of the sporting sector , such as security , which is inseparable from this type of organization .
My third conclusion is that I understand that there are a number of national associations which are still extremely unhappy , moaning and complaining bitterly that they have not received enough tickets .
This surprises me , because the national associations are part of FIFA and they therefore accepted the system as it was designed .
So , for pity 's sake , pay more attention in the future and contribute to the setting up of a good system instead of criticizing after the event and then leaving it to the Commission to sort out the situation .
Another thought comes to mind .
I believe that it must be understood , both at a national level and at the level of sporting organizations , that both citizens and citizenship of the European Union exist .
It is enshrined in the Treaty .
So there is a principle of non-discrimination .
It seems that some people are unable to accept this principle and its consequences .
From now on , when it relates to sporting events , there must be no more discrimination between Union citizens .
Allow me one last thought , on a completely personal level .
When I earlier noted the allocation of World Cup tickets , I mentioned that it has become extremely difficult for European citizens to obtain a ticket if they have no links with a sponsor or do not belong to a particular organization , for the bulk of tickets is apparently intended for those who belong to such organizations , or who know the right people .
I wonder if this is really wise on the part of the organizers ?
Of course , I understand that there are commercial considerations .
Sponsors are needed .
But is it necessary to go as far as they went on this occasion , by setting aside such a minimal number for people who do not have the necessary contacts ?
I do wonder .
Personally , I think the answer is clear .
I think we should show more concern for the citizen .
For my part , I have no problem in obtaining tickets .
Really no problem at all .
There are an enormous number of sponsors ready to invite me !
But the ordinary citizen has a big problem !
( Applause ) So on this basis we should admit the truth and admit that it is also our responsibility to try to improve the situation .
Mr President , this really is a very sorry tale , though I want to thank you and the Commissioner for at least allowing us to have that statement before we had the debate .
At least we get some idea of the full picture .
I certainly note the Commissioner 's words very carefully , namely that this system is not fair and has been discriminatory .
And what has the Commission done ?
It sent a warning apparently back in December , but we are now in March .
It has allowed three months to elapse while the situation has developed , and apparently we are now in a position where very little can be done about it .
I am sorry to have to say to the Commissioner that I do not think the Commission can entirely wash its hands of responsibility for the way this situation has developed .
It is interesting to know that in future we hope it is going to be avoided .
We have to ask the Commission this afternoon precisely what legal action and legal powers the Commission has to take against the organizers so that they face some penalty rather than simply expressions of regret ?
The Commission has responsibility to exercise those powers which it has quite clearly and lamentably failed to exercise up to now .
The world championship is of interest to people all over the world and certainly throughout Europe , and the number of seats that has been made available to European football fans is derisory .
The suggestion that to get tickets they have to give an address in France makes one seriously wonder who was awake when that proposal was going through .
If we hear now that other national associations are expressing concern , I ask : were they given the full facts at the time ?
That needs to be asked if they are now at this stage expressing their concern . The Commission cannot simply come to us this afternoon an say it is a sorry tale but it is taking no further action .
It must take some action .
Mr President , I wish to say to the Commissioner that Liberals in this House are deeply disappointed with his statement today .
This is the first billion-dollar World Cup .
The organizers have put national restrictions on ticket sales in breach of Article 85 of the Treaties .
They are abusing a dominant market position in breach of Article 86 .
The Commission was warned of this in June of last year in a letter from Professor Weatherill at Oxford University .
I am told that the Commission then had discussions with the CFO , who may have been less than honest with the Commission .
Very few football fans from outside France will get tickets to the matches .
Most of those who do will pay vastly inflated prices .
Liberals in this House call on the Commission , as guardian of the Treaties , to show the organizers the red card .
To those who say you cannot scrap an entire ticket system four months before the World Cup , we say : if it is illegal , it must be scrapped .
If the Commission decides there are good reasons to let it proceed , it must , at least , prosecute and fine the CFO .
Finding new arrangements to redistribute just 5 % will not do .
It is a sop to fans , stitched up with the CFO , and a cosy compact in changing rooms .
We are calling foul , and if we are not allowed to go to the stadia , then we may go to the courts .
Mr President , Commissioner , I would like to start by thanking you for being here today during this debate , for allowing us to be the first to receive information from you . The lesson , the conclusion we can draw from what you have said is that the football associations and the organizers of the World Cup in France are playing with you , and are playing with us , but above all with all these people in Europe , and that only one conclusion can be drawn from this : we must act .
You , Commissioner , as the person responsible on behalf of Europe , have often compared your role with that of a referee , who has to take decisions , often in difficult areas , and who is therefore , depending on the circumstances , sympathetic or unsympathetic .
Well , we are keeping you to your word , and there is one thing you could do here , namely to show the red card to those breaking the European rules , to those who think they are above the law , to those who act with the greatest contempt toward European matters .
But we can say that of course we will follow the rules for the 100 000 remaining tickets , when more than 2.4 million have already been sold .
That would be satisfying us with crumbs , and it is simply not acceptable .
Secondly , we could say we are going to impose fines .
It would not be all that bad if Mr Platini or the other sun kings in France were momentarily affected financially , because in the end - as you said yourself - this is primarily a question of money , and a lot of money .
Let them pay those fines , but the drawback is of course that this does not benefit the ordinary citizen , and so we , Members of Parliament , should take a look at what is in our powers , what means we have to enforce Community law .
I would also like to address the French Members .
Let us be fair , our friends from France , and let us keep it clean , this is not a game against France .
This is not Germany , Belgium , the Netherlands , the United Kingdom or Italy against France .
This is a question of elementary respect for European rules .
If we raise this question today then it is not without consequences for the future .
What is the future , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen ?
The future is , amongst other things , the European Nations ' Cup in 2000 , organized by Belgium and the Netherlands .
For that , too , rules will have to be complied with , even if that is not very nice for the Dutch or Belgian football supporters .
Today it might not seem very nice to the French , but if we are not resolute , if we are not consistent , it will be worse for the Belgians or the Dutch tomorrow . What is most important , however , is that we do not allow discrimination .
I would like to agree with Mr Watson ; if we are not allowed into the grounds , we should go to Court .
I can tell you , Commissioner , that we , a number of Members of this Parliament , have already taken on a renowned lawyer .
Mr President , sometimes we in the European Parliament are rather flattered if people come to us asking for assistance and actually take us seriously .
So let me share with you a heartfelt letter which I received from a football fan from Aberdeen , in my constituency .
He says , ' I write to you in the hope that the European Parliament can do something about the ridiculous ticket allocations for the World Cup finals in France .
I have been a member of the Scotland Travel Club for eight years .
I have previously been to two World Cups and two European competitions yet I do not expect to be allocated tickets for the games . '
This man was hoping that , because the World Cup was in Europe , surely to goodness he would be able to go to the first match .
As you know , the opening match is Scotland versus Brazil and you would have thought that the people who above all would be there would be the Scots and the Brazilians .
Instead he finds that he is not wanted .
The allocation to Scotland is too small and he is not going to be there .
He may of course decide to go anyway and try to buy tickets on the black market .
I think this is a very serious situation and one which should have been avoided at all costs .
I take note of what the Commissioner said about the French authorities following the same procedures as in the past .
If the procedures have been wrong in the past that is no excuse for not reforming them .
I welcome the small steps that have been taken to alleviate the situation .
We are talking about something like 160 000 tickets which sounds like quite a lot but in fact is a very small number indeed .
I would make a plea to give priority to fans who are going to see their own team playing .
Obviously if France is playing then it is reasonable to expect them to have the lion 's share of the tickets .
But when you have two small countries , Morocco and Scotland for example , then surely it would be quite easy to work out a mechanism to allow their fans to participate .
If there is one thing that makes a game enjoyable it is listening to the fans on both sides cheering their teams on .
I think it is time some common sense was brought into this whole process .
Mr President , there have certainly been delays in the Commission 's initiative on this problem .
Nevertheless , I want to give my full support to the action being taken by the Commission and the Commissioner at this stage , because they are actually trying to remedy an unacceptable situation .
I am saying that even though I actually believe that the number of tickets that can be distributed is too small .
It is obviously a very low number compared with the total available .
The Commission is taking the right action and I think it is right and important that the Parliament should take a stance because it is becoming apparent that , behind all the major sports events and shows , lie economic interests and often real abuse , with the sole object of making huge profits , even by speculating .
This is the case we have before us , because it is unacceptable that you need to buy a whole package , including travel , accommodation and tourist services , just to be able to get a ticket .
Although we believe that the major sports events and shows , as the Commissioner said , should involve the European citizens and , I would add , young Europeans in particular , it is obvious that this discrimination is unacceptable .
From this point of view , I believe that , even on the basis of the position assumed by Parliament today , we need to assign the Commissioner a new mandate so that he will not only continue the work he has performed so far , but he will establish new bases for tickets , from the quantitative point of view , and start on the rules .
I appreciate the fact that the Commissioner has been very explicit in this connection : we need to change the FIFA rules that have , until today , obliged the authorities , such as the Commissioner and now Parliament , to intervene on these issues .
Mr President , we all agree on the problems : the shortage of seats owing to the objective limits of supply and demand ; the excessive cost of tickets on indirect sale assigned to tour operators ; the need to oppose the black market .
We are divided in our replies .
Can we consider the sale of tickets for a sports or cultural event to be an exclusively economic activity ?
On reading the text of the draft arrangement , this would appear to be the predominant opinion , with reference to the rules laid down by the Treaty on competition , Articles 85 and 86 .
Within this framework , however , there is the risk of moving from an alleged abuse of the national dominant position to an abuse of the dominant position held by the EU , since it is by definition an international event : the football World Cup .
However , having to draw up the accounts with the legitimate expectations of supporters worldwide , the fairest and most effective position seems to us to be that of ensuring the allocation of quotas assigned to the national federations and to the non-profit-making youth sports associations , in addition to direct sales .
Our amendments should be made to this effect ; the outcome will determine our final vote .
Mr President , I should like first of all to thank the Commissioner for the efforts he has made .
I thought we were getting close to some kind of solution following a meeting I had with the Commissioner yesterday .
It would appear that solution has now disappeared and that the French authorities are now longer prepared to offer extra tickets in compensation to those people who have been disadvantaged by what is a clear breach of European Community law , namely Articles 85 and 86 .
What worries me is the failure to state that the Commission is going to pursue this urgently and with vigour .
We cannot allow these people to get away with it .
There are tickets available .
Anybody round here can pick up a ticket for a World Cup match just like that .
All you have to do is pay about £ 600 a time through one of those all-inclusive travel packages , exactly the thing we were trying to stop .
There are 2.5 million tickets available .
I do not believe that the French authorities have sold the 22.3 % of those tickets available for direct sales .
I would like to have some figures from them .
As somebody else said , all that seems to be on offer at the moment is the crumbs .
This is a cynical commercial organization - not the people of France and not the French football authorities - that is trying to exploit the special nature of sport in the interests of making money and at the expense of the ordinary people of Europe .
I hope we are going to take this seriously and , as a number of speakers have said including Mr Watson and Mr Cunha , if we do not get far more than is offered at the moment from the Commission or the authorities this issue is likely to go to the Court , and we have to make sure that the Court judges , and quickly .
The World Cup is now less than 85 days away .
Madam President , it is clear that the Commission has lacked vigilance in this matter .
Three years ago , FIFA set out the rules . We all knew what they were .
You should have intervened then .
Nor should 500 000 places have been offered to the sponsors to distribute through competitions and quizzes relating to whether you possess a certain brand of mineral water or tin of peas or not .
We all knew this . Nothing was done .
Now it is right under our noses ; the game is all but lost .
The 50 000 tickets that you mentioned , Commissioner , these are a drop in the ocean .
There are 166 federations , which is the equivalent of only around ten tickets per federation .
You have not even managed to obtain the other 100 000 .
This is very serious .
In any case , in conclusion I would ask you first of all to do everything you can to prevent a black market from forming . For the French will sell their tickets for matches such as the Belgium / Netherlands game at twenty times the price at which they bought them , which is unacceptable .
I would also ask you to play the game through to the end . You can still intervene .
You can still try to scrape together places . Indeed , you can still also use all your power to intervene on a legal level as well as on the level of compensation .
Madam President , we believe the concern over having to ensure the sacred principles of free competition and having to ensure the compatibility of initiatives with the rules of the internal market is the main reason for the spiralling increase in prices and offers in relation to the sale of tickets for the forthcoming 1998 World Cup to be held in France .
The Commission has found it necessary to disprove the accusations , according to which competition policy was at the origin of the spiralling increase in the prices of entrance tickets . It sent a letter to FIFA contesting the astronomic prices reported by some press agencies and emphasizing that these increases relate not only to entrance to the stadiums but also to the price of the means of transport and accommodation expenses .
In our opinion , however , irrespective of the real or merely alleged price increases , the multiplication , times 15 , of the prices applied by the travel agencies , the only agencies authorized to sell the World Cup package , are the direct consequence of the persistence of the Commission which is opposed to the establishment of a single retailer in each Member State .
Ensuring the principles of free competition , together with the fact of being able to overcome the accusation of abuse of a dominant position , should not be an obstacle to granting authorization to a single retailer in each Member State , specifically to prevent the emergence of the black market and , in particular , to prevent the monopolization of sales by the tourist agencies , thus giving all Community citizens the possibility of enjoying a sports event that is becoming increasingly more popular .
Madam President , the Commissioner has half-heartedly tackled FIFA on this matter .
What use is a slide tackle from Commissioner van Miert when you are dealing with people like Havelange and Lennart Johansen ?
The same thing happened with freedom of movement : the Commission went very half-heartedly on this issue .
They really have to strengthen their tackling - they really must get to grips with the situation .
We are as concerned as the Commission for the Community citizen .
We are particularly concerned , and I am particularly concerned for the members of the Tartan army who are hoping to come from Scotland to see Scotland play Brazil and the ordinary fan is not going to be given the opportunity at all .
This week two tickets for the World Cup sold for £ 19 000 in Glasgow .
That is almost more than some of the ordinary people earn in about two years .
What opportunity will there be for ordinary people if these inflated prices are charged by whoever is organizing this World Cup ?
As other members have said , it is up to the Commission to take strong action .
Madam President , the cultural , the social and indeed the commercial importance of sport is , I believe , beyond dispute .
The way that a football world championship binds peoples together has a quite special significance .
People retain memories of what happened there for the rest of their lives .
I therefore find it completely incomprehensible that the organizing committee for such an event uses a discriminatory ticket distribution system that gives preference to the citizens of its own country .
As the Commissioner has already remarked , the European Parliament is currently dealing with the second report on citizenship of the Union and is trying to find ways and means of making people feel European .
At the same time , sport , which already leads a rather modest existence in relation to its importance within the European Union , is being done a great disservice and a wedge is being driven between citizens of the Union .
In short , I can only regret that , if I have understood the Commissioner correctly , there is no possibility of straightening out the situation pro praeterito .
However , I must agree with the previous speakers and ask that we be informed of what is planned to prevent such things happening in future .
Madam President , I think I should first remind people that in relation to the rules of competition , the Commission is required to follow procedural rules .
When the problem first came to light in December , my departments immediately initiated a procedure , contacting the " accused ' by means of letters . There were also the reactions of some Members of Parliament .
But it was just some Members of Parliament , I think there were only two , although you now claim that you have been pleading with us since December to do something .
In any case , we acted promptly , as I said , by contacting the " accused ' to ask them to explain the situation and to tell us if what we had heard was correct or not .
As the explanations we received were not satisfactory - by this time it was January - we decided to move rapidly on to the second phase of the procedure and to send a letter of warning to the interested parties .
Such speed in the sending of a letter of warning is extremely rare . Those who normally criticize the Commission for moving too fast and sending a letter of warning without due consideration are now criticizing us for acting too slowly .
I am sorry but we did what we had to do , rapidly and with respect for the rules of the game .
Furthermore , the accused himself has rights .
This is my position and I stand by it .
You must realize that some things have been said today which I find unacceptable .
Secondly , as you know , we have had serious problems with sports organizations for quite some time now .
When I say " we ' , I mean the Commission in particular .
In fact , I think I now clearly understand that when these organizations consider the Commission is getting in their way they merely say to themselves , " we 'll go and find some support amongst the politicians ' . This is what happened in Germany .
Following a Court judgement , the political world rallied round to exempt sport from the rules of competition , saying to us , " It is no longer your business , do not get involved in this .
You , Mr Van Miert , and you , the authorities responsible for competition at national level , you deserve a red card , go and sit on the touchline . We are going to deal with this . '
This is the reality of the situation .
So please , keep things in perspective .
On many occasions , I myself , on behalf of the Commission , have reminded everyone that the rules of competition must apply , including with regard to FIFA 's behaviour .
Then , one month later , you probably read that a FIFA representative declared , in Singapore , if I remember correctly , that he was going to contact several European Prime Ministers in order to resolve the problem . In other words , they were going to bypass the Commission for they were tiresome , these Commission officials who dealt with such problems .
This is the reality , can you believe it ?
I met with more than one delegation of Members of Parliament who came to plead the cause of the sporting authorities .
I read yesterday in the papers that a minister - also in charge of sport - was going to come and see President Santer , my colleague Pádraig Flynn and myself to tell us that the Commission was no longer respecting the Bosman ruling of the Court .
This is the real situation .
But the Commission is holding firm , it is holding its course and it expects to make progress .
By the way , this is all apparently true for Formula 1 racing too .
So I repeat , I find some criticisms unacceptable .
On the other hand , I request your support in this matter .
When we have to tell FIFA that it must not only discuss with the Commission - which it generally refuses to do - but also change its system , can I count on the broad support of the European Parliament ?
( Applause ) Thank you very much , I appreciate that , but can I also count on your support in my discussions with certain national sports authorities ?
( Applause ) I am taking note of this .
When it comes to tackling the black market , Mr Monfils , please be assured that we will do all we can !
We will do all we can but , all the same , there is one thing that you cannot ask of the Commission and that is to take responsibility for organizing the World Cup .
This really is not our role .
Our role , on the basis of the rules of competition , is to check that offences are not committed , and to act if we consider they are .
As you know , this is my way and I think this is now understood , not only within Parliament but elsewhere too .
There is one other thing .
People have said , " what about the travel agencies ? '
I have not forgotten them . There is a problem here , too , for travel agencies must pay fees , they have to pay a great deal to be able to sell tickets .
But this still accounts for no more than 5.4 % of the tickets .
In principle , national organizations can also be contacted .
In principle , and here , too , there is a problem , for buyers should have been able to contact the organizers who should have made tickets available to them indiscriminately .
It is on this point that our action is centred .
As I said earlier , we have still not come to an agreement because , for the moment at least , we are not satisfied with the proposals made by the organizers to date .
We also want to check certain details which have been provided to us .
In fact , it seems that some of the categories I have mentioned are unclear and we would like to know precisely what they cover .
This is what we are going to do . We will see what happens .
Please do not ask me now what our conclusions will be !
Have a little patience .
Either the organizing committee will satisfy our demands as far as possible or it will not and the Commission will then go ahead with court proceedings .
This is the current situation .
If you require any further explanation , as usual I will be only too happy to provide it .
( Loud applause )
Commissioner van Miert , we all know you have a difficult job .
You have told us you could not take on the World Sports Federation but you did not tell us whether you would take it on if you were allowed to !
The debate is closed .
Before we proceed to the vote , Mr Killilea wishes to speak on a point of order .
Madam President , I hope it is a point of order .
I wish to compliment the Commissioner and , for a moment , I thought he was going to assist Scotland to try to win a match or two .
Just as well , after listening to Hughie McMahon .
Mr Killilea , the debate is now closed .
We shall now proceed to the vote .
Before the vote on Nicaragua :
Madam President , I wish to make a point of order .
We are discussing human rights . I am therefore surprised that the motion for a resolution on Nicaragua concerns foreign debt .
Could someone please explain to me how Nicaragua 's foreign debt is a violation of human rights ?
Yesterday we voted on the composition of the debate .
The House voted for this .
This text has therefore ended up below it .
That is the explanation .
Judicial cooperation in criminal matters ( continuation )
The next item is the continuation of the debate on the report ( A4-0058 / 98 ) by Mr Bontempi , on behalf of the Committee on Civil Liberties and Internal Affairs , on judicial cooperation in criminal matters in the European Union .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I am pleased to see that Mr Posselt breaks into spontaneous applause at the very mention of my name , which shows that contrary to all expectations he is a clever Member .
I refer to the events of this afternoon which resulted in our having to continue the debate now .
This afternoon we had the rather regrettable conduct of the debate to complain about and I trust you will understand if I linger a moment longer on procedural issues .
I can understand perfectly well that it is very difficult to organize an agenda in a packed business week in Strasbourg .
However , it is very difficult for Parliament to conduct a debate where the debate is interrupted in the middle of Parliament 's deliberations when the individual groups should be beginning to give their opinion on the rapporteurs ' presentations and when the Commissioner , who has actually come to hear Parliament , is given the floor , thereby turning the whole point of the exercise on its head , as the Commission is not hearing the debate but , quite the reverse , Parliament is hearing the Commission 's position . The Commissioner then departs and takes no further part in the actual debate .
This was all somewhat unfortunate .
I do not want to start apportioning blame now .
The whole thing was made worse - we shall have to reflect on this in general in the part-session - by the fact that Commissioner Gradin had to make her speech in an atmosphere which - with respect , Madam President - was more reminiscent of a cattle market than the dignified proceedings of the European Parliament .
Perhaps there will come a day when we will be able to discipline ourselves to show a minimum degree of courtesy on the day by listening attentively to the speakers whether they be Members or representatives of the Council or Commission .
That is the least that can be expected of a parliament worthy of the name .
So much for procedures .
I have three basic comments on Mr Bontempi 's report .
Firstly , we know from the trends which will logically follow from the ever closer integration of the European Union that transnational and Europe-wide crime is likely to grow because its field of operation has expanded .
Where business transactions are possible beyond borders , illegal business transactions are also possible beyond borders , in other words the market for organized crime is growing at the same rate as the Single Market .
We are now considering and organizing the legal framework for the market but we are not organizing the instruments we need to combat the growth of crime in the required form .
Cooperation , judicial cooperation , in criminal matters is being criminally neglected in the European Union .
There is a second reason for this .
The reason is that the police and the judiciary are still mainly the province of the nation states .
In political terms this is understandable .
On the one hand , we are confronted by a supranational body , the European Union , while on the other hand , the nation states realize that they are losing national sovereignty as the European Union gains in importance .
However , the national governments have a certain defence mechanism which is expressed in the strongest terms where the nation states can best demonstrate their sovereignty , namely in their monopoly of power , particularly in terms of the police and the justice .
The nation states are not therefore sufficiently prepared to use intergovernmental cooperation at European level to agree on provisions under Community law .
However , this would be essential politically .
I have now reached my third point .
We must finally realize that the crimes , from which Mr Bontempi has said we must distill precise information , in other words the crimes that particularly affect the European Union and , being in the area of fraud , are mainly committed against the financial interests of the Union , must also be able to be pursued and prosecuted by the Union itself . Only then we will not fail to agree on a system as quickly as possible in which we will establish operational criteria that will enable us to arrive at a proper criminal prosecution under Community law , which will then be supplemented by cooperation between police forces .
In this respect , Mr Bontempi 's report is a major step forward in the debate .
I hope that it does not stay a debate but that we will soon agree on suitable forms of cooperation with the efficiency required in the fight against crime .
Madam President , the " sign against crime ' campaign is now under way , the " vote against crime ' will take place tomorrow and the " fight against crime ' is our task in the European Community .
Mr Pirker thinks so too .
He sends his apologies for today as he has to go to Austria on urgent business .
But I think that organized crime quite simply has to be tackled in a much more targeted way .
It affects the legal trade cycle and public administration .
It also damages the financial interests of the Union .
A system of police cooperation is under construction - the EUROPOL drugs unit , established in 1997 , has successfully prosecuted 2 608 cases of organized crime , the UCLAF anti-fraud unit which protects the financial interests of the European Community has also been very successful . However , judicial cooperation remains in its infancy as different legal systems in the Member States prevent an optimum level of cooperation .
In the interests of improving cooperation , in the interests of combating organized crime efficiently , we have to have a debate about where national sovereignty should be set aside .
In any event we have to abandon it where the means to combat organized crime are lacking , where citizens - and not only in Brussels - are no longer protected and the Union 's interests are harmed .
The long-term objective is a common legal standard .
The Bontempi report - which , by the way , is excellent - urges us to act more quickly .
There are four points that I consider to be essential .
First , the administration of agreements on mutual judicial assistance must be radically improved .
Second , legal provisions must be harmonized , at least in the case of new offences .
Third , cooperation with third countries must be improved using programmes such as GROTIUS and Falcone ; in this way the EU can export security and legal systems .
Fourth , cooperation to protect the Union 's financial interests must be dramatically improved .
We need a strong core of material and criminal provisions .
UCLAF must be provided with the necessary resources if it is to become a criminal prosecution authority to protect the Union 's financial interests .
The EU must take steps towards judicial cooperation more quickly than before , not just to protect the Union 's financial interests but , more importantly , in the interest of our citizens ' safety .
Madam President , Mr Schulz has already made the important point that , indeed , we must improve the procedures in this House .
I will not come back to it . I just wish to add one point .
Why can we not interrupt the sittings before the vote at 12 noon five minutes beforehand to let everybody come into the Chamber ?
Then we will have an orderly debate .
What we experienced before was shameful and I really would like the Bureau and the Conference of Presidents to look into the matter .
Mr Bontempi 's report is characterized by a pragmatic and very instrumentalist approach .
Principles are fine but progress in concrete matters is essential .
We are faced here with , you might say , the positive side of negative integration .
We have here one of the Commissioners who is working closely on the side-effects of the internal market .
Everybody will soon be able to move freely around Europe except police and justice officials .
That is the heart of the matter .
It is very important that finally Member States are beginning to realize that a purely intergovernmental approach is not there simply to protect national interests but , at the end of the day , stands in the way of national justice .
The intergovernmentalist approach for the last 50 years was exemplified by the Council of Europe .
This is an important organization , but we all realize that justice and police cooperation in a Europe of 15 Member States without borders can no longer be achieved by ratifying national conventions which come too late , do too little , and have only partial effects .
It is this essential point which Mr Bontempi so rightly highlights in his report .
It is not a question of wanting to do away with democracy and national constitutional guarantees .
The European Union has become mature enough with its emphasis on human rights and protecting democracy , for progress to be made .
The Amsterdam Treaty - Mr Bontempi makes this quite clear - shows the way forward .
We can no longer work within the national conventions as if the European Union were simply an intergovernmental structure .
That is the heart of the matter .
This morning Mrs Gradin , in her initial response , made it quite clear that framework decisions should be the priority instrument in future for making progress .
I say this with great emphasis because it is the only way finally to involve also the countries of central and eastern Europe .
We must make more progress in this whole area if we are going to have an adequate reception of central and eastern Europe into the present European structures .
If this Europe , the Europe which we have been building for the last 40 years , cannot make more progress in justice and police cooperation how can we expect countries which , for 40 years , have been suffering from dictatorship , lack of protection of human rights and lack of institution-building to really come in with us and make the progress which we jointly want ?
It is essential and I would ask Commissioner Monti , who is standing in for Mrs Gradin , to say whether the PHARE programme should not be far more used to promote justice and police cooperation .
This is also in the spirit of Mr Bontempi .
It still remains disgraceful that neither the national parliaments nor the European Parliament are really involved .
This point has been made before ; we should not be defensive .
There is no way forward except for the national parliaments and the European Parliament to make more efforts to work jointly in this area .
The political will which is so often lacking in making progress should be made clear , both on the national side and on the parliamentary side , in this House .
The European Court of Justice , which has been the pearl of the institutions , still has an inadequate role in this whole process .
The Court can only give preliminary rulings if members so choose and even then it cannot really give an interpretation of the Treaty .
It is limited to framework decisions and decisions on the various conventions .
We must make progress in this field as well and it is again a point made very clearly by Mr Bontempi .
In short we really can do a lot more together but the central point remains that the political will on the part of the Member States is sometimes used as an alibi .
The approach of protecting national interests is an alibi for making progress at European level .
Against that we should strongly protest and it is that element which underlines Mr Bontempi 's approach ; we welcome it very much .
I hope also that the Commission will take it seriously for the current period .
Madam President , let me begin by saying that a majority in the Green group supports Mr Bontempi 's report apart from three points .
The first is that the harmonization of criminal law should not be accelerated .
It is and should remain a national concern for a long time to come .
The second point concerns the request to the governments of the Member States to refrain from derogations and to comply with the conventions .
As far as the Green group is concerned , such a general request is unacceptable .
The third point concerns the proposal to abolish the principle that a crime should be indictable in two countries .
In the current situation , to generally abolish this principle could lead to great human tragedies , not least among refugees .
That is the majority view of the Green group .
As a Swedish EU critic , however , I myself represent a totally different view to Mr Bontempi and will therefore vote against the report .
I am in favour of all forms of cooperation , even in the area of justice , if they take place at intergovernmental level and do not infringe on or restrict national sovereignty or national democracy .
The overriding aim of the report is to establish a common European legal and judicial area .
That requires , among other things , a harmonization of criminal law , which would mean the abolition of national self-determination .
The main legal basis is an interpretation of a treaty which has not yet been ratified or entered into force , the Amsterdam Treaty .
I find that strange .
International organized crime is best tackled through international , global cooperation at an intergovernmental level and through a developed cooperation such as in Interpol .
Madam President , I would first of all like to say that I fully support Mr Schulz ' preliminary comments .
This said , with regard to the content of the report , it is clearly understood that European cooperation is particularly legitimate when it proves to be more effective than action on the part of individual states .
And with regard to judicial cooperation this is precisely the case .
In order to fight transnational crime , it is clear that we need greater cooperation , albeit simplified , in the legal sphere , particularly in order to facilitate the work of the judicial authorities in the different Member States .
It is very important that judicial authorities should be able to relate directly to each other , and that the Rules of Procedure are simplified in terms of the exchange of information , documents and so on .
Of course , this must take place within the boundaries of respect for constitutional regulations and general principles of law .
Thankfully , within the European Union all Member States respect the rule of law which , in turn , respects the rights of the individual .
In this regard it is time that Member States showed less reticence towards accepting the respective legal systems of Members of the Union .
Mr Bontempi 's report has the considerable advantage of not clinging to grand principles but of being , on the contrary , very concrete , realistic and pragmatic .
This approach seems to be the best one in an area which is very sensitive with regard to sovereignty , the rights of the individual and , of course , the rights of the defendant .
The Group of Independents for a Europe of Nations will clearly support this report .
On the other hand , we cannot support the rapporteur with regard to the issue of a European prosecution service , which we believe would only complicate procedures rather than simplifying them .
Madam President , the increasing levels of international crime make it necessary to consider ways of putting a stop to this trend .
The different material and judicial requirements , the complicated provisions of mutual judicial assistance arrangements and the stipulation for punishment in both countries are cited as the cause of problems in connection with cross-border criminal proceedings .
As a practitioner of many years ' standing , I support any simplification of intergovernmental relations but because of historical and cultural differences I do not expect anything at all will be gained by harmonizing substantive criminal law .
Unlike Mr Pirker , and Mr Rübig who stood in for him today , we do not want to ask the Austrians , who in any case have been deprived by their government of their favourite toy , " bearer savings books ' , in order to combat money laundering , to give up sovereignty in the field of substantive criminal law or redefine the concept of sovereignty .
The demand made in recital K of the report to relinquish dual prosecution and scrap dual punishability indicates a misunderstanding and a misleading confusion of the two terms and a failure to appreciate the principle of the deputizing of the administration of international criminal justice .
To sum up , I do not see any need either to harmonize substantive criminal law or for a state prosecutor with Europe-wide jurisdiction but rather a need for some form of improved cooperation between prosecuting authorities .
Madam President , firstly , I congratulate my colleague , Mr Bontempi , on his report on judicial cooperation in criminal matters .
The EU has seen the creation of the single market : free movement of goods , services , capital and people .
In the words of a dead Chinese philosopher : ' We have seen a hundred flowers bloom ' .
Unfortunately many of them have been nasty weeds .
There is increasingly a European single market for the free movement of stolen goods : cars , for example ; illegal services - prostitution ; dirty capital waiting to be laundered in other Member States ; illegal immigrants smuggled in by organized criminal gangs .
And yet we have a two-speed Europe .
While the EU has been pushing ahead with many areas of activity - social policy , environmental policy , economic and monetary union - it has been curiously backward in the harmonization of legislation and practice in judicial and policing areas .
Europol has been a success , but at a very small scale .
It has worked very effectively at exchanging information across the European Union with respect to drugs trafficking , but it has not been extended to cover other areas : terrorism , racism , organized crime .
We need progress .
What distresses people in the European Union is that in spite of the single market , in spite of the European Union , cross-border crime and cross-border criminals continue to escape their punishment .
Murderers , thieves and embezzlers are hiding within the interstices of European law .
Common legal standards are not enough .
We want a common standard of justice .
What irritates European Union citizens are cases like that of Keith Cottingham , in the United Kingdom , a suspected letter-bomb murderer - accused of murdering a housewife , Barbara Holmes - who , for the last 14 years has been living in Spain .
For the last four years he has been living in Spain without a passport - it has expired ! But despite that fact , the British police have been unable to extradite him to the United Kingdom to face the courts .
European Union citizens will not take seriously a single market or a single judicial area while that sort of thing continues to happen .
Madam President , I would also like to congratulate Mr Bontempi on his report .
In the context of this debate , I am taking the opportunity to raise what is , mercifully , still a relatively small area of activity which has in recent years been criminalized .
I refer in this case to the transnational abduction of children by their parents and also the increasing problem of transnational abduction of children by criminal means .
The fact that we are dealing here very often with delicate family matters is very often used by local police forces as an excuse not to become involved in these cases - that these are family matters and should be left to the lawyers to sort out .
But behind the reluctance of police forces to implement court orders on the custody of children in one country when they are abducted into another Member State , very often lies the potential for great tragedy .
Two weeks ago I spent the entire weekend and most of the week trying to negotiate for the handover of children who had been illegally abducted from the United Kingdom and taken to Italy .
If the police had acted as they should have done four months earlier this situation would not have deteriorated to one where the children 's lives were at risk and where the parent who had abducted was threatening to burn down the house .
Unfortunately we have to make this a criminal offence because of the frequent reluctance of people to obey court orders where children and the custody of children are concerned .
For that reason I would like to take this opportunity , even though I know the subject is probably more appropriately dealt with in the report on marital cooperation in legal issues which we will be dealing with at the next part-session .
This is , however , a criminal offence , and I would like to see considerably more cooperation between the police forces in all our countries .
Madam President , globalization and the opening of the borders within the European Union have presented us with a problem .
The creation of a single market for the free movement of goods , services , capital and people turn out to have a darker side : increased transnational crime .
This is recognized by both those in favour of and those against a federal Union .
But where are we seeking the solution for the problem ?
It is a pleasant experience to find in Mr Bontempi 's report a realistic , clear tone .
Even though we take a different line on how the European Union should develop further , we are pretty much on the same wavelength with respect to judicial cooperation in criminal matters .
The judicial area touches the heart of the Member States ' sovereignty .
Individual criminal justice systems , and how punishment is imposed and enforced , have over the centuries developed individually in each Member State .
They are tied up with the Member State 's view of its constitutional arrangements and its cultural achievements .
As far as I am concerned , this can - and should - not be simply jettisoned in favour of further integration towards European union .
Priority must be given to everyday , practical cooperation leading to quick results .
This report rightly points to this .
Direct initiatives to stop the current growth in organized crime are needed .
In this , I do not shrink from the harmonization of certain notions such as " fraud ' .
Mr Bontempi 's report offers a basis for proceeding with practical , judicial cooperation in the field of criminal matters , whilst keeping the sovereignty of the Member States in this sensitive area intact .
This report therefore meets with my approval .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 9.00 a.m.
Work of ACP-EU Joint Assembly in 1997
The next item is the debate on the annual report ( A4-0080 / 98 ) by Mr Robles Piquer , on behalf of the Committee on Development and Cooperation , on the results of the work of the ACP-EU Joint Assembly in 1997 .
Madam President , Commissioner , the Joint Assembly as usual met twice in 1997 - in Brussels and in Lomé - for its 25th and 26th sessions .
The report I have the privilege of presenting summarizes these meetings .
The report is , of course , on behalf of the Committee on Development and Cooperation and I would just like to highlight the ten points I believe are most important .
Firstly , we emphasized the Joint Assembly 's contribution to the Lomé Convention , and asked therefore that the Joint Assembly be made institutionally independent .
Secondly , we asked for the European Development Fund , to which all Europeans contribute , to become part of the EU budget .
I believe that this is an extremely logical request .
In addition , we called for the necessary solidarity between the North and the South of our planet in view of the inevitable advance of globalization .
Fourthly , we also made the reasonable request that the Joint Assembly should have the opportunity to state its views on future EU-ACP links , particularly as regards the Fifth Lomé Convention .
We also called on the members of the Joint Assembly Bureau , in point 8 , to carry out a study on possible alternatives to the current voting system .
We believe that this is very important , and that it is now time to move away from the somewhat absurd situation in which we find ourselves , that is , where we have two separate electoral colleges : the Europeans on one side and the ACP countries on the other . We should instead combine these to have one single electoral college , which is based not on territorial differences but on the individual and personal traits of the members of the Joint Assembly .
It can of course continue to use , depending on the topic , either secret or open votes , but we believe that the European members , to whom we are directing this , should urge their colleagues in the ACP countries to implement this change in regulation .
I would also like to point out that we want to support and do support everything said at the United Nations conferences which affects us , and I hold up Mrs Junker 's excellent general report as proof of this .
We particularly underlined the importance of women 's rights and pointed to education , health and women 's participation in decision-making processes as examples .
We stated that we must pay particular attention to urban development .
In the ACP countries , as in the developed world , cities and urban conglomerations are becoming larger and more numerous .
Moreover , while considering future needs , we should pay as much attention as possible to environmental problems , such as the disposal of waste and the promotion of renewable energy sources .
In addition , the ACP countries should understand - and we are calling on them to do so - that the European Parliament is particularly concerned with defending the values of democracy and the rule of law . The defence and active acceptance of these values are an essential precondition for peaceful coexistence and economic progress .
Parliament should therefore realize that issues such as the location of meetings have a political value in themselves . The previous debate at the Lomé session was very intense due to the abnormal conditions - to put it mildly - that are prevalent in terms of the internal politics of that country , the country where the Lomé conventions were born .
There is no doubt that , for example , the fact that our ACP colleagues did not vote for a very moderate resolution , which only involved a request for free elections , caused a certain frustration on our part , as Europeans , and it was undoubtably influenced by the topographic factor of the location of the meeting .
My final point was a suggestion that the Commission should study with interest the possibility that the aid granted to third countries could maybe be managed by a coordinated service for the allocation of development aid . The ACP countries are very relevant in this respect since there are many of them and they receive a significant amount of aid .
In other words - if I may use a clear analogy - we should establish something similar to the ECHO office which could be used for development .
These are the most important points in the motion for a resolution adopted by the Committee on Development and Cooperation which I have had the privilege to present to the House .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I believe that the Joint Assembly is a body that is a forum for discussion and this must be particularly stressed as it is the only model in which development cooperation , which is the link to the principle of parity , is monitored by Parliament .
This in turn gives us the opportunity to discuss its decisions here in Parliament as well and to draw the appropriate conclusions from them .
I should like to refer to the general report which occupied us in two sittings last year .
It was a great pleasure and honour for me to be the general rapporteur and find out and monitor the outcomes of the big UN conferences - ranging from the education conference which was held in Thailand to the recent conference in Rome on food security - and to monitor what happened and what was still outstanding .
All of this can also be seen as part of the subject that likewise kept us busy last year and will continue to do so , namely the future of the Lomé Convention .
There has been a continuous development of the content of the Lomé Convention right up to the present convention , which also has weaknesses .
These weaknesses must be remedied .
Mr Robles Piquer 's report also contains proposals which should be welcomed so that some constructive work can be done .
Happily , it has been possible in these past few years to define the role of women as a key role for development ; we were able to intensify this work in joint assemblies and it has been a thread passing through the entire ACP cooperation .
The emphasis must be increased in this direction .
There is now great unanimity on this point but the practical activities leave a lot to be desired .
We can convince ourselves of this on a regular basis when we spend some time in ACP countries and take a look around .
There is still much to be done to involve the ordinary people and this means above all giving women a role and letting them participate in the development processes of ACP cooperation - all the way from planning via implementation to evaluation .
Women have the decisive role in all the issues that contribute to the security of daily life including , above all , food security and health security .
In our practical work it must be made clear that no measures may be taken that result in the marginalization of others ; this is prepared for by all the discussions we hold , by the working groups that are set up and by all the activities in which the partner countries of the European Union and the ACP community take part .
This situation can arise very easily .
For example , changes in trading patterns conceal the danger that women in particular are excluded from small business and their earning power is diminished .
They do not have as much access to the formal sector and are often thrown back on the informal sector .
The problem is the same as in Europe ; ultimately they are also responsible for the home and family and are therefore restricted in their choice of occupation .
Measures must be taken here to compensate for this and , when all is said and done , the best advisors there can be are the women in these countries themselves .
We are well on our way .
We have included this in all the areas that have been discussed , ranging from environmental issues , via issues of preventive health care and economic development to human rights .
In the meantime some very intensive consultation is taking place to find ways of applying human rights as women 's rights , of understanding democratic rights in such a way that the equal participation of women is carried through in all of society 's decision-making processes - in our ACP partner countries as well .
Madam President , for all its faults and the criticism it receives from various quarters , there are few conventions that have been as long-running and successful as the Lomé Agreement between the European Union and the ACP nations .
As we move forward to the year 2000 , and structural changes to the Lomé organization , we can also look back at its successes and failures and build a stronger , more efficient partnership for the future .
I would therefore strongly support everything in Mr Robles Piquer 's report on the work of the Joint Assembly .
The only real physical links we MEPs have with ACP members are during the Joint Assembly meetings and on fact-finding visits afterwards .
We are often criticized by the media for these Joint Assembly meetings in developing countries but I would strongly suggest you can learn more in a week on the ground looking at projects than you can learn in a year in a committee in Brussels .
This report sets out the work carried out by the Joint Assembly over the past year and gives the reader an insight into the huge variety of work done by the members .
It stresses the importance of partnership on equal terms . It stresses the importance of our ACP partners having a real input into any future organization post-2000 .
It calls for the EDF to be budgetized in order that genuine parliamentary monitoring can be applied , not only to the allocation of its appropriations but to the implementation as well .
It is a sad fact that one third of the way through 1998 there are two countries that have still to ratify the 1995 Lomé IV ( 2 ) Agreement .
As yet , no national indicative programmes can be started .
That is ridiculous .
I would plead with the Commission to try to overcome this hold-up .
We must cut the red tape .
The report highlights one area of the Joint Assembly meetings that does need improving and that is Question Time to the Council and the Commission .
Like Question Time here I find it dull , long-winded and lacking in sparkle .
This needs to be looked at for future sessions .
The report also looks at the location of our last Assembly .
I can only hope that our visit to Lomé hastens its rapid return to full democracy and respect for human rights as I was one of those extremely hesitant to support visiting there .
The future of the Joint Assembly is vital to the linkage between the European Union and the ACP developing nations .
If we move to a regional-based organization , representatives from those regional bodies must become part of the Joint Assembly and we should look at having regional conferences .
This is an excellent report and deserves unanimous support .
Madam President , I wish to thank the rapporteur , Mr Robles Piquer , for his excellent work , because he has managed to develop important arguments that relate to the future of relations between the countries of Africa , the Caribbean and the Pacific and the EU .
I have to stress several points made in the report , particularly the fact that it confirms that the enhancement of women 's rights and their adequate participation in all decision-making and political processes form an essential premise for making progress in the field of development , which implies , among other things , literacy measures and access to training and basic health services .
I am also satisfied that the importance of the signature of an international agreement to prohibit anti-personnel mines , as requested by the Joint Assembly at its 24th meeting , has been emphasized .
The recommendation made to the Commission to urgently bring forward the project studying the creation of a service responsible for coordinating aid for third countries , mainly comprising the ACP countries , is of particular importance .
I should also point out the work carried out by the working party , of which I am chairman , with regard to the consequence of the climate changes on the small island states .
I would remind you that , at the moment , they are changing from great heat to great cold , with no mid-season , that in spring and autumn they alternate between very high temperatures , like those of July , and very low temperatures , like those of January , and that the winds are strong and sometimes devastating .
I would also remind you that El Niño will strike hard and scientists are forecasting great disasters .
The whole of the southern hemisphere has been harshly affected by flooding and drought , with epicentres situated close to South Africa , Borneo and Sumatra , where huge fires have spread , capable of destroying a vast part of the forests .
High flooding has scourged south-east China and the western coasts of Mexico and California further north .
In the central regions of Africa , the difficult environmental conditions caused by the rain have given rise to an increase in diseases , such as malaria and cholera , with the deaths of 4 000 people .
The working party has submitted a draft resolution , approved unanimously by the Joint Assembly which met in Lomé on 30 October 1997 , on the ACP-European Union cooperation , in view of the Conference of the Parties to the UN framework agreement on climate changes held in Kyoto in December 1997 .
The object was for the Assembly to also indicate what the EU had proven .
Progress was certainly made on environmental matters at the Kyoto Conference in recognizing world intervention ; nevertheless , the protocol contains results that may be considered sufficient , but not satisfactory , which we obviously have to point out .
The working party is still endeavouring to assess the effects and social and economic implications of the climate changes and the rise in sea level on the small ACP island states and propose a strategy to increase the knowledge at international level of the dangers such changes may involve .
The climatic variability and the rise in sea level cause the erosion of the coasts and the small ACP island states are particularly concerned because they are far more vulnerable than the others at economic , social and cultural level .
That is why this working party has dedicated particular attention to this .
Madam President , I would like to start by congratulating Mr Robles Piquer on his report .
Something that was a dull and unexciting event for years is now , thank goodness , very different .
A clear attempt has been made , and a successful attempt at that , to arrive at changes in the way the Joint Assembly operates , in which we , Mr Robles Piquer and I , have been trying to keep our heads above water for years .
Of course , like Mr Corrie , I attach great importance to the existence of the Assembly .
That is why I admire the courage of the rapporteur to offer criticism , difficult criticism in a Joint Assembly .
We should get rid of block voting in the Joint Assembly .
A single electoral college might offer a solution .
The split vote divides the ACP countries and the European countries into two camps .
It is the exact opposite of what we strive for in a Joint Assembly .
This practice has meant that we have not been able to accept the rather sharp and appropriate resolutions on Nigeria , Congo , and Togo .
The Assembly must not and should not be allowed to continue to think in two halves .
The entire ACP cooperation is aimed at long-lasting development .
This means good governments , democracy , respect for human rights and assistance in complying with respect for human rights , on both sides .
ACP cooperation can be halted if this does not happen .
For this , practical measures must be worked out .
I hope , Madam President , that the Joint Assembly can be strengthened through procedural modifications , and I can also see that , with the growing significance political dialogue will be accorded in the ACP over the coming years , strengthening the Joint Assembly will become an issue for discussion , and that this will be achieved .
Maybe in a few weeks time we will have the opportunity , Mr Robles Piquer , to discuss your report in a smaller group , with what might be described as the opposition , although it is also our own side .
Madam President , I would like to join in the chorus of congratulations to Mr Robles Piquer for a very fine report .
I pay tribute to the commitment he has shown and that is shared by a number of colleagues in the Chamber today .
All of us who have become involved with the Joint Assembly have found it a very inspiring and uplifting experience .
It is an institution which has a lot to offer .
We wish that more of our colleagues could experience it at first hand .
The main value is the aspect of parity between the two sides .
However , I would urge caution on the idea of abolishing the right to call for separate votes between the ACP and the EU .
There is a danger that the one thing which keeps some of the ACP countries involved with the Assembly might be seen by them as a threat to their participation .
It is rarely used and with the secret ballot which we have introduced , perhaps we should leave things as they are .
I just mention that as a note of caution .
I have found that in the Joint Assembly there is a genuine respect for everyone 's point of view and we should do nothing to upset or threaten that .
I support Mr Robles Piquer 's call for help to restore and strengthen democracy , and to see that as a prerequisite for economic growth .
He and I were on the delegation to Ghana immediately after the last Lomé Assembly which was led by the distinguished Member for Leeds , Mr McGowan .
We had a very useful meeting in Ghana with the Speaker of the parliament and the Clerk to the House .
They shared with us the problems they had had in becoming a democracy again .
For me it was a very inspiring aspect of our visit that they were looking to us for help .
They asked what the European Parliament could do to help the Clerk - the Secretary-General of the parliament - and the members to become more expert in the procedures , which had rather fallen away .
I hope we will be able to do something in that particular regard , and to do something proactive , not just reactive , in the Joint Assembly in the future .
Madam President , the most striking point in this motion for a resolution is the difference of opinion in the Joint Assembly between the Members of the European Union and those of the ACP on human rights .
If what constitutes human rights is not viewed differently , then at least whether and how human rights violations are judged is viewed differently .
In order to prevent a small minority in the ACP group from vetoing the condemnation of a country , the rapporteur calls for a study to be conducted into possible alternatives to the current voting system in the joint Assembly .
I would like to add two comments to this .
Firstly , if the voting procedure is modified in the way proposed , then there is the risk that the effect of the Joint Assembly as a body for Members of Parliament of the European Union and ACP to meet , will decrease , because large groups can be outvoted on extremely important issues such a human rights .
What is a condemnation of Nigeria worth if this is happening against the will of the majority in the ACP countries ?
This question must weigh heavily when the voting procedure is reviewed .
Secondly , the resolution is one-sided as regards human rights , because a disagreement between the countries was not only about human rights violations .
According to the explanatory statement in the Robles Piquer report , the Members were unable to reach agreement on the rights of the unborn child .
The ACP countries rightly point to the rights of the unborn child .
Abortion , which is performed in many Union Member States , is a flagrant violation of this right .
But this point does not feature in the resolution itself , and in the explanatory statement it is qualified by being described as the " conflict of views based on the usual ideological differences ' .
Democracy and rule of law are rightly expressed in the resolution as an absolute condition for the continuation of development cooperation .
Let us listen to the ACP countries when they point to our violations of human rights .
Madam President , first of all we welcome the initiative , taken last February , with which the Council decided to change the existing procedure for the repayment of the debt contracted by the ACP countries : according to the National Alliance , this decision has certainly been made at an appropriate time because it enables most of these countries , in serious difficulties , not only on account of having to repay the debt but also the interest payable , to breathe a sigh of relief and face the most urgent reforms without delay and with greater calm .
The decision taken by the Council , backing the initiatives agreed by the Monetary Fund and by the Development and Cooperation Committees of the European Bank , clearly shows the obvious desire of the international financial community to bring the debt of the ACP countries to an economically more acceptable level .
The meetings held by the Joint Assembly last year , in Brussels and in Lomé , emphasized that only a consolidation of democracy , the rule of law , respect for human rights and a responsible use of resources will finally lead to the success of the development policy pursued within the scope of the ACP-EU cooperation .
From the point of view of environmental protection , we believe that the consequences of climate change , such as desertification and drought , should be prevented , and we should effectively combat the excessive growth rate of African cities , faced with a disorganized and unplanned urban development , particularly with regard to the health aspect but also the food and education sectors .
The criteria laid down at the Kyoto Conference , while hardly respecting the general requirements of reducing emissions and too obedient to the American diktat , constitute a valid approach to solving the problems of pollution and climate change , which the large powers will always make the small developing countries pay for .
With regard to human rights , the region of the Great Lakes but , in general , the whole of Central Africa , is faced with the theory of domination that can only be stopped if we manage to prevent conflicts by intervening in their causes , which always include economic crisis , violations of human rights and ethnic problems .
By adopting common positions in particular , supported and observed by all the ACP countries , we will be able to give the Joint Assembly the necessary credibility , as it will finally have understood that the EU considers democracy and the rule of law to be irreplaceable and necessary for the consolidation of a peaceful society and for the achievement of a sustainable development process .
Madam President , I wish to thank Mr Robles Piquer for emphasizing , yet again , the concept of partnership and how this is central to all our work in the Joint Assembly and , in particular , drawing attention in a very highprofile way to the system of voting that is in practice .
I agree with him entirely that it is not consistent with the objective of achieving that partnership .
It is up to us in the Joint Assembly to be seeking an overall view of the whole Joint Assembly on the important issues we face .
We know that it would be inconceivable in this Assembly for the Spanish delegation , the German delegation or the British delegation to have some kind of veto on the decisions of this Assembly because of a system of voting in separate blocks .
It is a great service to emphasize this .
I also have some sympathy with what Mr Macartney has said about caution .
I feel that the case for what is described as a single college for voting , is not that we can , as Europeans , be explaining to our ACP colleagues what democracy and human rights and self-determination is about .
In this Assembly and the Joint Assembly we too often see European arrogance going mad .
Despite my complimentary remarks , I am not too happy with some of the wording in paragraphs 17 and 18 of the motion for a resolution , where phrases like ' the ACP partners must be made to understand ' what the European views are on democracy .
Mr Blokland has made a very important point that we should not in any way give the impression that we want to impose views that are very specific European views .
I have reminded this Assembly before that we send delegations to many parts of the world .
We send them to ACP countries to ensure that principles , for example of one member , one vote is practised in elections .
Mr Robles Piquer knows that in this Assembly itself we have had an example fairly recently of a leader of a political group in this Assembly and , not so long ago , someone who became chairman of the Group of the European People 's Party being involved in an exercise of abusing our voting system - a system which is sometimes , I am told , called ' playing the piano ' in the European Parliament , where we have people pressing more than one button and pressing the buttons of absent friends .
Or for example when we emphasize voter education .
I was in Namibia for the independence elections .
There was a 97 % turnout in that election .
Across southern Africa it is usually over 80 % .
I was returned for my city with a 30 % turn-out .
Let us be very clear to maintain this partnership when we talk about human rights , democracy and self-determination .
These are not European values , they are universal values .
The more we make that clear in our work in the Assembly , the more we will achieve a real partnership .
Madam President , let me first of all congratulate Mr Robles Piquer for the quality of his report on the work of the ACP-EU Joint Assembly in 1997 .
I would like to take up the basic issues in this report and in your discussion .
Mr Rapporteur , you firstly mentioned , as did a number of speakers - and particularly Mr Amadeo - the impact of the United Nations Conference on relations between the European Union and ACP countries .
I can assure you that the Commission has taken this dimension into account in the direction of relations between the European Union and ACP countries in the future .
I am , of course , thinking of the Junker report .
Furthermore , Mr Robles Piquer highlights the importance of respect for democracy and human rights in relations between the European Union and ACP countries , at a time when future cooperation between the EU and ACP countries is under discussion .
This demand must rightly be considered and supported .
In future relations between the ACP countries and the European Union , the Commission , as you know , is emphasizing the need to strengthen the political dimension of this partnership , by highlighting the importance of developing a true political dialogue between the two parties .
This political dialogue will consolidate respect for human rights , democratic principles and the rule of law .
For the Commission , the framework for this dialogue must be the ACP-EU Joint Assembly sessions .
This institution has shown itself to be the preferred forum for the defence of human rights .
Proof of this is in the active participation of ACP representatives during the debates on particular countries at the last Joint Assembly in Lomé in October 1997 .
Mr Robles Piquer emphasizes the point that 99 % of ACP representatives at this meeting were democratically elected members .
The content of the debates was strengthened by this , whether it was a discussion on the situation in Togo or Nigeria .
Like your rapporteur , the Commission noted the quality of many of the ACP countries ' speeches , talking frankly of the situation of their neighbours or contributing constructively to the debate .
The publicity that surrounded these discussions also helped to strengthen their democratic nature .
How do we strengthen the role of this Assembly even more ?
In this respect , the Commission proposes calling it a " Parliamentary Assembly ' .
It is a question of confirming that this institution , unique in its kind , represents both the people of the European Union and of the ACP countries .
It is a necessity on which the Commission agrees with the rapporteur .
Similarly , the Commission understands the European Parliament 's reservations regarding the voting system of two separate electoral colleges used by the Joint Assembly for sensitive issues .
This was emphasized by the rapporteur as well as by Mr Bertens and Mr McGowan .
The Commission will thus support all efforts to ensure that the results of votes from this Assembly truly reflect the conclusions of a joint , open and constructive debate between European and ACP members .
However , a strengthening of the Joint Assembly will also be achieved through development of outside contacts , and we must therefore promote meetings with civil society partners .
Encouraging meetings between NGOs in both the North and the South , as Parliament has indeed done , is one way of strengthening democracy .
Meetings between people from the economic and social worlds must also be encouraged .
The Economic and Social Council is currently considering ways of intensifying contacts between the Joint Assembly and the economic , social and cultural players within the ACP countries .
The involvement of civil society will thus also be encouraged .
Let us also consider Members of Parliament at a regional level .
Regional meetings have already taken place between members of parliament from southern Africa and their counterparts in the European Union .
There must be more of these meetings .
We do not want to challenge the principle of holding two plenary sessions per year , but we should strengthen the role of national parliaments in relation to their public opinion .
My colleague Joâo de Deus Pinheiro often says that democracy is a process .
I believe that the Joint Assembly , which we should from now on call Parliamentary Assembly , is one of the best instruments at our disposal to accelerate and consolidate this process .
You also mentioned , Mr Robles Piquer - as did Mrs Baldi - the coordination of aid to the Third World .
Following your request , the Commission has decided to set up a joint service for the implementation of aid to the Third World .
I can also assure you , Mr Robles Piques , that a Commission document on urban development policy will be ready by the end of this year .
With regard to the budgetization of the EDF , the Commission is , of course , in agreement with Parliament .
You are giving your opinion on the future of EU-ACP relations and we have been looking forward to this .
Mrs Junker spoke in some depth on the rights of women and children in terms that the Commission agrees with .
Finally , in reply to Mr Corrie , concerning the two remaining countries to ratify Lomé IV , Belgium and the Netherlands , I believe that this is now progressing and that the President of the Commission and Mr Pinheiro have spoken to the governments in question regarding this .
Thank you very much , Commissioner de Silguy .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 9.00 a.m.
Europe Agreement with the Czech Republic
The next item is the debate on the report ( A4-0394 / 97 / rev ) by Mr Schwaiger , on behalf of the Committee on External Economic Relations , on the draft Council and Commission Decision on the position to be taken by the Community within the Association Council established by the Europe Agreement between the European Communities and their Member States of the one part , and the Czech Republic , of the other part , with regard to the adoption of the necessary rules for the implementation of Article 64 ( 1 ) ( iii ) and ( 2 ) of the Europe Agreement and Article 8 ( 1 ) ( iii ) and ( 2 ) of Protocol 2 to the said Agreement on ECSC products ( SEC ( 96 ) 1568-8846 / 97 - C4-0383 / 97-96 / 0237 ( CNS ) ) .



Madam President , being with each other is better than being against each other ; cooperation within the framework of the Association Agreement is better than disputes in international organizations .
This could be the motto for the drafting of the common position which you have just quoted and which deals with the state aid granted by this associated country , the Czech Republic , to the steel industry among others .
Let me explain the problem we now have to deal with in this report with regard to the Czech steel industry .
About 12 % of all steel imports into the European Union come from the Czech Republic .
Production facilities in that country are particularly outdated and in need of modernization .
At present , measures to protect the environment are almost non-existent and energy consumption in this production process is almost three times greater than in the European Union .
The result is serious environmental damage in the border areas of the Czech Republic , Poland and Germany .
On the other hand , the conditions imposed by the European Union on its own steel production call for compliance with strict emission standards .
It is compulsory to install flue-gas desulphurization systems and exhaust gas filters when constructing or modernizing steel works .
These differences in environmental legislation between the European Union on the one hand , and the Czech Republic and other countries in central and eastern Europe on the other , as well as the granting of national subsidies can therefore bring about a widespread undercutting of existing steel prices in the European Union and result in an unfair competitive advantage for Czech steel which would inevitably lead to further anti-dumping measures by the European Union .
Therefore , at the Essen Summit in 1994 and again at the Cannes European Council in June 1995 , it was proposed in the White Paper on preparation of the associated countries of central and eastern Europe for integration into the Internal Market of the Union to put an end to this conflict simply by implementing in these countries parts of the Community legislation relating to concentrations , anti-trust legislation , state monopolies and the state aids we are discussing here when their laws are being approximated to those of the European Union .
The uniform rules which would then also apply to the associated countries would make anti-dumping procedures superfluous and unnecessary ; these should be replaced by appropriate implementing procedures in the Association Agreements .
In the Commission 's proposal for a regulation before us today , residual customs duties applicable to the Czech Republic being now practically non-existent , state aids will only be acceptable to the European Union if they comply with their own rules as provided in Articles 92 to 94 of the EC Treaty on the prohibition of state aid .
In other words , the Czech framework legislation in this area must be adapted and to all intents and purposes converted to that of the European Union .
The European Union 's state aid monitoring authority , the Commission , and the Czech Republic 's monitoring authority , the Czech Ministry of Finance , are to work together in close consultation .
The harmonization of this Czech state aid legislation with that of the European Union can also serve as a model for the other Associated States of central and eastern Europe , namely Hungary , Poland , Slovenia as well as other countries where the following basic principles have been laid down clearly and unambiguously in specific provisions .
First , the EC Commission and the respective monitoring authority in the Associated Country are the central players in ensuring respect of the state aid provisions of the implementing rules in the Europe Agreement .
Second , the allocation of competences between the two authorities should be clear and coherent .
Third , the Commission should assist these authorities in the Associated Countries with state aid control by means of a performance monitoring system . In other words , it should help them to help themselves , and create the same legal criteria in this area instead of reneging on these provisions in the event of a dispute .
The particular problems of a transition should be taken into account for a limited period but it should always be borne in mind when harmonizing legislation that the aim is to achieve approximation to the stricter environmental standards set by the European Union .
We are grateful to the Council for adopting the position put before us in the Committee on External Economic Relations that Articles 92 to 94 are the legal basis for these implementing rules , as they make consultation with Parliament compulsory .
I should like to ask Commissioner de Silguy explicitly to depart from the erroneous legal basis , Article 113 , and join with Parliament and the Council in applying the only correct provisions , Articles 92 to 94 , in the case of the other Associated Countries .
My family comes from the northern Bohemian town of Gablonz on the River Neisse , whose emblem is an apple tree .
On the one hand , the apple represents the trade war which the Czech Republic is currently conducting against EU apple exports , but on the other it also represents the sin which led to the expulsion of Adam and Eve from the Garden of Eden , and the infringement of competition rules , and to us anything that infringes the concepts of the legal community is also a sin .
However , I am very grateful to Mr Schwaiger for not adopting a paternalistic stance with regard to state aid in the coal and steel sector but calling for partnership , partnership with the Czech Republic , and in particular for taking account of environmental issues in the Czech Republic .
Totalitarianism was rife there for decades and it is necessary to repair the damage to the environment in the Iser and Giant Mountains , the Erz Mountains , the Beskids and the Bohemian Forest .
I am very grateful to him for wanting to meet the Czech Republic halfway and I would appeal to the Czech Republic to meet the European Union halfway as well by respecting competition rules and avoiding distortions of competition caused by granting state aid which goes against the spirit of Community law and the spirit of the Association Agreement .
Madam President , the Commission would like to thank the rapporteur for recommending that Parliament approves the implementing rules with regard to Czech state aid .
Parliament 's approval will enable their final adoption by the European Union-Czech Republic Association Council and I am delighted with your report .
I must clarify , however , that for strictly legal reasons , as far as the Commission is concerned Article 113 , remains the appropriate basis .
These implementing rules are a precondition for the harmonious development of exchanges between the Czech Republic and the Community .
That is why the Commission is insisting on the importance of a rapid adoption of these rules by the Association Council .
As the Commission 's opinions on the eastern and central European countries ' requests for accession show , there remains a great deal to be done in these Associated Countries in order to improve the monitoring of state aid .
Your introduction , Mr Schwaiger , and Mr Posselt 's comments , demonstrate that there is a lot of work to be done within their industries in order to put them on a level with those of the Community , in terms of environmental standards , as well as rules of competition .
In its Agenda 2000 proposal , the Commission also highlights the importance of competition policy in the Associated Countries throughout the pre-accession stage .
By adopting these rules relating to state aid , the Union and the Czech Republic will conclude the implementation of the measures of the Europe Agreement in this field .
The Commission will ensure that the PHARE programme for 1998 and 1999 includes aid enabling the Czech authorities to monitor state aid and to come into line completely with European standards within a few years .
Finally , the Commission hopes that the implementing rules relating to state aid will be rapidly adopted by the other Associated Countries .
Thank you very much , Commissioner de Silguy .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 9.00 a.m.
( The sitting was closed at 7.30 p.m. )
Approval of the Minutes
The Minutes of yesterday 's sitting have been distributed .
Are there any comments ?
Madam President , I have just 30 seconds to make a speech in French .
The Council has not answered the questions I put to it on 15 August , or Mrs van Bladel 's questions .
So , could you please help us to obtain answers to our questions from the Council ?
Mr Janssen van Raay , I quite agree with your request , and think it is a pity that there is no representative from Council present to hear you .
We will of course pass your request on to the Council , not only this time , but whenever necessary .
Madam President , I would just like to strike a certain balance by declaring that you are my favourite president .
I do not think that is really a procedural motion .
It has nothing to do with the Minutes either , although I am delighted to hear it .
Are there any other comments ?
( The Minutes were approved )
Votes
Madam President , it may be a little too late for this , but my group would like me to ask you to request the House to postpone this vote until the next part-session .
I believe there are a large number of Members who will not be in favour , and as things stand , a vote on an important report will take place with only a limited number of Members present .
Mr Rosado Fernandes , we have already had a debate on this subject .
Circumstances have dictated that the vote has already started .
And I am very pleased to see that there are nevertheless a large number of us here to vote on this report , which is indeed very important .
On Amendment No 2
Madam President , I would like to propose an oral amendment that takes the debate and the observations made into account .
After " figure ' , I propose that we insert " some type of European attorney ' .
This tones down the proposal which , as many have rightly recalled , may have to be studied and tested .
So after " figure ' , I would like to insert " some type of European attorney ' .
This is the oral amendment resulting from our debate .
Are there any objections to this slight amendment ?
( Parliament accepted the oral amendment )
( Parliament adopted the resolution ) I should like to congratulate Mr Bontempi and to thank him for having been understanding with regard to this debate and vote , which have unfortunately been rather disjointed .
I give you my word that we will ensure that it does not happen again .
Madam President , yesterday afternoon and this morning we had a large number of roll-call votes .
There is a new ruling by the Bureau according to which only the roll-call votes up to Thursday noon are counted .
May I assume that the Members who took part in the roll-call votes yesterday afternoon and this morning will get a credit for this ?
The Bureau will consider your proposal very carefully , Mr Tillich .
But I would like to point out that the political groups keep detailed records of attendance , and it will be very important for this to be done carefully , especially during the forthcoming elections .

I rise to advise Mr Tillich that he is wrong : the Bureau 's instructions were Tuesday , Wednesday and Thursday with no time limit set on Thursday .
Therefore the votes last night did count .
Mr Tillich had understood perfectly .
That is why he has made a supplementary proposal .
I would merely like to point out to you that the system does not apply today .
Yes , exactly .
Mr President , on a point of order .
I was just contemplating Mr Tillich 's excellent point .
Perhaps the Bureau could investigate whether those of us who have stayed here Monday to Friday can recoup some of the bonuses which are withdrawn from those who have not participated in the vote during Tuesday , Wednesday and Thursday .
That would be an excellent way of encouraging Members to come here on Friday .
I would like to thank the rapporteur for a penetrating report .
I think the fight against cross-border crime is an important area which deserves greater attention in the European Union .
However , I would like to point out the importance of showing proper respect for the differences which currently exist between various Member States and their legal systems because of varying legal cultures and traditions , when considering harmonization in the area of justice .
For this reason I have difficulty supporting the proposal to establish a European prosecution service in accordance with the ' Corpus Juris ' .
Criminal justice and criminal prosecution differ considerably from one Member State to another , and this is what prevents criminal prosecution taking place outside national borders .
Another obstacle to the harmonization of criminal justice and criminal prosecution is the internal reform by Member States of their judicial systems .
For a long time the Netherlands took no action , for instance , to issue an international warrant for the arrest of the former Surinam army commander Desi Bouterse , suspected of large-scale trade in cocaine .
Bouterse has managed to set up a network in the Netherlands , and has informants to tell him between which steps the judicial authorities are intending to take , and so he is always one step ahead of them .
These kinds of transnational criminal organizations are a threat to our rule of law .
Exchanges of civil servants are taking place in order to intensify cooperation between the Member States ' judicial systems .
These exchanges only lead to improvement in cooperation with great difficulty .
Another source of weakness in the field of cooperation is that the training of judicial officers is highly inadequate in some Member States .
To conclude I would like to point out in connection with this report that , in order to enhance relations with countries outside the EU , it is important that both multilateral and bilateral treaties , such as the Convention on the transfer of executions of judgement , are signed , so that judicial cooperation with countries outside the Union can be fine-tuned as well .
We are regularly called upon to give our views on judicial and police matters .
Every report so far has been of high quality .
The latest is no exception , which is exactly what we have come to expect from Mr Bontempi .
I am in favour of the proposed guidelines .
However , I would just like to add one thing to the text . If judicial authorities are to tackle contemporary forms of crime , it is essential that their financial margins be brought into line with the cost of instruments that enable them to operate efficiently .
I wholeheartedly approve Rinaldo Bontempi 's wish to speed up ratification procedures for conventions within the EU .
Furthermore , I consider that we must also form and expand such relationships with countries outside the EU .
Crime , in all its forms , is becoming internationalized .
The judicial authorities cannot afford to lag behind if they are to combat it .
Finally , corruption in public service is both a scourge and a danger , because it calumniates the vast majority of people holding public office who carry out their duties honestly and enthusiastically .
Ladies and gentlemen , in order to combat corruption , this House must rid itself of the far right wing , which is another form of social gangrene .
We have seen , in the recent decade , a significant loosening of our borders in the EU and the Schengen Agreement has opened borders on the continent .
Add to this the trans-border nature of the Internet and we can see how easily people , goods and information can move around in the Union .
While this has made the lives of European Union citizens easier , it has also made it easier for crime and criminals to cross our borders at will .
Unfortunately , the Union 's ability to prosecute transnational crime has not been able to operate in a similar fashion .
While the Treaty of Amsterdam , as Mr Bontempi points out in his report , provides stronger recourse for the Union , we need to ensure that our law enforcement agencies can keep up with crime .
I support the rapporteur 's call for more interaction between Member States ' law enforcement agencies .
I welcome his call to allow judicial authorities to speak to each other without diplomatic protocol .
We have removed the red tape from crime crossing our borders .
It is time to remove the red tape from binding those trying to prevent that crime .
We would like to point out that we are in favour of all forms of cooperation , even in the area of justice , if they take place at an intergovernmental level and do not impinge on or restrict national sovereignty or national democracy .
The overriding aim of the report is to establish a common European legal and judicial area .
That requires , among other things , a harmonization of criminal law , which would mean the abolition of national self-determination .
In order to achieve these objectives , there are also , for example , proposals to have uniform definitions of crimes , to permit advanced technical surveillance , such as via satellite or bugging , to recognize the role of the Court of Justice and to consider establishing a European prosecution service , which we strongly oppose .
The main legal basis is an interpretation of a treaty which has not yet been ratified or entered into force , the Amsterdam Treaty , which some may consider a rather strange legal basis .
International organized crime is best tackled through international cooperation at intergovernmental level and by developing cooperation through Interpol .
In view of the above , we have therefore voted against the report .
) The Danish Social Democrats have today voted in favour of developing judicial cooperation within the EU .
We have to work together better to deal with cross-border organized crime in the EU .
But we believe this should start with the existing instruments available in the third pillar .
This is a good starting-point for future cooperation .
In the Amsterdam Treaty , we have defined and improved legal cooperation , and there is no reason to harmonize any further .
We are against standardization for standardization 's sake .
The cultures , traditions and systems of individual countries must be respected , and any differences in penalties and evidence between Member States are not necessarily a problem .
We must ensure that criminals do not escape , and the best way of doing this is by improving practical cooperation between Member States .
The judicial authorities in the EU are already working together very well , which is something we can use in the fight against international crime .
We agree with the substance of the concerns expressed by the rapporteur , and share the view that crime , and particularly organized crime , is on the increase .
In the European Union , and indeed the rest of the world , the traffic in human beings , arms and nuclear materials is proliferating , as is large-scale corruption , fraud and economic and financial crime , which so often go hand in hand with drug trafficking .
We consider that , in preference to the new measures proposed by the rapporteur , it is necessary first and foremost to make the control measures and mechanisms stipulated in existing legislation effective and practical , in conjunction with further measures to be deliberated between Member States , including some proposed by the rapporteur .
Member States must assume responsibility , and encourage other countries to do likewise , for applying existing measures and other measures identified as being necessary to complement them , such as those that are expected to emerge with the imminent introduction of the euro , which , as one OECD body recently stated , " will open the door to the laundering of dirty money ' , because tax havens and other forms of easy money benefitting organized crime can only be eliminated by adopting effective and bold measures .
However , we disagree with the proposals in the report concerning the means and scope for carrying out these projects .
They should be put into effect in the context of effective judicial cooperation between Member States of the European Union .
This can and should be promoted and strengthened by means of intergovernmental cooperation , particularly by simplifying procedures and even by approximating criminal law and legislative concepts , without necessarily leading to legal standardization or harmonization .
We cannot therefore agree with the emphasis on suppressing the explanations and reservations expressed by some countries about international conventions , since this right ensures that any country can , ultimately , protect its individual identity and defend its sovereignty .
Robles Piquer report ( A4-0080 / 98 )
I fully support the Robles Piquer report and in particular the call made in the report for sanctions against those developing countries that are wasting the benefits of aid by spending huge amounts on their military budgets .
As a first step we must ensure that European development aid , which is the main source of income and a major inspirational support for many developing countries , is not diverted and misused for military purposes .
In addition we must reduce or cancel European aid for those countries who refuse to reduce military spending and continue to spend more than 1 % of their annual income on arms and armies .
Civil wars in several parts of Africa , fuelled by huge spending on arms , are destroying the impact of development aid , making millions of people destitute and generating a massive refugee problem .
The time has now come , I believe , to inform the recipients of our development aid that excess spending on military budgets will be directly reflected in reduced development aid .
Of course food aid must not be restricted where famine exists or is threatened .
The Green Group in the European Parliament supports the report by Mr Robles Piquer on the work of the ACP-EU Joint Assembly in 1997 .
We also voted in favour of the proposal to draw up a rule to allow representatives of parliaments in overseas countries and territories ( OCT ) to participate in meetings of the ACP-EU Joint Assembly as permanent observers .
We are very pleased that non-governmental organizations ( NGOs ) from the ACP countries and the EU have now been granted observer status .
We believe that NGOs from ACP countries in particular have an important role to play in the struggle for greater democracy , fundamental human rights and the participation of citizens in development work .
NAFO - Monitoring the Common Fisheries Policy
The next item is the joint debate on the following reports :
A4-0086 / 98 by Mr. Varela Suanzes-Carpegna , on behalf of the Committee on Fisheries , on the proposal for a Council Regulation amending Council Regulation ( EC ) No 3070 / 95 of 21 December 1995 on the establishment of a pilot project on satellite tracking in the NAFO Regulatory Area ( COM ( 97 ) 0671 - C4-0666 / 97-97 / 0346 ( CNS ) ) ; -A4-0019 / 98 by Mr Teverson , on behalf of the Committee on Fisheries , on the Commission report on monitoring the Common Fisheries Policy 1995 ( COM ( 97 ) 0226 - C4-0334 / 97 ) .
Madam President , Madam Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , in the framework of cooperation within NAFO , a pilot project on satellite tracking of vessels fishing in the regulatory area of this organization was agreed upon in September 1995 . It was originally planned , in principle , that the project would be carried out between 1 January 1996 and 31 December 1997 .
However , it was decided last December extend the pilot project by one year , until 31 December 1998 .
The Commission is now consulting Parliament on that extension . In practice , there is no other alternative since this has already been approved within NAFO and it is now too late to put forward any objections .
We are therefore in favour of the proposal .
However , we believe that we should take this opportunity to look at the various current control and inspection systems used in the NAFO regulatory area .
Many of these are experimental and their actual purpose should be explained to Parliament , since this is an area which , as you know , has become the most inspected and controlled on the planet .
We must also look at how the other NAFO contracting parties implement the various measures and if they enforce them to the same extent as the European Union , so that the EU can go to the NAFO annual meeting in September with a solid position supported by Parliament and so that a coherent , unified and comprehensive policy on tracking vessels in the NAFO area can be formulated .
The amendment approved in Parliament 's Committee on Fisheries states that this House should support such a policy of accuracy and transparency .
We must also remember that the NAFO Convention regulates fisheries in an international high seas area , adjacent to Canada 's Exclusive Economic Zone . This has always had an effect on relations , tensions and conflicts in the area .
After the " halibut war ' , caused by the illegal seizure by Canada of the Community vessel Estai in international waters , a number of provisions were agreed upon bilaterally between the European Union and Canada , not without some difficulty , and subsequently at multilateral level in NAFO . As a result , the non-application of extraterritorial Canadian fisheries legislation in respect of Community vessels was also agreed upon .
Due to this conflict , new control measures were introduced at the request of the Canadians , and there is now an extensive inspection programme which includes the compulsory deployment of at least one inspection vessel for contracting parties with 10 or more vessels fishing in the NAFO area , as well as a dockside inspection at each port call .
The Hail transmission system is also compulsory , and each fishing vessel must carry an observer on board . Similarly , each vessel should be equipped with the equipment required so that they can be tracked by satellite .
This is a pilot project which has been extended and which , according to Commission reports , has required significant efforts on the part of the Commission and the Member States , which are partly responsible for the costs , which have risen to ECU 500 000 , as 21 vessels have been equipped with the necessary technology .

It seems to be the right time to take another look at this situation and to find a system which does not discriminate against any fleet , which is applied equally across the board , which is operative and coherent , which ensures that systems do not overlap unnecessarily and which in time will have the necessary degree of stability .
Faced with this situation and the European Union 's fulfilment of its obligations , we must also consider the fulfilment of bilateral , multilateral and international obligations by the other parties involved , particularly Canada .
Cooperation and good faith are at odds with the maintenance of extraterritorial legislation which has caused so much damage recently .
The greatest danger for fisheries and peace in the NAFO regulatory area , as you know very well , Madam Commissioner , comes from attitudes such as those of the Canadians and legislation , such as the current C-27 , which continues to infringe international law in general , and the law of the sea in particular . They make bizarre interpretations of the New York Convention on transzonal species , they call into question the very regulations and functioning of the NAFO Convention and they rashly and unnecessarily flout the principle of good faith which has always been the hallmark of the European Union .
I therefore call on the Commission to intervene in this matter .
Madam President , the Common Fisheries Policy is without doubt the most important instrument for making sure that we have sustainable fish stocks throughout European Union waters .
As we all know , controlling fishing is one of the most difficult tasks .
A part of the problem is the severe mistrust between different national authorities - even , dare I say , among parliamentarians here - not least within the industry about which fleet is doing what and how well , and how the Common Fisheries Policy and its control mechanism are being applied .
These annual reports to Parliament - this is the second one - are an excellent idea .
When I first heard they were to be produced I was hopeful that we might cut through the misunderstandings and rumours and really find out how well the Common Fisheries Policy was being implemented .
We would find out how well the controls were working not only across the Union as a whole but between Member States .
Instead of this , for the second time we have a report that is full of tables and statistics which make it very dry .
These statistics are not comparable between different countries and are difficult to interpret .
This means that there is no increase in trust or understanding between Member States or within the industry as to how well the industry is being controlled .
In fact , there is a long explanation of faults and problems and from the two annual reports so far there has been little if any sign of progress or improvement over that time .
Not only that , the report is very late .
This is the report for 1995 which means that we are well behind .
The main faults with this report are that the statistics are not comparable , there is no action plan to try to resolve the problems and no blame is apportioned as to why the Common Fisheries Policy is in the state that it is .
When it reviews the year in question , there has been no improvement and no measurement of the problems .
We all know that illegal fishing takes place and that there are illegal landings .
Yet , there is no attempt to quantify the size of the problem .
So , once again we are left with a report that has no teeth .
One of the real concerns to all of us engaged in the fishing industry , in particular parliamentarians here , is once again the absolute lack of political will by Member States to make this policy work .
If we do not make it work there is no chance of sustainable policies or a sustainable fisheries sector for the future .
That is something this House should be very concerned about .
In fact , the regulation demands that , following one of these reports , Member States should report back on what they have done to take matters forward .
There is no account of any Member State having come back to report after the previous report .
No Member State has bothered to do that and that is of grave concern .
I would say to the Commission : Be brave ; where there is blame , actually name .
Let us name the Member States where the policy is not working .
Let us not be shy .
This report is supposed to make public the problems of the Common Fisheries Policy .
We should talk about them .
The Commission has its own inspectors , professional people who understand what is going on .
We should have some input from them as to what is really going on .
Let us not pretend that these statistics tell us something .
The truth is that there are many problems out there .
My wish is that future reports be on time , that they be clear about where the problems lie and that they be forward-looking .
I wanted to see an action plan come out of this and I am delighted to say that since this report the Commission has produced one .
It was published in February and in due course will come to Parliament .
However , although this report goes through all the problems we know but does not quantify them , I hope it represents the start of a new chapter .
This report was an opportunity lost but I hope that the action plan which Parliament has yet to discuss will be a start for real reform .
Madam President , I would like to talk about the Teverson report .
Anyone who looks at the Commission 's report can only agree with the rapporteur .
We ought to be extremely worried that since the first report was published a year ago there has been no improvement in controls , and that the political will of the Member States is evidently lacking .
But it is also regrettable that the Commission 's report is so feeble and meaningless .
It almost gives the impression that the Commission just wants to relieve itself of a burdensome duty .
It is too passive and too hesitant , whereas definite action is what is needed .
For instance , the Commission absolutely must give the Member States clearer rules about what kind of information they are to provide , so as to obtain uniform information , because comparable information can only be obtained if this is done . Otherwise , the end result will be a report which begs more questions than it answers .
An action plan for improving controls by the Member States is also necessary , covering all sectors of the Common Fisheries Policy , including marketing channels , for instance .
An essential goal of this action plan should be to encourage cooperation between Member States , but also between them and the Commission .
However , the Commission will not be able to avoid giving serious consideration to harmonizing sanctions , because only deterrence provides protection against infringement , and only uniformity of sanctions can help to make the monitoring activities credible to the fishermen of the various Member States .
Credibility is also the key word of my last comment .
I would particularly like to highlight one sentence in Mr Teverson 's report : ' The Commission 's annual report about control of the Common Fisheries Policy should contribute essentially to maintaining its credibility . ' I fear that this Commission report has not quite lived up to this .
Madam President , we can only overcome conflicts by working together .
The Varela report also says as much .
In view of the disagreements between the EU and Canada , which at their climax in March 1995 resulted in an infringement of international law , the present decision by NAFO must be particularly welcome .
Extending the pilot project for satellite location of fishing vessels in the NAFO regulatory area has set the course for a calm sea in terms of international fisheries policy .
This was probably also the reason for continuing the project .
Which is a good thing , because it can consolidate the present peaceful situation .
Our goal must be to introduce compulsory satellite monitoring of specified fishing vessels in the NAFO regulatory area .
This is required anyway for monitoring stock conservation measures .
We shall be voting next week in the Committee on Transport and Tourism on the first Commission communication on the introduction of a European satellite navigation system for air traffic .
This technology is necessary for Europe and is impressive , and not just in my opinion .
As far as the NAFO area in concerned , three years are enough to make a decision about satellite monitoring .
This decision is urgently required , because at the NAFO annual meeting in September this year a uniform EU line on monitoring and enforcement in the fisheries area should be adopted .
The Committee on Fisheries therefore supports Amendment No 1 , because creating uniform monitoring systems in the NAFO area is a further step towards a conflict-free future .
Likewise , the Commission 's report on monitoring carried out in that area should finally enable us all to draw conclusions .
Parliament and the Commission are therefore asked to act accordingly .
Turning to the Teverson report , it is certainly true that it is time we had definite and comprehensible monitoring methods for the Common Fisheries Policy .
What is the use of laws and agreements if they are not socially effective ?
Many of my visitors are amazed that people smoke everywhere in this Parliament , although there are many signs forbidding it .
And what do we see on the European seas ?
There are no signs , but we all know about the directives on the Common Fisheries Policy .
But they are often ignored , or are inadequately implemented or monitored .
The credibility of a whole system is called into question by such behaviour .
It will only be possible to prevent over-fishing if fisheries activities are tightly monitored and effective sanctions are introduced . It would be even better , as the Commission says , if support - including financial support - were given to those Member States which act responsibly , and the number of them is increasing , thank goodness .
In addition to this principle of carrot instead of stick , a detailed Commission action plan would help to improve the situation .
We wait for it to be formulated .
In its report , the Commission praises the cooperation between Member States with the aim of achieving more effective monitoring .
However , it is an open secret that some Member States unfortunately still have the wrong attitude to fisheries policy .
But otherwise , our work would remain unloved and ignored , like the notices forbidding smoking here in Parliament .
Madam President , the Commission 's report on the monitoring of the Common Fisheries Policy in 1995 does not make for very pleasant reading .
Some are being selfish when it comes to exploiting common fish stocks .
Some Member States fail to respect jointly agreed regulations , and continually condone quota violations and other offences .
Mr Teverson has dealt frankly with these problems in his report and called for stern action .
I would like to thank him for a bold , impartial and unbiased account .
Fishing is distinct from other means of livelihood in that fish stocks cannot be increased .
The current measures target the conservation of stocks already in existence and their proper use .
The methods used in the Common Fisheries Policy are thus mainly of a restrictive nature , and they cannot do anything to add to the resources we already have .
As fishing activity is concentrated at sea , in scattered locations , it is difficult to supervise .
But it becomes all the more difficult if one Member State does not wish to play ball .
The EU 's resources in this area are limited .
The regulations in force are complicated and technically difficult to monitor .
Although various schemes have been and are being developed , the results are not very good .
There is mistrust between the major fishing nations .
The way things have gone up till now shows that complicated regulations are threatening to lead to deadlock .
The Liberal view is thus that the regulations should be simple , effective , and easy and cheap to monitor .
The Common Fisheries Policy can succeed in the future only if it has the genuine support of Member States .
More regulations , bureaucracy and intensive surveillance can never be enough to maintain a successful policy .
That is why the future of the fisheries policy depends on whether we really want to improve on it or not .
Fish is an important and nutritious food source .
Stocks must therefore be protected against overfishing and be kept at a good level , for future generations as well as our own .
Madam President , the basic aim of the Common Fisheries Policy is a system of sustainable fish stocks .
There are problems in the Mediterranean caused by drift-net tuna fishing , which is damaging natural resources .
In the Nordic countries we have a special problem , which is economic , ecological , and also linguistic .
It is about salmon fishing .
So-called natural salmon are born in certain catchment basin areas , live in the Baltic and the Gulf of Finland , and return to the rivers to spawn .
Owing to their characteristic gene structure these salmon are known as natural salmon .
They are classed as an endangered species by the EU .
Apart from natural salmon , the Baltic is inhabited by salmon which have been introduced there , and which do not have the same prized gene-value as the original natural salmon .
Their main prey and source of food is fished using drift nets in the southern parts of the Baltic , but increasing numbers of natural salmon on their way to breed are finding their way into the same nets , and now natural salmon only account for about 10 % of the total salmon population in the Baltic Sea .
The Finnish government is asking the Commission to make an exception of the Baltic in its general ban on drift nets .
That way they are seeking to steer the Finnish salmon prey towards the thirty or forty mainly Åland Island crews at the cost of losing the natural salmon gene stock and effectively destroying salmon fishing in rivers .
If , however , the natural salmon get back to the rivers to breed , they will be twice as large , measured by weight , as the salmon caught at sea alongside the introduced salmon .
The UK , which now has the presidency , must set in motion a determined policy to ban drift-net fishing once and for all , at the conference of Fisheries Ministries at the end of the month .
We must then have reports on the monitoring of the Common Fisheries Policy .
Because this is a Community matter , the Commission must insist on a common principle to apply when governments , and in this case it is mine , violate the policy .
Madam President , we support the report of Mr Teverson and the conclusions he comes to .
We endorse the resolution , especially the comments about the lack of overall analysis , and criticisms by the Commission of the Member States and the lack of progress in monitoring the marketing channels .
As I found out when I was rapporteur on the report for the same subject for 1994 , the level of surveillance and control of EU vessels varies widely from one country to another , but nowhere at all is it satisfactory .
The Member States apparently lack the political will to fulfill their obligations .
This is a major problem .
If the Member States cannot do what they are supposed to do , then the Commission should get tough with them and consider legal ways of encouraging them to act .
At the end of the day maybe we should consider whether surveillance should become a Community responsibility , because at the moment Member States are not fulfilling their obligation .
It is quite clear that there is a lack of political will there , and something has to be done about it .
Madam President , today we are again dealing with the serious issue of natural resources management .
The dispute between Canada and the EU arose in 1995 when fish stocks emigrated outside the Canadian 200 nautical mile exclusive zone and the Canadians decided to protect those fish stocks in extra-territorial waters .
Unlike the majority of colleagues in this Parliament at that time I fully agreed with the measures taken by the Canadians .
I still believe that the Canadians were right because fish do not realize where the 200-mile zone ends and international waters begin .
Today I am happy that this conflict was resolved around the negotiating table .
Canada agreed on the non-application of extraterritorial fisheries legislation in international waters of NAFO .
Also , several control measures have been agreed upon , amongst them an agreement that each vessel be equipped with a satellite tracking system .
That is what we are discussing today .
My group fully supports the pilot project which has been carried out on satellite tracking .
We think satellite tracking is a serious control measure to prevent over-fishing .
We therefore fully endorse the recommendations from Mr Varela SuanzesCarpegna and Mr Teverson , who we congratulate for reaching unanimity in the Committee on Fisheries .
Madam President , the credibility of the Common Fisheries Policy stands or falls with an effective monitoring policy on the part of all Member States .
The Commission 's annual report on monitoring activities in the Member States therefore fulfils a useful function .
But to get a good picture of the intensity of the monitoring done by each Member State , reporting will have to improve considerably .
The report for 1995 offers no more than offering an interesting survey of the various inspection activities in the Member States .
It is not possible to compare the effectiveness of Member States on the basis of this report .
The monitoring systems vary too much and the way the results are presented in the Commission report is too restricted .
The description of actual offences in the report is very brief .
Such information is extremely important to get a good picture of the scale of the problem .
Some Member States do not issue any information on fishery offences at all , whilst others only mention the number of offences , without giving any indication as to the nature of the offence .
Most Member States leave out all details of the fines and penalties they have imposed .
Without advocating European criminal justice , I would like to point to the need to maximize approximation of sanctions imposed by different States as far as possible .
The deterrent effect ought to be comparable throughout the entire Union .
Finally , the problem of illegal landings .
It is important that these are charted better .
There is a serious suspicion that large quantities of fish are landed illegally in a number of Member States , bypassing the quotas .
At the end of 1996 the BBC reported that in the United Kingdom a quarter of all fish reaches the shore illegally .
Up until the present moment the Commission has neither confirmed nor denied this report .
But systematic controls when the fish is landed , combined with a reporting obligation , are needed in many other countries .
In Member States with many harbours , this will lead to organizational problems .
The problem is serious enough , however , to warrant considerable stepping-up of monitoring .
Madam President , I would like to make five points to the Commissioner concerning Mr Teverson 's report on the Commission report on monitoring the Common Fisheries Policy .
Firstly , I would like to consider the timing .
In other words , this report is from 1995 and we are now in March 1998 .
I would like to know if , for 1999 , the Commission could join together 1996 , 1997 and 1998 in a single report so that we could consider the situation as quickly as possible .
Secondly , Madam Commissioner , the report has not , in fact , given us that much information since what the Commission has done , or the Commission 's services have done - as can be seen on pages 10 to 59 - is to collect the national information , put it in a file and bring it along .
The Commission only drew up pages 3 to 8-5 pages - and then only some basic tables .
I will give you an example of how basic they are , which I hope will not be unpleasant . In one of these , it states that " there are 30 inspectors in Spain ' .
And , in a footnote - No 4 - it adds : " to this figure , which corresponds to the national inspectors situated in Madrid , must be added 232 inspectors working for the autonomous communities ' .
In other words , there are 252 inspectors instead of 30 .
In addition , as regards Italy , it states : " in theory , 5 200 people are involved in some type of fisheries inspection ' .
Given that fishing is not a very important activity in Italy , this gives the impression that each individual fish is inspected by an Italian . I do not actually believe this to be true .
Therefore , I call on the Commission to ensure that the next report is more uniform , and that at least the information is clearer .
Thirdly , there is a lack of Community controls .
What concerns me is that not only is there no Community monitoring , but all the conclusions , which can be found on the last page of the report , are aimed at cooperation between countries .
In other words , it supports monitoring on the part of the states .
Entrusting fisheries countries with the monitoring of their own fisheries is the same as asking hunting organizations to monitor their own hunters .
This will not be possible , and it is a point which we would like to make very clear .
Fourthly , there is a lack of funding .
This is rightly conceded in the Commission 's report , which states : " as a consequence of fraud , between ECU 7 000 million and ECU 8 000 million is lost every year ' , while we spend ECU 300 million on monitoring .
In other words , if we spent more , we would save money .
The question is whether or not it is possible to increase funding to maintain these monitoring activities - I know the Commissioner is going to tell me that the budgetary power lies with Parliament .
To end on a positive note , Madam Commissioner , these new systems are beneficial .
The satellite monitoring systems and even NAFO 's control system which Mr Varela talked about are all very constructive .
I disagree with Mr Varela on one point and that is that Mr Varela is calling for another report on NAFO .
Would it not be possible to have in the near future a comprehensive report which would mean that , rather than having different reports , we would have only one which would include NAFO and the new systems ?
Madam President , I accept Mr Teverson 's report as a very honest effort to state clearly the opinion of the Committee on Fisheries .
I listened very carefully to Ms McKenna .
I was interested to note that while she continuously opposes the existence of the European Union , this morning she wants to give it more competence in the area of policing the seas .
I certainly agree .
As someone who is interested in the image of the European Union , I sometimes wish we did not have the responsibility of the Common Fisheries Policy .
We could have made it into something useful for the European Union .
It could have been a little gem of achievement .
All we can say , I suppose , is that European Union fishermen have not been sinking each others ' boats or killing each other in fights over fish , as they have done in some parts of the world .
Apart from that , it has largely been a failure .
There are two considerations .
One is environmental : the health of the seas .
The other is economic .
We could have improved the marine environment considerably and at the same time , we could provide , at least for the future , a better livelihood and greater profits for fishermen .
But it seems we have ignored all the warnings .
When we come here and complain about fraud in the area of Community spending we get satisfaction , figures and action , but never in the area of fishing .
I do not blame the Commission .
It is entirely due to the lack of political will in the Member States and the lack of trust that exists between fishermen and governments .
We have to try a lot harder at European Union level if we are to convince everybody .
If one fish is found dead in a stream , lake or inland waterway anywhere in the European Union , there is war ; someone is taken to court , and people are brought to justice .
Thousands of tonnes of small fish are discarded annually in the seas .
No-one takes any notice .
I want to make a specific complaint .
I have to deal with these things in my own constituency : fishermen off the west coast of Ireland complain of gross overfishing by Dutch-registered vessels .
They claim these fish are being landed in Las Palmas and that there is no policing or control .
I do not want to be nationalistic .
I believe all fishermen have a share of the guilt .
But I would like specific complaints at least to be reported and commented on .
Madam President , I also wish to congratulate the rapporteurs on their reports .
The common concern of both the Varela Suanzes-Carpegna and the Teverson reports is the need for effective monitoring and enforcement of international and Community fishing agreements .
As has been said , we must ensure that all the measures in those agreements are being carried out if fish stocks are to remain at a sustainable level .
There is , as we all know , deep suspicion among Europe 's fishing communities that other countries ' fishermen are getting away with flouting the rules and , therefore , they do not see why they should keep them .
This is the main reason for the anger and resentment felt towards the Common Fisheries Policy .
The fact that we are discussing the 1995 Commission report on monitoring the CFP in March 1998 is indicative of the slowness with which action is seen to be taken on enforcement .
I therefore welcome the Commission proposal to extend the pilot project for satellite tracking of vessels in the regulatory area of the North Atlantic Fisheries Organization up to 31 December 1998 .
Indeed , I hope that it will not just remain a pilot project which will come to an end at the end of this year , but will be the basis of a comprehensive system of satellite tracking , applied eventually over a much wider area , including the Mediterranean , where Community vessels are subject to quotas and controls .
We need to report back on the effectiveness of the pilot before the end of this year , so that the necessary amendments and extensions can be made to the scheme if it is proving to be the valuable contribution to the conservation of fish stocks we all want to achieve .
I would like to begin by thanking the rapporteurs , Mr Varela and Mr Teverson .

The truth is that the monitoring of fisheries , as we all agree , is inadequate in several respects , and this is highlighted in the report .
On the one hand , as Mr Medina has already said , this is due to the lack of resources devoted to this area by the Commission itself , and for which , we , as Members of Parliament who have budgetary authority , must also share the responsibility . On the other hand , it is due to the lack of political will on the part of many Member States .
This is a mistake since if we do not adequately monitor the fisheries sector , we are demonstrating weak policies in that we are attacking the resources on which the future survival of fisheries depends .
However , there are reliable fleets , of course .
There are fleets which fulfill all the technical requirements .
Therefore , where monitoring is not adequate , these fleets are becoming less competitive than those which do not respect the regulations .
As we increase the demands for technical measures , we are also increasing the imbalance in terms of the lack of competitiveness of those fleets which do meet the technical requirements .
This is a problem which needs to be solved .
Some measures in this respect are highlighted in the report , and I would like to congratulate the rapporteurs on that .
But this report also underlines another important point : monitoring should not only involve catches , but should also cover markets and marketing .
The Commission should also investigate certain instances of fraud taking place at the moment , for example , in respect of imports of tuna steaks under the GSP-Drugs preferential arrangements .
Madam Commissioner , yesterday you wrote a very nice article on the topic of drugs and the barbarities which sometimes occur .
I believe that fisheries are also subject to fraud , but it is not due to a lack of solidarity in this field . However , the European Union 's solidarity must be underpinned by all its economic sectors , and not necessarily just the fisheries sector .
There is another aspect of fraud which I would like to emphasize and which is also pointed out in the report .
I have in mind the possible fraudulent import of cod of a different origin via Norway .
In fact , it is possible that part of the existing 800 000 tonnes of cod from the Arctic , of which practically 50 % belongs to Russia , reaches Community markets via Norway .
Therefore , this report also underlines the need to extend control measures , and I call on the Commission , with the courage it normally shows and in the light of this report , not to mention the policies the Commission is implementing , to expand monitoring of the fisheries policy , because this will undoubtedly be an important factor in preserving our fisheries sector for the future .
Madam President , I rise to speak about the Teverson report , which is one of the most depressing I have ever read .
Anyone who , like me , remembers being told that the sea is our future , that it is a source of unlimited food , that everything is available to us , and who now , just a few years later , reads what Mr Teverson has said , will see a tragic picture emerging .
On the other hand , there are still many reasons for being optimistic , not least because of the fact that we have an excellent Fisheries Commissioner , who has energetically achieved a great deal .
But it is also true that we are still dependent on national governments today , and they have no will at all .
They are much too weak , whether policy or security is at stake .
If our governments are weak , then Europe is weak , and that lies at the heart of the tragic part which our continent has to play in this whole field , quite apart from the fact that we only ever talk about Europeans .
The real criminals of the sea are the Russians , the Americans and the Japanese , with their big industries which actually exterminate whole regions .
We only have to look at the coast of South America and see what is happening there .
I believe that the Teverson report is a signal to us to call on our governments again to stir themselves into action at last , because otherwise they will yet sink Europe .
The debate is closed .
We shall now proceed to the vote .
The next item is the vote on the report ( A4-86 / 98 ) by Mr Varela Suanzes-Carpegna .
( Parliament adopted the legislative resolution ) The next item is the vote on the report ( A4-19 / 98 ) by Mr Teverson .
( Parliament adopted the resolution )
Guidance programmes for the fishing fleets
The next item is the report ( A4-0046 / 98 ) by Mr Cunha , on behalf of the Committee on Fisheries , on the Commission 's annual report to the Council and the European Parliament on the results of the multiannual guidance programmes for the fishing fleets at the end of 1996 ( COM ( 97 ) 0352 - C4-0393 / 97 ) .
Madam President , during the early 1980s , the over-fishing practised by a very oversized Community fleet approached alarming proportions .
In 1983 , in view of the gravity of the situation , the Commission submitted a first multiannual guidance programme ( MGP ) which was intended to reduce the fishing effort and which established basic parameters for the tonnage and power of vessels .
MGP I was followed by MGP II and MGP III , covering the period 1992-1996 , which finally stipulated differentiated goals for reducing fishing effort , with 20 % for demersal species and 15 % for benthic species .
Thus , the overall reduction of the fleet depended on its structure , the species fished and the techniques employed .
The result achieved by MGP III , which we are currently analysing , was to reduce the fleet 's capacity by 15 % measured in terms of tonnage and by 9.25 % in terms of power .
As will be seen from the report , the global objectives have not been uniformly achieved by all countries .
Thus , countries like Denmark , Germany and , in particular Spain and Portugal , have reduced the capacity and the power of their fleets . Portugal and Spain even exceeded the objectives set .
In other cases , however , the objectives were not met and some Member States even increased their capacity over and above its previous level .
I have a number of comments in view of this .
The information in the Commission communication shows that virtually all Member States experienced technical difficulties in complying with the deadlines set for harmonizing units for measuring vessel tonnage .
It is to be hoped that these technical difficulties will now be overcome through MGP IV .
The situation is more worrying as regards power , since each Member State uses a different method of calculation .
The Commission should , as a matter of urgency , submit proposals to facilitate setting criteria for such calculations .
This is the only way to enable comparative analyses of the different Member States to be made and to be able to ascertain the degree of compliance with the objectives laid down .
However , the Commission report conveys the still more serious impression that some national governments are reluctant to furnish the Commission with reliable data on the condition of their fleets , and appear to have little interest in adopting appropriate measures for reducing capacity in compliance with the objectives established in the MGPs .
Thus , non-compliance with the multiannual guidance programmes is repeatedly carried over to the following programme which , in turn , ignores what went before .
It is worrying that the objectives enshrined in the MGPs should in practice be dependent on the good will of Member States .
The effectiveness of the instruments at the Commission 's disposal for enforcing compliance is doubtful and they do not encourage Member States to take appropriate steps to reduce the fishing effort of their respective fleets to conform with the ceilings stipulated in the programmes .
In the light of this situation , and of the fact that a balanced conversion of national fleets is essential in guaranteeing the conservation of resources , and in ensuring that Community fishing remains profitable and competitive in future , it is essential that the Council and , by extension , Member States , should recognize their responsibilities and accordingly draw up enforcement measures with real teeth , in the event that the objectives laid down in the multiannual programmes are not met .
Given the current state of affairs , we should consider penalties including a reduction in Member States ' quotas whenever the objectives set are not met and this is obviously deliberate .
Finally , I would like to congratulate the Commission on the quality of its report and urge the Council to take its responsibilities seriously and adopt a regime of penalties including effective measures in cases of deliberate non-compliance with the objectives laid down .
Otherwise , we will just be pulling the wool over each others ' eyes and , if that is the case , it would be preferable to put an end once and for all to the charade that this would make of the multiannual guidance programmes .
Madam President , Madam Commissioner , multiannual guidance programmes I , II and III from 1983 to the end of 1996 did not succeed in eliminating the mismatch between the over-sized fishing fleets of the European Union and the critical state of its fish stocks .
There are various reasons for this .
On the one hand , according to the rapporteur , there were different measurement bases in the Member States when the multiannual guidance programmes were introduced , and on the other , there was the lenient way Member States implemented the rules .
It is obvious that there were very big differences in implementation by Member States .
Despite the Commission 's good intentions - and I hold the Member States equally responsible - there is still a lot of catching up to do in implementing the rules .
It is good that there was progress between 1992 and 1996 .
A reduction in the tonnage and engine power of the EU fishing fleet was achieved .
But this has changed little as far as the critical state of the fish stocks is concerned .
It is therefore doubtful whether MGP IV will result in any fundamental improvement .
This has already been demonstrated by the resistance of some Member States to the provisional rules under MGP IV .
The rules which were then finally decided are also only half-hearted in my opinion .
If MGP IV is to yield the successful outcome we are seeking - and here I agree with the rapporteur - the Commission must use effective instruments which are not dependent on the Member States ' good will .
I would like to add one important point : the socio-economic effects not only on fishermen themselves , but also on the whole coastal region .
I foresee the greatest difficulties for Member States here , and I hope that fisheries will be discussed in the structural fund debates , and not just at the margin .
Madam President , the most interesting aspect of Mr Cunha 's report - and I would like to congratulate him on it - is the fact that , although three multiannual programmes have now been finalized , we will still have to be on our guard to ensure that none of the Member States try to avoid meeting the requirements . This would be a selfish attitude which could in itself prevent us from fulfilling the objectives of resource conservation and which , in addition , would create unfair competition with those Member States which complied with the programme .
As Mr Cunha stated in recital C of his report , achievement of the MGP objectives is necessary to ensure sustainable development in this sector .
In agreeing with this statement - as I do - we recognize with frustration that non-compliance on the part of some states hinders such sustainable development for the entire Community fleet .
Moreover , it demonstrates an unacceptable lack of solidarity .
With the approval of MGP IV , we can see that certain progress has been made .
This is particularly true in that there seems to have been a major commitment on the part of the Commission to ensure that this new generation of MGPs can be concluded under fair and non-discriminatory conditions for the fleets of the various Member States .
However , I would like to go further and call for determined action .
We accordingly agree with Mr Cunha 's call for the settingup of a system of effective sanctions , which could include the reduction of fishery quotas , and this is one of the reasons why we are supporting his report .
Moreover , the report also addresses the lack of uniformity in the measurement system . In this respect , I would like to highlight the need to concentrate our efforts on achieving a standardized system of equivalent measurements and provisions which oblige all Member States to supply reliable data .
It is only in this way , Madam President , that we can really discover what measures we need to take to achieve the sustainable development of the Community fleets or , as I would prefer to say , the Community fleet .
Good morning , Madam President .
In his evaluation of the third guidance programme , the rapporteur expresses concern at the lack of interest shown by some Member States in taking measures to reduce the size of their fleets .
We may regret their lack of enthusiasm , but should we really be surprised at it ?
In fact , some ports have been literally reduced to their bare bones .
If a balance is not achieved , the whole social and economic fabric is threatened , including fish auctions , shipyards , the fish trade , refuellers , and so on .
Nor should we underestimate the tremendous difficulties experienced in some countries , where procrastination is a way of life .
After all , it ought to be possible to take into account in the calculations those vessels which are more or less stateless or have a borrowed nationality , which fly the flag of one country , when everyone knows they should really be classed as belonging to another in terms of quotas and power .
The rapporteur emphasizes that only a system of effective sanctions will compel national bodies to comply with the objectives set .
Amongst such measures , he proposes the automatic reduction of quotas .
I personally do not think that is a good solution , because it can only be applied if a specific fleet only catches a specific species .
What will be done in the case of multipurpose vessels and what about vessels over 50 % of whose catch consists of non-quota species ?
I also think that suspending aids for shipbuilding is a very restrictive measure , and may even be excessive , as it can have an adverse effect on safety and the improvement of working conditions .
I should also like to thank the rapporteur for having taking that point into consideration by including it amongst the recitals of his report .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , Commissioner , the Commission 's annual report on the final results of MGP III helps enormously to clarify the way the Community fleet has developed and the role that national governments have played in that development .
For instance , the report demonstrates that my country went furthest in applying MGP III as regards the key issue of reducing the capacity of the fleet 's different components and segments , and that it went even further than the levels set . I have to say that I find this totally incomprehensible given the information contained in the report .
I must say that I find it very hard to understand this " good boy ' attitude since , at the same time , other Member States were cynically - I can safely say - increasing the capacity of their own fleets in terms of tonnage and / or power .
The detailed information contained in the report should have had a greater influence on the values and strategies laid down by the current MGP IV , which covers the period 1997-2001 .
More attention should have been paid to this data both by the Commission , in drawing up the proposals for MGP IV and by the Council , in deciding not to insist on further capacity reductions for Member States which have complied with and even exceeded , to some extent , the programmes under MGP III .
The Commission also has its share of responsibility here , since it has not shown itself equal to the task of enforcing decisions to harmonize the measurement of the tonnage of the various fleets , and nor has it proved able to make progress with the prescriptive framework required to harmonize measurement of the power and productivity of the various fleets .
Thus , these basic requirements for establishing reliable comparisons and monitoring are not met , and there is a failure on the part of many of those who possess the fleets with the highest capacity and productivity in the European Union to comply with the MGPs . It is therefore difficult to persuade many fishermen of the justice , transparency and fairness of the Commission 's and some Member States ' arguments and theoretical proposals for Community strategies that are obviously necessary to adapt the capacity of the Community 's fleet to existing marine resources .
There is also a total absence of firm measures against those who flout the rules .
The rapporteur - whom I congratulate - argues that these measures should include , for instance , the withdrawal or reduction of quotas . Similarly , there is a lack of consideration for those who have met and even exceeded the responsibilities they are required to take on .
This cannot be allowed to continue much longer .
On behalf of Portugal 's fishermen and producer organizations , who have been heavily penalized in recent years , I would like to voice an appeal for action without further delay .
The Commission and Mr Cunha have both done very good jobs in analysing the results of the final year of the third multiannual guidance programme .
The Teverson report and the Cunha report both relate to things that are essentially the responsibility of the Member States , that is , control and surveillance , on the one hand , and the size of the national fishing fleets on the other .
Both reports show clearly that Member States are not taking their responsibilities seriously .
Only four countries out of fifteen have met all their objectives under the MAGP-3 .
All the others are over the limits , in terms of either tonnage or power , in at least one of the fleet segments .
The four countries that have met the objectives are Spain , Portugal , Denmark and Finland .
The Commission report is quite comprehensive in giving information on the degree to which various Member Sates have met their obligations , but one suggestion I would make to improve the quality of the report is to give some idea of how , for example , Spain and Portugal met their objectives , what happened to the vessels which were removed from the register , how many were decommissioned , how many were scrapped , how many were sunk and so on .
Also , how many were simply transferred to another flag : how many vessels continue to fish either here in the Community or elsewhere , under what is in some cases essentially a flag of convenience .
The fisheries agreement with Argentina subsidizes transfers to the Argentine flag .
How much of the reduction of the capacity from Member States has gone over there and what impact is this having on the resources in that area ?
We cannot just talk about massaging the figures and removing vessels from the national register and putting them somewhere else , we have to see where they are going , what is happening to them .
No Member State can actually pat itself on the back if we do not know exactly the end result of what they are doing .
We need this information to analyse fully what is happening .
Madam President , this is a useful debate , and a lot of things have come out during its course , which is not always the case .
There are , of course , historical reasons , not least the attitude of the last Conservative Government in the UK , why it did not come up with decommissioning funds but applied the principle of subsidiarity and applied days at sea .
So we immediately come up against a real problem historically that certain governments quite legitimately applied a different measure , with which I disagree , but , nevertheless , they did so .
You cannot sweep that under the carpet and ignore it totally .
That is one of the fundamental problems .
There are others , to which Ms McKenna has referred , about what precisely is being measured when the reduction in fleets is being talked about .
I say to the rapporteur and others who are talking glibly about eliminating quotas , that they really are playing with fire on this one .
I am alarmed to discover that the support given by the Group of the European People 's Party and the Confederal Group of the European United Left - Nordic Green Left seems to be conditional on the automatic reduction of quotas .
This is the sort of talk which alarms the fishermen and should alarm the governments of Europe , if people think they can simply apply a measure like this and say that the European Parliament is in favour of it .
We have to be a little more statesmanlike and responsible .
I am very glad that the Commissioner is here to listen to this debate .
I was surprised on Monday , when I moved that we should not take a vote on this very important and sensitive issue on a Friday , to find that I was in a small minority .
The big groups said it was not controversial .
I can think of few things more controversial than threatening the Common Fisheries Policy 's fundamental principle of relative stability .
We have to look at this in a very different way , and I continue my plea that we should take a more rational approach to it .
I am just relieved that this is an own-initiative report , which does not have legislative force , because if it purported to do so , it would cause all kinds of havoc throughout the industry .
Mr President , it goes without saying that all Member States should keep to the rules which form part of the Common Fisheries Policy .
When the Member States flout these rules , sanctions should be imposed .
On that point I agree with the rapporteur .
But I do not think linking sanctions exclusively to the fleet capacity is the right approach .
Data on the number of vessels and engine power provides an extremely incomplete picture of the actual problems , especially if this data is based on unreliable and non-harmonized measurements made by Member States , as was the case in the annual report for 1996 .
To get a good idea of the extent to which the Member States have met the objectives of the Common Fisheries Policy , more issues should be looked at .
I am thinking of the Union 's quota policy , which is in fact the backbone of the European policy on the preservation of fish stocks , for instance .
The multiannual guidance programmes are closely related to this .
This instrument encourages Member States , after all , to adjust their fleet capacity to the available quota .
In this context it would have been helpful if , in addition to statistics on tonnage and engine power , the rapporteur had given a survey of the extent to which the quotas are complied with .
The rapporteur and other Members would then have seen that in the Netherlands the quotas are respected , despite that fact that the capacity of the fleet has not or has hardly been reduced .
The point I am trying to make , Mr Cunha , is that reducing fleet capacity is not the only way to lessen the pressure on resources .
The Netherlands has managed to stick to its quota by reducing the number of fishing days .
Such arrangements for managing fishing effort must be taken into account in the results of the multiannual guidance programmes .
Fishing methods also have an effect on resources .
In the Netherlands , for example , the overall length of the trawl has been reduced from 14 to 12 metres .
Experts believe this has reduced pressure on fish stocks by 10 % .
No allowance was made for this in the annual report for 1996 .
To sum up , I endorse the rapporteur 's plea for tightening sanctions , such as a reduction of quotas in the event of infringement .
But then the Member States should not be judged on just one aspect of the Common Fisheries Policy , but on the entire policy .
This means that allowances should be made for deployment of the fleet and for compliance - or non-compliance - with the quota .
I have tabled two amendments to this effect , and I hope the rapporteur will agree with these .
Mr President , I am sorry the Commissioner is not here because , really , without her here the debate somewhat loses its interest . I actually wanted to congratulate the Commission on the report it has prepared and , since the Commissioner is no longer here , I am disappointed at not being able to do so .
However , at least the rapporteur is here . He has presented a magnificent report and I would like to congratulate him as well .
The rapporteur understands the situation very well and I wanted to emphasize that his report is both clear and accurate .
So , apart from the amendments adopted by the Committee on Fisheries , it is difficult to accept any other amendments that would spoil the content of his amendment .
I would like to highlight the same point as Ms McKenna , but with a slight correction .
Ms McKenna said that only four countries had met all their objectives under MGP III , when in fact only three countries have met them as , if you read page 49 of the Commission report carefully , you will see that the Commission has some objections in the case of Finland .
Therefore , only Spain , Portugal and Denmark completely meet the MGP III objectives .
This means that the countries which are more highly dependent on fisheries are those which are most eager to meet the objectives .
Mr Cunha 's report sets out a series of points we agree with : the need to continue to establish harmonious criteria , the question of fleet capacity , the power of vessels , etcetera , and , in particular , the need to introduce a system of sanctions .
The Community has begun to introduce sanctions as regards competition and , more recently , as regards convergence .
Mr Cunha 's proposal is perfectly reasonable : he calls for a quota reduction for those Member States which do not meet the Community requirements .
However , the issue he raises in recital B is also very important : that the aim of the Common Fisheries Policy should not necessarily be a reduction for the fisheries sector .
Instead it should be to establish a balanced fisheries system since , in the sea , the general rule is that the big fish devours the little one and a certain biological balance has been established so that the human factor ( fisheries activity ) makes up part of this biological balance .
The adoption of measures aimed simply at reducing fisheries activity without taking this balance into account could , strangely enough , have a negative impact because , for example , if we do not continue to fish for species which are predators , those fish which are consumed by the predators will become less and less common .
I therefore believe that the Commission has taken the right road , that the Cunha report is truly excellent , and that we should congratulate both the Commission and Mr Cunha on their reports .
Mr President , since the start of the 1980s we have known about the damaging effects of overfishing in the seas of the EU .
The multiannual programmes , the MGPs , which are before us today , were introduced as a counter-measure ; for instance , this year there is MGP IV , the fourth generation .
The absence of uniform assessment criteria is ridiculous .
Is a brake being deliberately put on progress towards uniformity , or why is it that we cannot get results which suit the whole of Europe , based on either tonnage or engine power ?
This problem should have been sorted out a long time ago .
There are also gaps in the register of Community fishing vessels , which reduce its effectiveness .
This issue really should be resolved as well .
So a greater will to implement the directives is necessary .
National interests must not take precedence over higher-level European fisheries policy .
In any case failure to achieve the goals will unavoidably result in destroying many fisheries businesses on land , once fish stocks have degenerated too far , if not before that .
We should not let ourselves be deceived about the shortcomings of other countries in this area just because total capacity has been balanced out by particularly conscientious countries .
We cannot allow the countries which comply to become resigned as a result .
Their achievement must be a spur to the stragglers , otherwise there will be no progress in future .
It seems that there are not enough incentives to achieve the goals set .
The overhang from the previous MGPs is scarcely motivating .
It must be compulsory to keep within the limits , even if at the moment there are no effective sanctions along the lines I have described to ensure that it is done .
A quota reduction such as the rapporteur has suggested could also be effective .
But - and let me emphasize this again - it is more important to increase the awareness of the Member States .
Because they , the Member States , are responsible .
I would like to take this opportunity to thank you , Mrs Bonino , and DG XIV for the important discussion this week about Agenda 2000 and the subsequent legislative proposals on fisheries .
It was a good discussion , and I look forward to working together more .
Thank you , Mrs Langenhagen .
Ladies and gentlemen , Mrs Langenhagen 's speech has brought us to the end of the speeches by Members of this House and , before handing the floor over to Mrs Bonino , I would like to inform her that during her brief and justified absence , Mr Medina Ortega wanted to congratulate the Commission on its good work .


Therefore , the Presidency would like to repeat Mr Medina Ortega 's thoughts , while it understands completely that the Commissioner had to excuse herself briefly from the Hemicycle and , as always , I hand over to her with pleasure .
You now have the floor , Mrs Bonino .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , firstly I would like to congratulate Mr Cunha on his report , which I think provides a good analysis of the subject matter .
The Commission believes the multiannual guidance programmes to be important instruments , and so respect for their objectives is an essential factor for the future of the sector .
In this connection , I would like to remind Members that the services of the Commission are examining the possibility of bringing legal actions against Member States that have failed to fulfil their obligations under MGP III , that have consequently not achieved the programme objectives or that have failed to keep the information on their fleets in the Community fleet register up-to-date - this is also in answer to several observations made by Ms McKenna - or have failed to remeasure the tonnage of the fleets in gross tonnage units .
The Commission officials are therefore analysing the possibility of bringing legal actions against Member States that have failed to apply the provisions in these areas .
I have just two comments to make on amendments proposed and a further point with regard to the remeasuring of fleet tonnage .
The latter relates to the Commission 's request , which the Parliament is well aware of , for uniform units for measuring the fleet capacity .
This has been a great problem .
The Commission has appointed experts to examine the way in which the tonnage of each Member State 's vessels is measured . These experts are to assess the quality of the information supplied by the Member States themselves , and then submit recommendations to the Commission on how to speed up this remeasuring process .
The Commission is also trying to find suitable ways of harmonizing the definition and measurement of power throughout the Community and is collecting information available so as to examine the question thoroughly .
With regard to the MGP IV decisions adopted last December , the Commission is examining how to assist fleet reconstruction by means of financial provisions or incentives , as Mrs Langenhagen called them , and these provisions will be applied together with the percentages of incoming and outgoing fishing vessels .
I would also like to remind Members that , for those Member States that have not achieved the MGP III objectives , this backlog has been taken into account in preparing MGP IV . The Commission has not therefore agreed to wipe the slate clean .
For non-compliant Member States , apart from any legal action , the overhang from the past has been taken into account in preparing MGP IV .
Two further thoughts .
One amendment contains proposals for sanctions . I have to say that the Commission does not agree with this proposal , for several reasons : firstly , because the automatic reduction in quotas for non-compliant countries seriously undermines the basic principle of the Common Fisheries Policy , which is that of relative stability ; secondly , because if we embark on this kind of procedure , it is obvious that other Member States will ask for the same type of sanction , perhaps on account of exceeding quotas , inadequate controls , unloading of substandard fish , and so on .
I would therefore ask Parliament to reconsider a reduction in quotas as a sanction because of these possible implications .
Withdrawal of financial aid for the modernization and construction of fishing vessels is already taking place .
I must inform Members that the inclusion of productivity in the measurement of capacity is not realistic .
Frankly we do not know how to measure productivity - it seems an unacceptable measure in the sense that it cannot be applied .
I have already talked at length about the measurement of tonnage and power .
I would just like to add for information that the Commission is about to enter into a contract with the UK Seafood Industry Authority , according to which , as I have said , a group of experts will be given the remit of reviewing the procedures and methods used in Member States to measure tonnage .
Power , on the other hand , involves somewhat more complex issues .
The Commission recognizes that it is essential to further harmonize the measurement of power , because this is fundamental for MGP IV .
The debate is closed .
We shall now proceed to the vote .
On paragraph 3 :
Mr President , if my fellow Members agree , I would like to table an oral amendment to the last line of paragraph 3 .
It refers to " an automatic reduction of quotas ' .
My oral amendment is to remove the word " automatic ' .
Are there any objections to the oral amendment proposed by Mr Cunha to take out the word " automatic ' ?
Mr Macartney has the floor .
I am happy to accept that there is an improvement but it does not remove the problem so , no , we have to insist on the roll-call vote against that section please .
( Parliament adopted the resolution )
Congratulations , Mr Cunha .
This is an important report on an important area for the conservation of fishery resources .
In spite of its bluntness , the MGP is the most important instrument for achieving consistent conservation of fishery resources .
At the same time it is important to recognize that the conservation of fishery resources must be seen in the overall context of fisheries policy .
Conservation of fishery resources must also take account of the actual fishing capacity of national fishing fleets , the need for serious action concerning the threat to stocks of certain species , and the effectiveness of agreements with third countries , that is agreements which the EU signs with countries outside the Community .
Agreements with third countries are an area where there is every reason for criticism of EU policy .
As the situation currently stands , the Union does not pay sufficient attention to the need to develop the role of fishing in global food supply and to strengthen the economic capacity of developing countries themselves in this area . Furthermore , EU support for agreements with third countries involves maintaining national fishery capacity for certain Member States at a time when there is a need for substantial restrictions on all European fishing .
The assessment of MGP III suggests that a fundamental re-examination of the direction of the Common Fisheries Policy is required .
I wish to welcome very warmly Commissioner Bonino 's assurance that the European Commission does not support the idea of quota sanctions linked to MAGP compliance .
I am also greatly heartened by the Commissioner 's reiteration of the fundamental importance of the Common Fisheries Policy 's founding principle of relative stability .
Conservation of fishery resources in the Mediterranean
The next item is the report ( A4-0045 / 98 ) by Mr McMahon , on behalf of the Committee on Fisheries , on the proposal for a Council Regulation amending Regulation ( EC ) No 1626 / 94 laying down certain technical measures for the conservation of fishery resources in the Mediterranean ( COM ( 97 ) 0459 - C4-0510 / 97-97 / 0237 ( CNS ) ) .
Mr McMahon has the floor for six minutes .
Mr President , I take great pleasure in introducing this report on behalf of the Committee on Fisheries on conservation in the Mediterranean .
There is a very serious problem in the Mediterranean .
It concerns not just bluefin tuna , which is what the report is about .
The report is about how we work the Community regulation into ICCAT , the International Commission for Conservation of Atlantic Tuna .
The problem is the other species in the Mediterranean .
Because drift nets are used in the Mediterranean - as many as 8 000 whales and dolphins are killed annually by the activities of fishermen from various nations in the Mediterranean area .
The proposal in front of us goes part of the way towards dealing with this very serious problem for marine life in the Mediterranean .
The proposal calls for a ban on the use of helicopters and on fishing during the months of June and August , particularly during the spawning season for bluefin tuna .
There is also the activities of third countries .
We are very concerned in the Fisheries Committee about the activities of ships from countries such as Guatemala and Honduras , who are using drift nets in the Mediterranean and catching tuna , porpoises , dolphins and whales .
They are destroying the marine ecocosm within the Mediterranean .
As regards traditional fishing and the Italian swordfish fleet , we agreed during the debate on the Baldarelli report to phase out the use of drift nets .
The Commission agreed then , in 1994 , to give ECU 100 million to the Italian fishermen as a kind of reconstruction for ending their fishing activity .
Some 2 700 Italian fishermen were offered compensation .
I am sorry to tell the House that only 42 have availed themselves of the offer of selling their licences and moving into other activities .
It is obvious that the current policy of setting a limit of 2.5 kilometres for drift nets is not working .
It is important to look toward a gradual phasing-out of drift nets in the Mediterranean over a period of time .
I am very glad to say that the United Kingdom presidency and , in particular , the Minister for Fisheries , Mr Elliott , are very interested in this portfolio .
Mr Elliott and I have had several in-depth discussions about how it might be progressed .
He undertook to have it on the agenda at the next Fisheries Council .
As Parliamentarians we want to conserve and protect commercial fishing .
We want to safeguard communities which depend on fishing for a livelihood .
But at the same time we must try to protect the marine ecocosm .
We must try to protect , safeguard and conserve dolphins , whales and seals .
If this marine life is destroyed , it will affect the food chain .
It will mean that future generations will find that not only will there be no dolphins or whales , but there will be no tuna fish and very little fish at all .
The problem is that we are going to exhaust all the world 's resources .
As a Parliament , as Europeans , in the European Union , the onus is on us as we enter the new millennium , to take measures so that we can strike a proper balance between the commercial exploitation of fishing , conservation of stocks and conservation of marine life .
This is what this report is about .
It is a very restricted report .
It only deals with measures in the Mediterranean .
But , as a Parliament , must adopt this as our general principle for the future .
Mr President , this is a very technical report and it is not necessary to go into a lot of detail because it is just a question of Parliament approving something to allow certain measures to be taken by the Commission which I and my political group wholly endorse .
As Hugh McMahon , the rapporteur , has pointed out , this is really a conservation measure and this Parliament will want to support anything that the Commission brings forward by way of conservation measures
Regarding the Mediterranean as such there are one or two important problems there .
We must recognize the fact that the fish resources in the Mediterranean are maybe not as they should be .
They are currently being over-exploited , rather as has happened in the North Sea and the Atlantic area .
Having said that I would just raise with Mr McMahon and perhaps with the Commission the question of Amendment No 1 , because it does appear to me that the rapporteur is trying to pay compliments to his own government back in the United Kingdom .
This is not what should necessarily be happening in a European Parliament report .
I accept fully that the British Government is in favour and has made it a priority to try and phase out drift nets but the question I would ask of the Commission is whether the Commissioner views the Council 's position as being the same , because there is a great deal of division in the Council of Ministers regarding the phasing out of drift nets which does not necessarily reflect the position of the British Government .
I would suggest to the rapporteur that Amendment No 1 is trying to be congratulatory of one government in the Council when we should be looking at the Council 's overall position rather than an individual government .
Mr President , I have come to the conclusion of my remarks but I would just say that we fully support the Commission 's endeavours in this area .
Mr President , tuna in the Mediterranean is protected by special bans and regulations .
That shows that the Commission has the administrative means to preserve fish stocks .
But , as Mrs Bonino says , it is the Member States that are largely responsible for surveillance .
The means available to the Commission to control the situation include banning overfishing with drift nets , in collaboration with the various national governments .
This is what Mr McMahon was alluding to .
And , in this way , it could be believed that modern fishing technology is a threat to fish stocks in all our waters .
The problem in the Mediterranean is tuna .
In the Nordic countries , one economic and ecological problem is that of Norwegian salmon .
The EU should be tackling the fishing problems of the northern regions as well as those in the Mediterranean .
The Norwegians breed salmon in the estuaries of rivers where there are stocks of natural salmon .
In this way they are polluting the waters and may be spreading fish diseases , especially into the mouth of the Tenojoki river .
The dumping price of Norwegian salmon is also forcing fishermen in other countries to make ends meet by overfishing .
Reports like the one before us today are also needed for our northern waters .
Mr President , just adopting the ICCAT recommendations on the management of red tuna in the Mediterranean , as proposed by the Commission , is not enough .
In just three years , catches have doubled , from 20 000 tonnes in 1992 to 40 000 in 1995 , and we all know that these official figures are far lower than the true level .
If this escalation continues , the Mediterranean will soon have no tuna left .
We are asking the Commission for far more restrictive rules .
ICCAT should submit a plan for the recovery and protection of red tuna , saying " No Fishing ' , with no exceptions , for fish under 7 kg , at the same time as abolishing all the current fishing techniques used for young fish .
We believe that , at this point , the Commission should propose an embargo on tuna imports from the states of Panama , Honduras and Belize , which provide flags of convenience for fishing fleets which thereby escape any rules , as these countries do not belong to ICCAT .
Unfortunately , in many cases , these flags of convenience conceal European owners , shipping companies and other economic operators .
It is our responsibility to prevent this rule-bending , this fish piracy , and the continuing and devastating practice of using drift nets , particularly by Italian fleets . The EU also needs a far more strict policy and new restrictive measures .
Mr President , I would like to congratulate Mr McMahon on his report since it supports the Commission 's proposal to incorporate management measures to preserve the bluefin tuna into the EC regulation .
These measures were recommended by ICCAT back in 1996 and , given the situation of this resource , are of undeniable importance . I would like us to concentrate on these measures rather than on others which do not directly affect the debate .
However , the report also deserves our support since it highlights other decisions taken at that meeting which the Commission has not as yet incorporated into the EC regulation .
I am referring to the ban on tuna imports from Honduras and Belize due to the fact that their fleets completely refuse to respect the minimum rules of responsible fishing activity .
We know , Madam Commissioner , that the written procedure has begun for the study by committee 113 , but we fear that this debate may become overly long-winded before reaching the Council . Therefore , since , according to the different parties consulted , this embargo would not contravene GATT or WTO rules , we call on the Commission to help us , as a matter of urgency , to ensure that this committee gives its opinion as soon as possible so that the embargo can be put in place .
In addition , as you are aware , ICCAT has also recommended a similar embargo on vessels displaying a Panamanian flag , as from 1 January 1998 .
The Commission is not drawing up any proposal in this respect , on the pretext that neither Japan nor the United States are imposing such an embargo , but they are not exactly setting a good example !
The Commission is a member of ICCAT , and the Member States of the European Union wish to fulfill all the recommendations set out by this body .
Therefore , I call on the Commission once again to provide for these embargo measures , which are of the utmost importance in ensuring that the contracting parties comply with the recommendations laid down by ICCAT .
Mr President , the number of tuna fished in the last few years has risen dramatically .
There must be an immediate restriction imposed on tuna fishing if we want to guarantee their survival .
At international level , we have ICCAT 's recommendations on tuna stocks and measures for their protection in the Mediterranean .
The problem has not so much been with the measures , but in neglecting them .
Drift-net fishing is also responsible for an ongoing diaster in the eco-system , for example , with dolphins and seals .
The Commission 's recommendations echo those of ICCAT , and Parliament must accept them .
It will , however , be vital for all nations that fish tuna in the regions under surveillance to be committed to the action proposed and for surveillance to continue to be effective .
If the restrictions only affect those vessels that fly a Community flag there will be no real change in the situation and more adversity for fishermen .
The Union , too , must push for results .
Mr President , Members will probably recall that the Community joined ICCAT last November , and now belongs to the General Fisheries Council for the Mediterranean .
Under international law , the Community was already required to cooperate with these organizations , but now it has become a member it obviously has to comply promptly with all the management recommendations laid down by these organizations .
Ladies and gentlemen , the proposal before us today is a step in this direction limited to two recommendations , while the other ICCAT recommendations are already being worked on under the appropriate legislative procedures , and will form part of other legislative proposals that will be submitted to Parliament for the examination .
For example , I see that the Committee on Fisheries proposes to include in this proposal a ban on transfers from or to ships belonging to non-cooperating countries .
Frankly , I do not believe that Regulation 1626 , which we are dealing with , is the appropriate framework for this type of amendment and proposal , because it relates almost exclusively to technical measures for preserving fish stocks .
The Commission , however , intends bring forward a Council regulation on the control of unloading and transfers : this proposal is already being prepared and the Commission believes it should provide a more appropriate framework .
I can say the same about Amendments Nos 3 and 5 .
On 30 January , the Commission transmitted to the Council a proposal relating to an embargo on imports of tuna from Belize and Honduras .
So the Commission made this proposal for an embargo back on 30 January , and the proposal is now on the Council 's table .
With regard to Panama , which involves several slightly more complex legal aspects , the services of the Commission are examining the question and are drawing up an appropriate proposal .
Finally , two very brief comments on the amendments relating to drift nets .
We are aware of the situation and of the European Parliament 's position on the Commission 's proposal .
Drift nets come under the regulation on technical measures , in a broader context and not specifically for the Mediterranean , as we all know .
Consequently , I do not want to go into the merits of the amendments , but I believe that the amendments relating to drift nets fall outside the legal framework of this proposal , and so the Commission cannot accept them , because drift nets are not just a Mediterranean issue .
However , as already mentioned , the Council will discuss the issue of drift nets on 24 March , on the basis of a compromise proposed by the presidency .
Thank you very much , Mrs Bonino .
The debate is closed .
We shall now proceed to the vote .
On Amendment No 1 :
Mr President , I believe I might be able to accept that amendment , but I think that it should be reworded slightly to say : ' whereas the priorities of the Council should be a phasing out ' .
You have the floor , Mr McMahon .
Mr President , as rapporteur I have to defend the committee 's position , but I will leave it to the wisdom of the House to decide what to do .
I know that Mr Provan spoke on this in the debate and his group actually voted for that amendment in the committee when we made the reference .
Maybe a reference to the Council might be more felicitous than the UK presidency .
I will leave it to the House to decide on that , rather than mention one Member State in the Council .
Mr Medina Ortega has asked for the floor .
Mr President , as you are a Spanish speaker , if you read the text in Spanish you will see that Mr Provan 's question does not arise because the Spanish text reads : " having regard to the priorities of the Council with a view to the phasing out of drift nets ' .
There is no " is ' or " should ' .
I propose that we vote on the Spanish version of the text , doing away with " of the UK Presidency ' . It then reads : " having regard to the priorities of the Council with a view to phasing out drift nets ' , thereby getting rid of the problem concerning " is ' or " should ' .

That is what we shall do .
( Parliament adopted the legislative resolution )
I would like to thank the rapporteur for doing such a good job on this report .
The question of conserving fishery resources is of the utmost importance .
It is therefore important to support the measures the Commission is proposing in relation to tuna .
I would like to point out , however , that the question of a possible embargo against Honduras , Belize and Panama should be seen in the broader context of conserving global fishery resources .
Import embargoes against these countries should not be viewed solely as a form of unilateral protection from competition for particular fishermen in the European Union .
Review of Council Directive 85 / 384 / EEC ( diplomas in architecture )
The next item is the report ( A4-0079 ) by Mrs Berger , on behalf of the Committee on Legal Affairs and Citizens ' Rights , on the report from the Commission containing a review , on the basis of experience , of Council Directive 85 / 384 / EEC of 10 June 1985 pursuant to Article 30 thereof ( COM ( 97 ) 0350 - C4-0487 / 97 ) .
You have the floor , Mrs Berger .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the directive on the mutual recognition of diplomas in architecture is probably one of the few EU directives with which all those concerned , almost without exception , are satisfied .
The professional group concerned , the national authorities responsible and the Commission have all emphasized , in the context of this review , that the directive has been found to work very well in practice .
I would like to emphasize and support this high degree of satisfaction and note the associated absence of amendments - the Commission has only proposed two minimal amendments - even if this is perhaps not the most thankful or prestigious task for a European Parliament rapporteur .
One of the main reasons that this directive has functioned well in practice is that this sectoral directive , unlike the first general system for recognition of diplomas , provides for automatic recognition , and thus makes it possible to exercise the right of establishment and freedom to provide services quickly and without bureaucracy .
This important advantage needs to be preserved , and should not be sacrificed on the altar of a misplaced desire for uniformity and simplification .
I am therefore glad that both the Committee on Legal Affairs and Citizens ' Rights and the Committee on Culture , which was asked for its opinion , have opposed the architects ' directive being integrated as part of the SLIM initiative into the first general system , which does not have this automatic recognition , and which therefore does not ultimately work so well in practice .
However , the two European Parliament committees involved failed to agree on another point .
This was the question of the prescribed minimum duration of study .
The directive at present stipulates four years ' full-time study .
The Committee on Culture proposed an increase to five years .
At my recommendation , the Committee on Legal Affairs and Citizens ' Rights , which is the lead committee , did not accept this proposal , and I therefore recommend to the plenary that it should reject Amendment No 1 as it stands , since it aims to achieve the same thing .
I know that in many Member States the average duration of architectural study is already much longer than the prescribed minimum of four years .
But that has nothing to do with it being impossible to teach and acquire the necessary knowledge in a shorter time . It has much more to do with the universities ' equipment , which is often bad , the lack of university lecturers and poor organization of studies .
We should not legitimize or accept this lamentable state of affairs in the directive on recognition .
Extension to five years would also automatically deprive graduates of higher colleges of technology of recognition of their diplomas .
The often excessive length of studies and late entry to the profession are certainly two of the most serious problems faced by architects in Europe today .
But another problem is that more and more public sector bodies avoid the trouble of a Europe-wide tender exercise , and fall back on the more restricted tendering procedure , which is still allowed under the procurement directives .
This puts newer architectural practices at a particular disadvantage compared with more established ones , and can also have a negative effect on the quality of architecture in Europe .
But the solution cannot be the regional restriction of competition , as discussed by some architectural associations .
Instead , we need to consider , as part of a review of the procurement directives , how tendering exercises can continue to be Europe-wide but made less onerous .
I would like to close by asking the House to support my report , and apologize because it is possible that I shall have to leave before the vote .
My train goes at 12 a.m.
I then have no other train to Austria for ten hours , so I hope you will understand my predicament .
If necessary , my colleague Evelyne Gebhardt from the Committee on Legal Affairs will represent me .
Thank you , Mrs Berger .
We know perfectly well that we must never miss the train in life , especially to go to a city as beautiful as Vienna .
So , I hope you have a good journey if you have to leave us before the vote .
Mrs Baldi , draftsman of the opinion , has the floor for five minutes .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the architects ' directive is giving great cause for concern , owing to the attitude of several Member States as well .
I would like to report the position of the Committee on Culture , Youth , Education and the Media , which was fairly clear here .
But firstly , I would like to thank the rapporteur for taking the following points raised by our Committee into account : firstly , the need for the Commission to treat this review of the directive on the mutual recognition of diplomas in architecture as an opportunity to highlight the direct recognition of diplomas by professional bodies and to streamline the bureaucratic formalities ; secondly , the fact that the competent authority in the host country needs to be clearly designated and systematically notified to the Commission ; thirdly , the fact that even the Committee on Legal Affairs and Citizens ' Rights is amazed that the Commission can consider integrating architecture into the general framework of Directive 89 / 48 / EEC , as it recognizes that , unlike the general system , Directive 85 / 384 / EEC provides for a specific system of simple benefits more favourable to architects and that the results in terms of architects ' mobility , which have been achieved thanks to automatic recognition , could be jeopardized .
There is no doubt that we are somewhat concerned that the conclusions we believe to be a priority have not been taken into consideration , such as the strengthening of the Advisory Committee , which should not just be a talking shop .
In fact , thanks to its composition ( three experts per Member State - one architect , one teacher and one representative of the competent authorities ) and its role in the assessment of diplomas , this committee demonstrates the absolute need for convergence .
By giving it the power to draw up recommendations and prepare studies on the assessment of new training courses , its remit would therefore be extended beyond consultation as such .
The stumbling block is the duration of courses .
We are truly perplexed by what is happening .
In practice , in 1992 the Advisory Committee stated clearly that courses should ideally last five years , plus two years ' practical experience .
As we are aware , this has been discussed for over 18 years .
We believe that European professions should provide this type of training , otherwise we will end up with technicians instead of professionals , and , we in the Committee on Culture , Youth , Education and the Media , have emphasized this accordingly .
Training is very important to us , particularly when the main participants are the professions that enable us to play a role in the rest of the world .
Perhaps we are forgetting our cultural and architectural heritage , which is of great value , and also that , to have people at the top of their professions , we need to give them adequate training , and that is why , in our opinion , a study course cannot stop after a few years .
A degree course cannot equip us to practise a profession competitively in a couple of years , if we are to have the benefit of the basic preparation we consider necessary .
The Committee on Culture , Youth , Education and the Media was very clear on this point .
We fail to understand why the Committee on Legal Affairs and Citizens ' Rights is insisting on a training system more appropriate for another type of profession .
We are concerned because , if this situation prevails , we will only be talking about technicians and surveyors , while several Member States of the EU , such as Greece , France and Italy , have already increased the length of study to a greater number of years .
We want to get things right here ; we do not want to fall in line with the position of just one Member State that has quite different needs .
We therefore think it is essential for profession of architect to be properly recognized and for architects to have a corresponding role within the Union .
When we talk about mobility , we are talking about the possibility of moving objectives forward , but we are also talking about very clear training standards , based on an ethical code and adequate preparation .
I am a little surprised , and here I am speaking as an architect , to hear discussion in committee about several specific sectors without any provision for adequate training .
In the case of town planning and restoration , the main sectors of architecture , the limited number of years proposed by the Committee on Legal Affairs and Citizens ' Rights are certainly not enough .
I beg you to think about this and I ask the Commission to exercise caution when it comes to giving its opinion .
Mr President , the Committee on Legal Affairs has thought very precisely about what it is doing .
Ladies and gentlemen , Maria Berger has given a comprehensive report on experience with the 1985 architects ' directive , and has said everything that needs to be said about it .
I do not need to add anything to her thorough work on the matter .
We all have good reason to approve the report and the conclusions .
However , I would also like to know why it has taken eight years to get this subject on the agenda .
The answer is part of a dark chapter in Europe 's history . Our constituents at home are perfectly justified in summing up their feelings in a single sentence - and they often do - ' I am fed up with Europe ! ' .
For them , Europe is full of slackness and ponderous bureaucracy .
The recognition directive , which is supposed to give architects professional freedom of movement within the Union , is an example of hair-raising slackness and ponderousness which it is hard to top .
The Council , governments and the Commission have all played their own part in this tragedy .
Act I of the tragedy of failure : it took eighteen years until the directive was finally adopted in June 1985 .
During that time , measured by length of study , four generations of architects were deprived of the civil right of professional freedom of movement within Europe .
At the same time , the European Community outgrew the architects ' directive .
Finally , with the enlargements in 1973 and 1981 , four new legal frameworks had to be taken into account in the law , which in the end was ten pages long .
Act II : instead of the 24 months agreed at the negotiating table , it took ten years to fully implement the directive !
Meanwhile , the European Community grew because of German unification and another three new members .
During this difficult period , it was only thanks to the breakneck working speed of the German federal government that a simple letter from the Commission was answered in just two years !
Act III , but not yet the final curtain : instead of 1990 at the latest , the Commission submitted the report on experience some eight years later , with the approval of the Member States .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I am sure that our citizens totally fail to understand such sloth .
Act IV , and provisional climax of this appalling play : before we had had a chance to give our views on experience with the old directive , the Commission brought forward an amended version !
They have thus treated the freely and directly elected European Parliament with contempt and trampled on its democratic rights .
One last word . The principle that the European Union is there for its citizens and not vice versa really needs to be observed better in practice .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , this is one of the directives which aims to guarantee the right of establishment of professional people , and which therefore relates to the citizens ' Europe , Europe in practice . The profession we are now discussing , architecture , is certainly a profession that poses difficult problems .
In fact , in four Member States , architecture is not a regulated profession , and in the others , architectural training is particularly diverse ; finally , some Member States did not request the derogations they were entitled to , in 1985 .
This applies to Ireland and the Netherlands , in particular , although those countries have a number of particularly long-standing training courses .
There have also been considerable delays in incorporating the directive into national law , and for all these reasons perhaps , we can see that a very small number of professional people have so far taken advantage of the directive : only 1 500 in eight years .
As you can see , ladies and gentlemen , that is a very small number .
The directive must therefore be re-examined in the light of the experience gained and I should like to warmly congratulate Mrs Berger on her excellent report .
Like the rapporteur , we regret that the Commission did not ask the European Parliament to give an opinion on the amendments , and in that respect , we approve all the rapporteur 's suggestions , particularly those relating to the need to generalize the ' Vlassooulo ' judgment on the automatic recognition of diplomas .
With regard to those countries which did not apply for derogations , the Commission has been kind enough to tell us that the problem will be solved by means of the proposal for a directive of 2 December , which will amend the general directive . We have taken note , Madam Commissioner , of that commitment .
Finally , we have reservations about the fact that the Commission envisages including architecture in the general system .
You see , ladies and gentlemen , we have always considered that such decisions should be taken within the professions themselves , and we are not at all convinced that it is what European architects want .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , whenever we in this House simultaneously talk about the Europe of free movement and the Europe of diversity , it is rather like trying to square the circle . At the very least it is an extremely difficult conundrum to solve , and the solution varies from case to case .
Achieving these two ideals may simply involve the Europe of the internal market , the Europe of unity , taking the highest cultural achievement , the highest cultural and social state of development of one country as the basis for the common law .
Then the wealth of Europe would become the common wealth .
The task of reconciling these ideals becomes insoluble if it is misused for deregulation , as is the case here .
Nothing has been said about the situation of architecture .
The demands of the Committee for Culture , Youth , Education and the Media have been ignored .
It is not a question of training and badly equipped universities , what is at stake is whether we recognize architecture as art , culture and science , or whether we yield to the exploitative pressures of the building and real estate sectors .
I therefore ask this House to accept the very carefully worked out compromise proposal from our Italian colleagues , because it at least preserves something of the cultural and social ideals of architecture .
Mr President , I also wish to congratulate the rapporteur , because in her report she has come up with a solution to a problem which the Commission has made for itself .
The Commission report was originally scheduled for 1990 but , for a variety of reasons , it was delayed until last summer .
Whatever the reasons for this delay , what is certain is that in its 1997 report the Commission cited it as a reason not to entertain the problems that Ireland had with the 1985 Directive , despite the fact that , as I said , the delay was caused solely by the Commission .
In 1985 the Irish Government failed to obtain a derogation , as Mrs Fontaine has said , from the strictest provisions in the directive concerning recognition of architects ' qualifications .
This derogation would have applied to experienced , able architects with an established right to practise .
Other countries , such as the Netherlands , had obtained such a derogation for architects of a similar status .
The net result has been that a group of perfectly talented Irish architects were discriminated against and their movement in the internal market curtailed .
The Commission must now recognize that these architects must be treated like their European counterparts and those working in other professions with an established right to practise .
Competent authorities , such as the Irish Department of Education , have recognized these architects ' competencies .
I wish to congratulate the rapporteur for forcing the Commission to re-examine its position .
I hope that these architects will now belatedly be given the rights that are theirs .
Mr President , the directive on mutual recognition of diplomas in architecture is one of the series of regulations essential for completing the common European market .
The right of establishment and freedom to provide services are a fundamental requirement for a common market , which obviously can only be achieved if the professional qualifications which are gained in one Member State are recognized in the other .
Through my work in the Committee on Petitions , I repeatedly see petitions from EU citizens demanding recognition of their qualifications .
I speak here as a member of the Committee on Culture , and we really have considered this very thoroughly .
It is clear to us all that it will require a great effort on our part if we are to create regulations for mutual recognition of diplomas .
However , in all our efforts it is important that we do not lose sight of the cultural independence of the individual Member States , and remember that regulations about mutual recognition of diplomas must not lead to uniformity of educational content .
For instance , in Germany there is , as well as the classical study of architecture , which is pursued at universities , study at ' higher colleges of technology ' .
In spite of the shorter duration of study , there is no question of the graduates being less qualified .
In the design of the course , great value is explicitly attached to efficiency and a high level of practicality , and also to cultural aspects .
The diversity of European culture should be maintained by preserving the cultural sovereignty of the Member States .
This also involves ensuring the diversity of educational systems in the EU states .
We must concentrate above all on achieving comparability of our educational systems .
If we succeed in achieving this ideal , we will arrive at more useful arrangements for mutual recognition of diplomas , and thus advance along the path to European unity .
( Applause )
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I support Mrs Berger 's explanations and congratulate her on her report .
I would like to add a few brief comments .
The great benefit of all recognition directives is that they make Europe simpler in practice for the individual - as we are always demanding - that they make freedom to set up business anywhere a reality for the first time , and above all that they open up new employment opportunities .
In this connection , I would like to point out that mutual recognition of educational qualifications in the EU is also the logical consequence of the EU educational programmes , which give financial support to measures to give credit for study in other countries , and I would therefore like to call for considerably increased resources for ERASMUS and ECTS in future .
Furthermore , we should resist all attempts to undermine the recognition directives , as has happened for instance with teachers , in case after case , for chauvinistic reasons .
That causes enormous damage to the European ideal in the workplace , and creates a negative image of the EU in the press .
The architects directive as a whole has proved itself in practice , but if more traditional forms of education combined with long periods of practical experience are to be put on a par with more recent qualifications , then that should be made clear again here .
Finally , another important point : Mrs Baldi 's demand , which incidentally was against the votes of my party in the Committee on Culture , that the minimum study period should be raised to five years as a condition for mutual recognition , is highly questionable in terms of European policy . I say this because , as has already been mentioned , it would at a stroke wipe out the mobility of thousands of architecture students in higher colleges of technology .
That would be a big step backwards for European policy , and we here would not want to be held responsible for it .
The proposal is also unjustified and hasty in itself , because the formal minimum study period alone does not decide the quality of education , but the actual time spent studying , which varies from country to country , and the average number of hours per week during term .
I do not want to go any further into that , but I would just like to say that Amendment No 1 with the proposal to introduce means of compensating for different periods of study is dubious and should therefore be rejected , please .
Mr President , the Commission accepts the well-balanced draft resolution submitted by the Committee on Legal Affairs , and I would like to congratulate the rapporteur , Mrs Berger , on her work .
The Commission believes that the directive has proved valid and deserves its place among the sectoral directives .
With regard to the delays and timing issues mentioned , I believe that several explanations are given at the beginning of the report ; nevertheless , we share your frustration .
Consequently , just a few minor amendments are envisaged , leaving the essence of the directive intact .
The Commission notes , in fact , that the draft resolution allows the substance of the directive to remain unaltered .
With regard to the future , all the options are open and I believe that , from this point of view , there is room for further thought .
Having established these premises , it follows that the Commission cannot accept the amendment submitted , because it would call into question the balance on which the directive is based .
The Commission will consider Parliament 's vote but we note that the Committee on Legal Affairs has , after much thought it would appear , also reached the conclusion that a change in the duration of training is not justified .
In addition to these brief comments , I can only repeat that the Commission will naturally consider Parliament 's vote but it seems unthinkable to me that it will be given priority .
Thank you very much , Mrs Bonino .
The debate is closed .
We shall now proceed to the vote .
( Parliament adopted the resolution )
Mr President , I rejected Paragraph 8 because for I believe that the quality of education has absolute priority .
Life-long education and continuing education are the basis for successful practice of a profession .
These qualification-related conditions for entering the profession also reflect the world-wide trend , originating in the USA , of setting a high standard for entry to the professions .
Mr President , I would like to associate myself entirely with what Mr Rübig has just said , but I would also like to add that I rejected the amendment because I believe that it conflicts with our basic principle of subsidiarity in the European Union , and since that principle has absolute priority as far as I am concerned , I had to reject it .
Mr Hallam wishes to speak on a point of order .
Mr President , on a point of order .
This has been a fascinating debate today which has been very interesting .
The trouble is that the Friday mornings are the one section of our work as a plenary session which is not televised either to our rooms or for the archives .
It i