Resumption of the session
I declare resumed the session suspended on Thursday , 12 March 2009 .
First , I would like to welcome the new Secretary-General of the European Parliament , Klaus Welle , who is sitting on my left , and to wish him all the best in his endeavours .
( Applause )
On my right is David Harley , the Deputy Secretary-General .
He represents , so to speak , continuity within the Secretariat .
I would also like to wish him all the best .
( Applause )
Statement by the President
Ladies and gentlemen , I have been asked to make the following statement .
This week marks the 60th anniversary of the deportation of hundreds of thousands of citizens from the Baltic states .
On the night of 24 March 1949 , a wave of Soviet deportations began , during which tens of thousands of Estonians , Latvians and Lithuanians were forcibly expelled from their homelands .
They were robbed of their civil and human rights , and perished as a result of the hard , inhuman conditions they faced in the Soviet prison camps .
Almost every family in Latvia , Lithuania and Estonia , as well as in other former Soviet republics , suffered as a result of the horrific violence perpetrated by the totalitarian , Communist regime .
Almost every family had relatives who went missing in Siberia , persecuted by the KGB or who were incarcerated and oppressed .
The events we are talking about did not take place in some dark , distant past .
They remain vivid memories for many people who , today , are EU citizens .
Thus , it is our duty , on the basis of our common values , and in order to commemorate the many victims of these deportations , to clearly and decisively condemn these abhorrent crimes perpetrated by the totalitarian , Communist regime in the Soviet Union .
For we owe it to the victims to assess the past in an objective , in-depth and careful manner , as reconciliation can only ever be based on truth and remembrance .
Approval of the Minutes of the previous sitting : see Minutes
Composition of Parliament : see Minutes
Welcome
Today , it is my honour to welcome a delegation of the Pan-African Parliament to our Parliament .
As you all know , the Pan-African Parliament is to the African Union what the European Parliament is to the European Union .
I am particularly pleased to welcome Mr Khumalo and his parliamentary colleagues here today , as it gives me an opportunity to thank him and his colleagues , and thereby also the President of the Pan-African Parliament , Mrs Mongella , for the welcome I received in October 2008 , during my visit to the Pan-African Parliament , as well as for the invitation to speak at the plenary session of the Pan-African Parliament .
Once again , I would like to sincerely bid you all welcome .
I am very happy that you are here with us today .
( Applause )
Lapsed written declarations : see Minutes
Action taken on Parliament 's positions and resolutions : see Minutes
Texts of agreements forwarded by the Council : see Minutes
Petitions : see Minutes
Documents received : see Minutes
Oral questions and written declarations ( submission ) : see Minutes
Order of business : see Minutes
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I have a question for you concerning the European Council .
We have heard that at the meeting of the European Council you said that Parliament agrees that the vote on the President of the Commission should take place on 15 July and the vote on the remainder of the Commission should be held once the Treaty of Lisbon has been adopted .
I would like to know whether or not this is true and , if it is true , on what authority you made these statements .
Mrs Frassoni , as you yourself were present , I am sure you will recall that we discussed this matter at the Conference of Presidents .
There was only one objection with respect to 15 July , which came from you .
All the other group chairmen shared the view expressed in my statement before the Council .
In any case , you may read the exact wording I used in my speech .
The speech is available to all MEPs and to the public .
One-minute speeches on matters of political importance
The next item is the one-minute speeches on matters of political importance .
( FR ) Mr President , I would like to draw the European Parliament 's attention to the arrival of the President of Belarus , Mr Lukashenko , in Prague .
Is President Lukashenko 's arrival in accordance with the values that we stand for ?
Can the European Union have dealings with a president who holds all powers , without any time limit and without a mandate ?
What image will the European Union be giving by agreeing to accept the presence of a president who has had several of his political opponents eliminated and limits the rights of his citizens ?
What image will our Union be giving to the Obama administration , when a US citizen is languishing in a Belarusian jail and is likely to die unless something is done quickly ?
I think that this invitation should never have taken place .
( ES ) Mr President , I would like to talk to you all about El Musel , the major port of my region , Asturias .
It is absolutely essential that the Commission frees up funding for the extra costs of this port .
Commissioner Tajani has understood this , as did his predecessor , Mr Barrot ; they have both recognised the great functional and environmental challenges of El Musel .
In the midst of the crisis , since works such as those at El Musel are vitally needed , it is time to move beyond drawn-out , excessively bureaucratic obstacles , and time to think big and press ahead with this funding , which is so important for Asturias , for the north of Spain and for European economic recovery , too .
Let me say once again , for European economic recovery , in which Spain is so honoured to take part .
( BG ) The outcome of the last European Council meeting serves as an example of how to put into practice one of the European Union 's basic principles : solidarity .
The EUR 5.6 billion in aid will enable the peoples of the Old Continent to overcome the consequences of the global financial and economic crisis .
The EUR 105 million approved for Bulgaria , earmarked for safeguarding energy security , establishing broadband Internet , and for agriculture , reflect the support for and growing confidence in the government 's programme for tackling the crisis .
It is vitally important for my country that the European Commission approves and the European Parliament supports the extension being sought for compensation until 2013 for the early closure of the Kozloduy nuclear power plant 's third and fourth blocks .
Bulgaria suffered the most in terms of losses resulting from the recent gas war between Russia and Ukraine .
It is therefore important to observe the principle of treating all EU Member States equally .
I am counting on the thumbs up from the President of the Commission , Mr Barroso , and I urge my fellow Members in the European Parliament to allow justice and solidarity in Europe to prevail .
Mr President , I wish to raise the issue of the sniping and remarks that are being made in some quarters about the Irish banking and financial system .
The Irish system works within a legal and regulatory policy directive framework dictated by the EU .
The system in Ireland is as strong , or as weak , as that EU framework .
As we all know , the regulatory system has failed globally .
Ireland is no worse , or better , than any other place .
I object to hostile comments about Ireland emanating from London , New York and the German media .
All these places have experienced regulatory and banking challenges and problems equal to and , in many cases , far worse than those we have faced in Ireland .
The constant sniping from some of our EU neighbours has been based on prejudice rather than objective fact and does little for EU solidarity at a time when Europe is going through enormous financial and economic challenges .
( HU ) The internationally-renowned Roşia Montană Gold Corporation , a Canadian-Romanian joint venture , is planning to develop Europe 's largest open-pit gold mine in the Transylvanian town of Verespatak ( Roşia Montană ) .
The European Parliament , in its resolution of December 2004 , expressed its deep concern regarding the threat of natural catastrophe posed by the project .
The 2005 general assembly of ICOMOS , in turn , resolved to protect the historic heritage of the ancient settlement .
The venture , accompanied by a series of scandals , is meant to use the same cyanide technology-based processing method as the one that contaminated the entire length of the Tisza River in 2000 .
The built heritage of Verespatak ( Roşia Montană ) has also been destroyed and its population impoverished .
It appears that the Romanian Government is preparing to lift its temporary ban on the investment .
I ask the European Parliament to intervene in order to save Verespatak and protect its natural environment .
The European Commission , for its part , should contribute to the rehabilitation of the destroyed town and its environment .
( EL ) Mr President , the next few days will mark :
10 years since the dirty war unleashed by ΝΑΤΟ and the governments of the European Union , both centre left and centre right , against the people of Yugoslavia ;
6 years since the criminal war and occupation of Iraq by the USA and its willing allies , a war which has cost the lives of approximately 1.5 million Iraqis ;
60 years since the establishment of ΝΑΤΟ , the imperialist war machine and threat to peace throughout the world which is preparing to mark its 60th anniversary with a celebratory summit in Strasbourg .
In Washington ten years ago , on 23 and 24 April 1999 , the leaders of the ΝΑΤΟ member states signed a 50th anniversary declaration approving its new doctrine .
Thus the new NATO strategy was adopted , which also officially overthrows the basic rules of international law .
A series of other criminal interventions by NATO followed in Afghanistan , Iraq , Iran and the Middle East .
In the run-up to the NATO summit , the French authorities have turned the centre of Strasbourg into an off-limits zone and activated the facility provided for in the Schengen Convention in order to prevent peace demonstrators from entering France .
They have mobilised considerable army and police forces to deal with demonstrators .
These measures , which blatantly violate basic democratic rights , illustrate how much the imperialists and ΝΑΤΟ fear the people .
The people need to respond to the celebrations and ' fiestas ' marking the 60th anniversary of criminal imperialist action by ΝΑΤΟ by reinforcing the anti-imperialist peace movement , strengthening the grassroots demand that ΝΑΤΟ be disbanded ...
( The President cut off the speaker )
Mr President , intergroups have a long and distinguished history in this Parliament .
In intergroups , MEPs can unite across the political divide to deal with particular issues .
For example , the oldest intergroup - the one on disabilities - vets legislation that goes through this Parliament to be sure that it is disability-friendly and educates other parliamentarians about disability issues .
Despite the valuable work of intergroups they have been marginalised over the last year and , effectively , they are being shut down by in-house parliamentary rules that refuse intergroups meeting rooms and slots in the schedule of the Strasbourg sitting .
I think we need to sort this out quite urgently - before the next term - because , otherwise , intergroups will be a thing of the past ; Parliament will be much poorer for their extinction and the people of Europe will not be as well served .
( Applause )
( BG ) Ladies and gentlemen , in recent years in Bulgaria a despicable practice has been observed known as ' vote buying ' .
This is being carried out by every single political group , apart from the patriotic Attack party .
Even parties describing themselves as an alternative to the ruling parties are paying voters , as indicated a few days ago by the information from the village of Brest near Pleven .
The forthcoming elections in our country look as if they are going to be the most rigged and underhand elections in Bulgaria 's recent history .
The ethnic Turkish and anti-constitutional party MRF has earmarked the huge sum of EUR 60 million to help it get the maximum possible number of members of parliament representing Turkey 's interests into both the European Parliament and the Republic of Bulgaria 's National Assembly .
There is an absolutely real danger that the next European Parliament will have representatives who have won their seats as a result of vote buying .
Our message in Attack is : ' No Turkey in the EU ' , and we call on President Pöttering to urge the Bulgarian authorities to see to it that this move is foiled in the forthcoming elections through the adoption of election laws .

( HU ) The story is obvious : a few hundred metres from the Hungarian border , in an Austrian village by the name of Heiligenkreuz , an Austrian company is calling for the construction of a high-capacity waste incinerator .
On the Hungarian side , the city of Szentgotthárd considers the planned establishment unacceptable for reasons of environmental protection , among others .
Over the past two years , there have been frequent protests on the Hungarian side , but the Austrians refuse to acknowledge this .
The result is that a growing anti-Austrian feeling is even beginning to affect the traditionally cordial relations between the two countries .
We ask the Austrian party to examine the plan , bearing in mind Hungary 's considerations , and to put a stop to its development .
Mr President , in January the Commission attacked the Hungarian moratorium on genetically modified maize MON810 .
The moratorium is clearly supported by the whole Hungarian scientific community , all political parties and Hungarian society .
At the European Council in March , Hungary and Austria obtained a huge majority to maintain this moratorium , despite the Commission decision .
Twenty-three of the twenty-seven Member States supported Hungary against the Commission .
This shows that it is high time for us to rethink the method of authorisation of GMOs in the European Union .
I think - and , from the Council vote , it is clear - that most Member States think the same way : that the Member States should have the competence to authorise a GMO or not .
I hope that the next newly elected Parliament will create a new regulation on the authorisation of GMOs , based on the spirit of subsidiarity and transparency .
The Commission should cooperate with Parliament and the Member States , not dictate to them .
( FR ) Mr President , one of our fellow Members has just spoken about the issue of intergroups .
There are more than 20 intergroups within this Parliament and their work has been obvious throughout the course of this term of office , which is about to end .
Countless dozens of texts have benefited from the work of our intergroups ; there are tens of thousands of people , Mr President , and hundreds of institutions who have been received in Parliament thanks to the work of the intergroups .
If we continue to oppress the intergroups by refusing to give them meeting rooms , there will be more demonstrations .
Mr President , you have a great deal of experience , a very great deal of experience of our Parliament .
Do not allow more or less secret sub-groups to meet during the next parliamentary term .
We are not afraid of transparency at intergroup level , which is why we are urging you to make an assessment , quite openly , of the intergroups during this term of office .
In this way we will have proof of their usefulness .
Mr President , I beg you , do not remain deaf to the demands of the intergroups and to all the letters that have been addressed to you over recent years .
( PL ) Mr President , there is no denying the demographic crisis taking place in Europe .
The resulting shortage of labour poses a threat to the economic development of the EU Member States .
The crisis is also undermining the efficiency of the pension systems , and is creating serious problems for European healthcare and social care systems .
In the meantime , the European Commission has failed to understand our efforts to alter negative demographic trends by promoting family development .
In particular , there have been objections to the need to lower the VAT on products intended for very young children , such as nappies .
The idea of punishing individual countries for adopting these kinds of solutions shows a lack of awareness of the dangers we are facing or , alternatively , it can be viewed as a sign of bad faith .
In any case , it is unacceptable .
( PT ) It is scandalous that the only wholly Portuguese-owned tyre factory has been at a standstill for several months , putting at risk nearly 300 direct jobs in the socially deprived area of Vale do Ave .
This area has one of the highest levels of unemployment in the European Union following a series of business closures and job cuts in the textile sector .
The Camac workers in Santo Tirso and the trade union representing them have publicly exposed this serious situation , indicating that the company owes nothing to the banks or to the State , and is in fact in credit to the tune of tens of thousands of euros as a result of VAT withholding .
The main creditors are the workers themselves whose salaries have not been paid because the company has failed to cope with the consequences of the falling value of the British pound , which is where almost all its production is exported , and the soaring cost of the raw materials used in the manufacturing process .
Following the company 's insolvency application , they are waiting until 30 March for a solution .
The Portuguese Government and the European Commission urgently need to respond to the warning and to the discontent voiced by the workers in order to prevent more unemployment and misery in an area where there are no alternative jobs .
Mr President , the revision and reform of parliamentary procedures is now heading up the agenda , and I am sure that this is a subject very much dear to your own personal heart .
Can I please underpin the comments already made by a few colleagues about the importance of intergroups ?
I am Co-President of the Intergroup on Ageing , and , as you may be aware , over 50 % of voters this year - for the very first time - will be over 50 as opposed to under 50 .
So , ageing issues are not just something that are of interest to people in here but are of interest to people , right outside , amongst our constituents .
I would plead with you , Mr President , to use the qualities of clarity and fairness which are the hallmarks of your presidency to make sure that the work of intergroups can be facilitated and not hindered from here on .
Have we got your promise , please ?
It is always nice to see the British Conservatives fully on board the European boat , and totally at our side .
Thank you so much , and I promise to be on my best behaviour .
- Mr President , I am rising on the issue of breaches of environmental law in Ireland , specifically relating to water quality .
The new EU survey of water quality in Ireland indicates that almost two thirds of people say water quality is a serious problem , while half consider that the quality has deteriorated since 2004 .
Eighty per cent of people consider that there has been no improvement in the quality of our rivers , lakes and coastal waters over the past five years .
For seven years now the Commission has been investigating whether or not the Irish Government is complying with a 2002 European Court of Justice decision that Ireland was in breach of water-quality legislation .
We have to find ways to ensure that the laws that we pass in the interests of the citizens of Europe are in fact applied by the Member States .
The Commission , who is the policeman and the policewoman of this Union , must act in a timely way to ensure this compliance .
( HU ) In the new Member States , in times of stress the old reflexes of those in power , unacceptable under the rule of law , still operate .
When it was our Hungarian national holiday , political rights were infringed to an unacceptable degree in Budapest .
The area around the celebrations was completely closed off , as they were during the dictatorship .
A few days ago , demands for a more responsible government and calls for the prime minister to step down were met by police action that included detentions and inhumane , humiliating treatment .
Since the weekend , we have seen that the authorities disregard democracy as well , since they are trying to prevent early elections from being held by shifting around top leadership positions .
This is not the kind of democratic state governed by the rule of law of which we , the young generation of the end of the Communist regime , have been dreaming ; rather , we feel that this is how soft dictatorships begin .
Similarly , the actions of the Romanian authorities put us in mind of the reflexes of the past when , against the recommendation of the Romanian authorities , the President of the Hungarian Republic travelled to take part in the celebrations of 15 March with the 1.5 million-strong Hungarian community in Romania but was able to do so only as a private person , by car .
The reason for this was that the landing permit for the president 's airplane was revoked by Romania , on the contrived grounds that the visit would damage the partnership between the two countries .
This is happening in 2009 in two neighbouring EU Member States .
- ( HU ) Last week 's EU Summit confirmed the basic principles which the European Parliament has also enunciated , namely that the European Union does not tolerate protectionism and does not allow the dismantling of the achievements of the common market .
I congratulate the President , since he was present at the European Council meeting .
Very important decisions were taken , including decisions on the matter which Prime Minister Ferenc Gyurcsány of Hungary recommended a year ago and which the Rasmussen report of the European Parliament supported , namely that a financial market and bank supervisory system be set up .
A decision in principle was taken on this at the summit , which represents a very important step forward .
It is an important step forward for the entire European Union , but especially for Central and Eastern Europe and the Baltic states , that banks cannot abandon their subsidiaries situated in that region but must forward the support they receive .
The fact that support to the balance of payments of Member States outside the euro area has been doubled from EUR 25 billion to EUR 50 billion is a very important expression of EU solidarity .
This is in the common interest of all of us , and thankfully it is in the interest of the entire European Union .
( SL ) At our last sitting we adopted an important maritime legislation package which has improved procedures to be followed in the event of maritime accidents .
As we know , the sea brings us many benefits , but it involves risks , as well .
When a major accident happens , those who live along the coast pay the consequences .
Therefore , the best course of action is prevention , in particular the kind of prevention that regulates the volume and nature of sea traffic according to the sensitivity of the area being transited .
For this reason , I would like to put the following question to the Commission and , in particular , Commissioner Tajani , who is in charge of transport and whom I shall address in his own mother tongue , Italian .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , ( ... ) how the aims of this new law on safety at sea fit with the plans for two methane-producing regasifiers in the Gulf of Trieste , an area of heavy shipping and high urban concentration where the sea is shallow , not more than 20 metres deep , and the seabed must not be touched as it is steeped in mercury .
The terminals would , if built , attract one methane tanker per week per installation .
We know the risks that these ships bring in areas such as this .
( PL ) Mr President , today I would specifically like to focus on the way in which the Israeli army is attempting to wipe out the Palestinian nation before our very eyes .
We should not remain indifferent to this issue .
I listen to Israeli media reports with embarrassment , I listen to soldiers recounting that they were told to shoot at civilians , including old women .
The newspaper Haarec has published the written command given by one of the military commanders to his subordinates .
He ordered his men to shoot at people helping wounded Palestinians .
Ultimately , the soldiers have also learnt to show utter disregard for Palestinian lives .
Proof of this can be found in the form of macabre T-shirts worn by Israeli soldiers , which show a pregnant Arab woman and bear the slogan ' one shot , two kills ' .
We must break the silence which exists in this Chamber regarding this matter .
No nation is better or worse than any other .
Today , the Palestinian people need our help and support .
We should rise to the challenge and address this problem .
- ( SK ) Two weeks ago , Mr President , you brought us some very sad and horrific news .
In Germany a young man killed 15 people and then killed himself .
He committed murder and plunged many people , including his own family , into grief and despair .
His family too have lost a child and their world too has been turned upside down .
Allow me to quote the words spoken by the German President at the funeral for the victims : ' We are all confronted with a very serious question .
Are we doing enough to protect ourselves and our children ?
Are we doing enough to protect those who are at risk ?
Are we doing enough for peace in our own lands ?
We must ask ourselves what we can do better in the future and what lessons we can draw from this event .
Let us also help both parents and their children to stay away from danger . '
I would therefore like to call on the European Parliament and the European Commission once again to support the Europe-wide campaign ' Do you know where your children are ? '
As I have already said in this house , let us do everything we can to ensure that nothing like this ever happens again .
( RO ) The European Union is , first and foremost , a social Europe .
We need economic development , but we equally need jobs , decent salaries and pensions , access to health and education services , and they must be of good quality to boot .
During an economic crisis many companies get into difficulties and employees lose their jobs .
In Romania at the Arcelor Mittal sites in Galaţi and Hunedoara , several thousand employees will be made technically unemployed in rotation , receiving just 75 % of their salary or will just be made redundant .
Similar situations are also going on in other countries and in other companies from different industrial sectors .
I call on the Commission to consider preparing a Council decision with the aim of reviewing the criteria for access to the European Social Fund and the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund .
This must be done at industry and company level , not only regionally and locally , so that the funds are mobilised quickly to help the workers in crisis .
I believe that Europe can and must do more for employees who are facing difficulties .
( HU ) I would like to draw attention to the methods used by the Slovak Government to repress the linguistic rights of minorities , in violation of the latter 's rights .
Last week , the government accepted a legislative amendment concerning the national language which , according to the government , does not affect the minorities ' language use ; however , the bill itself suggests otherwise .
I would like to mention two examples .
Paragraph 8 ( 4 ) of the bill refers to health care and social institutions and states that there are two instances in which individuals belonging to a minority group may use their mother tongue in these institutions : if they do not know the national language , or if the institution is located in a settlement where the percentage of minorities exceeds 20 % .
So the doctor will first ask the patient what language he or she speaks , and only after that can he ask what is wrong with him or her , otherwise a breach of the law will , according to the bill , be punishable by a fine of between EUR 100 and 5000 .
The situation is no better when it comes to information provision , for radio programmes - with the exception of public service radio - will have to be broadcast first in the minority language , and then once again in full in translation .
Mr President , I have only one question : can minorities count on support from Europe ?
( SL ) There has been a monument to the first anti-fascists in Europe in Bazovica , near Trieste , a short distance from the Italian border with Slovenia , since as far back as September 1945 .
Four Slovenian patriots , Bidovec , Marušič , Miloš and Valenčič , were sentenced to death by a special fascist tribunal in 1930 , during the First Trieste Trial .
The monument has been damaged and daubed with paint sixteen times to date , most recently just over a week ago .
This act of vandalism is one of a series of political , economic , cultural and educational efforts to exert pressure on the Slovenian ethnic community in Italy and on the Republic of Slovenia .
A whole host of acts , involving paint being daubed on Slovenian monuments , on the walls of Slovenian schools and on regional signs bearing names in Slovenian , have deeply hurt the feelings of Italian citizens of Slovenian descent and the Slovenian people of the Republic of Slovenia .
However , no one has yet been called to account for these criminal offences .
I find it hard to believe that the Italian police have been so incompetent that they have failed to find the perpetrators , or that there is a lack of political will to find them .
When , for the sixteenth time in a row , it seems impossible to track down the perpetrators , that really is too much .
( BG ) Ladies and gentlemen , during the last part-session , in connection with the discussions on Turkey , there was talk of Turkey 's failure to acknowledge the Armenian genocide .
However , you are unaware of another unacknowledged genocide committed by the Turks over five hundred years : the Bulgarian genocide .
I will familiarise you with a small part of this , which took place over four days in April 1876 , through the words written at the time by an American journalist by the name of MacGahan :
' It is all the same to me whether this information is impartial or not , once the terrible figure has been acknowledged of 15 000 people killed in four days .
No rounding up of this figure can add further to its horror , which is of colossal magnitude when you take in fully all the pernicious , despicable details of this brutal slaughter .
The French consul himself heard how the bashibazouks told their attentive audience with delight that , as they cut the heads off children , they watched with curiosity as their small bodies fell and rolled around like slaughtered chickens . '
These few lines describe just four days out of five centuries of outright genocide inflicted by Ottoman Turkey against the enslaved Bulgarians .
We MEPs from Attack want acknowledgement and an apology before any kind of discussion at all is initiated about Turkey 's membership of the European Union .
( EL ) Mr President , in addition to being an agricultural policy and an economic policy , the common agricultural policy , as revised in the years 2003 to 2008 , is now very much a social policy and , in my opinion , rightly so .
For example , food aid programmes are being strengthened , initiatives are being taken on fruit and vegetables in schools , again in my opinion rightly so , and programmes are being implemented to introduce broadband and invigorate the countryside .
However , a robust common agricultural policy is needed in order to meet today 's needs , because with the common agricultural policy farmers receive support and remain in the countryside .
So let us unite in demanding that common agricultural policy resources stop being channelled to other policies .
Resources for agricultural policy need to be increased :
if we want safe food , because only safe foods can and should be European foods ;
if we want food adequacy , because only thus will we be able to deal with crises ;
if we want a protected environment , in which case food will have to be grown in keeping with European practices ;
if we want farmers to stay in the countryside , we need to help them ;
if we want healthy consumers , we need to provide them with European foods .
To close , I should like to call on the European Union to increase its budget , because this will give our Europe a future .
Also , if we want a robust farming sector , we need to increase the funds for the common agricultural policy .

Mr President , it is more than a month since you visited Gaza , but the latest figures from the Israeli Government show that nothing has changed : still no materials for reconstruction are being allowed through the checkpoints ; no material for schools , no material for industry .
The bombing has stopped , but the blockade continues .
Perhaps this would be a good time for this Parliament to try and influence opinion by hosting an exhibition of the T-shirts to which reference has been made by another Member - clothing produced to the design of soldiers , such as the sniper from the Givati Brigade , whose design incorporates a pregnant Palestinian woman and the slogan : ' One shot , two kills ' .
There are other reports in Israeli newspapers of other designs that are more racist , more extreme , more vile .
Such an exhibition might encourage Members to question whether or not we should be continuing with the EU-Israel Association Agreement in the present circumstances .
Mr Davis , at its meeting last Wednesday , the Euro-Mediterranean Parliamentary Assembly , which I myself chaired , adopted a resolution on the tragic situation in the Middle East .
I would like to remind you of this fact .
It is worth taking note of this resolution .
Thank you for your comments .
( HU ) This is not the first time I have been obliged to speak up in connection with the proposed enormous coal-fired power plant , with a 4-million-tonne annual carbon dioxide emission , being planned for the town of Tőketerebes ( Trebišov ) in Slovakia .
This power plant has met with equally widespread protest on both the Slovak and the Hungarian side of the border , and in spite of this , the parties concerned have restarted the licensing process for the power plant .
On the other side of the border , the Hungarian Government issued a ' Crisis management and growth strategy ' , according to which , on the grounds of crisis management , Hungary is now seeking to expand by a new 440 megawatt lignite-based block the largest emitter of carbon dioxide , the Mátra power plant , which emits more than 6 million tonnes of pollution per year .
I need hardly say that neither power plant will be using CCS .
At the end of last year , the European Union adopted the climate package , and last weekend at the EU Summit it approved the financing for a climate compensation scheme for developing countries .
Furthermore , we are preparing full steam ahead for the Copenhagen climate conference in December .
Meanwhile , the leaders of two Member States , Slovakia and Hungary - although admittedly the latter just resigned - are going ahead as if nothing had happened , financing climate change out of taxpayers ' money disregarding the latter 's protests .
I hope the European Union will give neither political nor material support to this .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , while in East Jerusalem thousands of Palestinian homes continue to be demolished , even the Palestinian culture is a target of Israeli policy .
Sadly , certain Israeli soldiers have made T-shirts with an image of a pregnant Palestinian woman with a bulls eye and the slogan : ' 1 shot , 2 kills ' .
The Arab culture is under attack .
The Palestinian Authority has chosen , together with the Arab nations , to make East Jerusalem - not Jerusalem as a whole - capital of Arab culture for 2009 .
Israel has arrested 20 activists - including international activists - who were simply putting on an event to celebrate Palestinian culture .
It is an attempt to destroy any Palestinian presence whatsoever in East Jerusalem .
I therefore ask myself if the international community can do something to ensure that this event can be a success and that Jerusalem really is a shared capital .
Let us move to make this event happen .
( SL ) At the weekend , Slovenia and , in particular , the region of Lower Carniola , was alarmed by Renault 's decision to transfer its Clio production from Novo Mesto to France .
I would like to believe the official explanation , that the decision was warranted by increased demand for Clio and Twingo , not by protectionism occasioned by difficulties in the car industry .
Ladies and gentlemen , to whom does the Revoz car production plant in Novo Mesto belong ?
Is it Slovenian ?
Or French ?
The answer is clear : a Slovenian production plant which manufactures French cars is most definitely a European production plant .
I firmly believe that we have to protect the car industry with a European solution , rather than national ones .
Otherwise , we will be distancing ourselves from compliance with the four basic freedoms which form the core of the European Single Market .
( DE ) Mr President , at the beginning of March , political prisoners Mikhail Khodorkowski and Platon Lebedev were transferred from Chita , in Siberia , to Moscow , in order to once again face untenable accusations .
The first public hearing is due to take place on 31 March .
The fifth round of human rights consultations between the EU and Russia was due to take place on the same day .
The Russians have now deferred these important talks indefinitely .
Russia is thus making it very clear just how little it values human rights .
Rather than administering justice , the judicial system continues to serve the purpose of eliminating opponents of the regime , and the wool is being pulled over the eyes of the EU .
( DE ) Mr President , I would like to address a critical remark to the Commission with regard to the decision to ban the classic light bulb , which was submitted in writing last week .
I fully support the energy efficiency requirements and the climate objectives , which we have established , together with the Council and the Commission .
It was only the approach that was wrong in this case .
It is clear that citizens do not feel included , when decisions are taken behind closed doors , using comitology procedures .
Thus , the Commission definitely deserves criticism for failing to involve the European Parliament in the decision-making process and for not following the normal procedure .
Secondly , there was a clear lack of communication .
The people are very concerned , as no comprehensive impact assessment was carried out in relation to these measures , especially as we know that these bulbs contain mercury and therefore pose a threat to human health , especially for children .
Thirdly , it would also have been wise to think about the future and promoting new technologies .
Therefore , I would ask the Commission to submit a new proposal .
Mr President , Estonians , Latvians and Lithuanians would extend their warm gratitude to you for your expression of solidarity on the occasion of 60 years since the 1949 deportations from the Baltic States , which have been universally assessed as crimes against humanity , committed in peace time four years after the end of the war .
Two thirds of the deportees were women and children who were sent to Siberia for approximately 10 years .
Proportionally , the number of deported persons would amount to half a million had these deportations taken place in three Scandinavian states - Sweden , Denmark and Norway .
However , today it is clear that economic and political enlargement of Europe is not enough to have Europe truly integrated as a ' community of values ' .
We need a new wave of enlargement : that of Europe 's conscience .
We acutely need an all-European awareness and will to recognise these crimes and prejudice as an integral part of our common history .
( RO ) Many of us have spoken today about the need for solidarity and I too want to continue this theme .
The European Union 's energy independence and Member States ' solidarity in this matter are more necessary than ever .
Our action must be united and consistent in view not only of the risks but also of the need to diversify our resources .
I congratulate the European Council for the agreement it has reached on the Economic Recovery Plan , for the emphasis that has been placed on the energy sector and on financing the Nabucco project .
I urge the European Commission to find quickly and efficiently the methods to guarantee that these finances are effective and produce the required results in both the energy sector and , particularly , in the economic sector , severely affected and threatened by protectionism .
Resorting to protectionism is the worst thing that can happen to emerging and developed economies alike .
( EL ) Mr President , a year has passed since the decision of the group for the revision of the European Parliament 's rules of procedure made it hard for intergroups to operate by deciding that they should only operate on Thursday afternoons .
To all intents and purposes this did away with these intergroups , which were a platform on which to present ideas , generally on issues which do not , for the most part , concern European policies , such as the issue of the family .
I chair the intergroup on the family and child protection and I must convey to you the deep regret of family associations in civil society and of simple European citizens about the fact that they can no longer express themselves through this intergroup .
The group for the revision of the rules has not told us if it has evaluated intergroups and has not provided us with a solution for the future .
How can they be replaced ?
Mr President , I would like to speak about a very important issue related to the European Prize for Literature .
The prize is financed by the Cultural Programme of the European Union , and it aims to put the spotlight on creativity in the field of contemporary fiction .
I think it is a very good initiative , but I have my concerns about its implementation .
I have been contacted by cultural organisations from my country that are unhappy because Romania is not included this year in the programme .
Indeed , out of 34 eligible countries , only 12 are included each year in this programme .
The legitimate question is how the remaining countries , including Romania , could take an active part if they are not included at all in the programme .
So I would like to bring this problem to your attention , and I hope we will find , together with the European Commission , a convenient way to settle this problem .
( RO ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , this will be a difficult year for Europe .
We are facing challenges which are unprecedented in European history .
We must fight against the financial and economic crisis , against the energy crisis , climate change and against terrorism which is threatening everything we have built to date .
This is exactly why it is more important now than ever for us to stand united .
We must take a stance against anti-European discourse , against ultra-nationalist elements which are destructive and dangerous .
In the current climate , citizens dissatisfied with the worsening crisis , not to mention other problems , can be easily manipulated by ultra-nationalists who are using this unfavourable general climate to attack a united Europe .
Let me remind you that the effects of the crisis which we are feeling at the moment would have been catastrophic without the European Union and the euro zone .
I call on those European politicians who are involved in electoral campaigns to adopt a firm stance against the anti-European discourse .
I call on them not to use ultra-nationalist and chauvinistic elements or ' head speeches ' just to win a few extra votes . Thank you .
( HU ) According to the official discourse generated by the global economic crisis , confidence in the international financial system needs urgently to be rebuilt .
Nowadays confidence is the keyword , one that is reflected in the documents of the European Union as well .
I would like to suggest another key word , solidarity , for solidarity or cooperation is an oft-repeated fundamental value on which the European Union is based .
However , I would like to ask whether we , those outside the euro zone , can speak of a practice of solidarity when we are advised to raise taxes and contributions rather than rely on EU crisis funds and its mechanisms , whereas it is precisely based on the principle of solidarity that the EU operates this fund .
Will the citizens of the Central and Eastern European Member States have to give up hope of catching up to the EU standard of living within a reasonable deadline ?
I think not .
I am certain that the European standpoint , which the EU is proclaiming in advance of the approaching G20 summit , will be a standpoint that will be acceptable to us all .
( HU ) Hungarian communities in five EU Member States recently commemorated the Hungarian Revolution and War of Independence of 1948-49 .
Hungarians then fought shoulder to shoulder with Poles , Serbs , Croatians , Swabians , Germans , Austrians , Armenians and Romanians for their freedom and for world freedom against the two largest armies of Europe at the time .
We commemorate the event every March , and the presidents of two other countries did so as well .
The Romanian authorities dishonourably sought in a manner unbefitting an EU country to prevent László Sólyom , the President of the Hungarian Republic , from travelling to Romania .
What would have happened if they had tried to do the same thing with the President of the United States of America , Barack Obama , who also recognised and paid tribute to the 1848 Hungarian War of Independence , had he wished to come to Romania ?
It would be good if at last we could all realise that we are living in Europe , where we can respect each other 's past and history and can also respect each other 's national holidays .
( RO ) I am an advocate of Serbia 's integration into and accession to the European Union .
In this context , I urge the European Commission to adopt specific effective measures to guarantee the rights of the people belonging to the Romanian minority living in Timoc Valley .
The European Framework Convention for the Protection of National Minorities and the European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages must be applied effectively in Timoc Valley in the counties of Craina , Morava , Pojarevaţ and Timoc in eastern Serbia .
We are in 2009 and I believe that the time has come for the traditional Romanian ethnic community in Timoc Valley to enjoy the right to proportional representation , as well as to churches and schools in their Romanian mother tongue . Thank you .
The item is closed .
Economic Partnership Agreement between the EC and Cariforum - Stepping-stone Agreement towards an Economic Partnership Agreement between the EC and Côte d 'Ivoire - EC-Cariforum States Partnership Agreement - EC-Côte d 'Ivoire Stepping-stone Economic Partnership Agreement - Stepping-stone Economic Partnership Agreement between the European Community and its Member States , of the one part , and Ghana , of the other part - Interim Partnership Agreement between the Pacific States , on the one part , and the European Community , on the other part - EC-SADC EPA States Interim Economic Partnership Agreement - Economic Partnership Agreement between EC and Eastern and Southern African States - Economic Partnership Agreement between the EC and the East African Community Partner States - Stepping-stone Economic Partnership Agreement between the European Community and its Member States , of the one part , and Central Africa , of the other part ( debate )
The next item is the joint debate on Partnership Agreements :
the recommendation by Mr Martin , on behalf of the Committee on International Trade , on the proposal for a Council decision on the conclusion of an Economic Partnership Agreement between the Cariforum States , of the one part , and the European Community and its Member States , of the other part ( 05211 / 2009 -C6-0054 / 2009 - , and
the recommendation by Mrs Mann , on behalf of the Committee on International Trade , on the proposal for a Council decision concluding the stepping-stone Economic Partnership Agreement between Côte d 'Ivoire , of the one part , and the European Community and its Member States , of the other part ( 05535 / 2009 - C6-0064 / 2009 - 2008 / 0136 ( AVC ) ) ,
the oral question to the Council by Mr Markov and Mr Martin , on behalf of the Committee on International Trade , on the Economic Partnership Agreement between the Cariforum States , of the one part , and the European Community and its Member States , of the other part - B6-0203 / 2009 ) ,
the oral question to the Commission by Mr Markov and Mr Martin , on behalf of the Committee on International Trade , on the Economic Partnership Agreement between the Cariforum States , of the one part , and the European Community and its Member States , of the other part - B6-0204 / 2009 ) ,
the oral question to the Council by Mr Markov and Mrs Mann , on behalf of the Committee on International Trade , on the stepping-stone Economic Partnership Agreement between the European Community and its Member States , of the one part , and Côte d 'Ivoire , of the other part - B6-0217 / 2009 ) ,
the oral question to the Commission by Mr Markov and Mrs Mann , on behalf of the Committee on International Trade , on the stepping-stone Economic Partnership Agreement between the European Community and its Member States , of the one part , and Côte d 'Ivoire , of the other part - B6-0218 / 2009 ) ,
the oral question to the Council by Mr Markov and Mr Fjellner , on behalf of the Committee on International Trade , on the stepping-stone Economic Partnership Agreement between the European Community and its Member States , of the one part , and Ghana , of the other part - B6-0205 / 2009 ) ,
the oral question to the Commission by Mr Markov and Mr Fjellner , on behalf of the Committee on International Trade , on the stepping-stone Economic Partnership Agreement between the European Community , of the one part , and Ghana , of the other part - B6-0206 / 2009 ) ,
the oral question to the Council by Mr Markov and Mr Ford , on behalf of the Committee on International Trade , on the Interim Economic Partnership Agreement ( EPA ) between the European Community , of the one part , and the Pacific States , of the other part - B6-0207 / 2009 ) ,
the oral question to the Commission by Mr Markov and Mr Ford , on behalf of the Committee on International Trade , on the Interim Economic Partnership Agreement ( EPA ) between the European Community , of the one part , and the Pacific States , of the other part - B6-0208 / 2009 ) ,
the oral question to the Council by Mr Markov and Mr Sturdy , on behalf of the Committee on International Trade , on the Interim Economic Partnership Agreement between the European Community and its Member States , of the one part , and the SADC EPA States , of the other part - B6-0209 / 2009 ) ,
the oral question to the Commission by Mr Markov and Mr Sturdy , on behalf of the Committee on International Trade , on the Interim Economic Partnership Agreement between the European Community and its Member States , of the one part , and the SADC EPA States , of the other part - B6-0210 / 2009 ) ,
the oral question to the Council by Mr Markov and Mr Caspary , on behalf of the Committee on International Trade , on the interim agreement establishing a framework for an Economic Partnership Agreement between the Eastern and Southern African States , of the one part , and the European Union and its Member States , of the other part - B6-0211 / 2009 ) ,
the oral question to the Commission by Mr Markov and Mr Caspary , on behalf of the Committee on International Trade , on the interim agreement establishing a framework for an Economic Partnership Agreement between the Eastern and Southern African States , of the one part , and the European Union and its Member States , of the other part - B6-0212 / 2009 ) ,
the oral question to the Council by Mr Markov , on behalf of the Committee on International Trade , on the agreement establishing a framework for an Economic Partnership Agreement between the European Community and its Member States , of the one part , and the East African Community Partner States , of the other part - B6-0213 / 2009 ) ,
the oral question to the Commission by Mr Markov , on behalf of the Committee on International Trade , on the agreement establishing a framework for an Economic Partnership Agreement between the European Community and its Member States , of the one part , and the East African Community Partner States , of the other part - B6-0214 / 2009 ) ,
the oral question to the Council by Mr Markov and Mr Arif , on behalf of the Committee on International Trade , on the stepping-stone Economic Partnership Agreement between the European Community and its Member States , of the one part , and Central Africa , of the other part - B6-0215 / 2009 ) ,
the oral question to the Commission by Mr Markov and Mr Arif , on behalf of the Committee on International Trade , on the stepping-stone Economic Partnership Agreement between the European Community and its Member States , of the one part , and Central Africa , of the other part - B6-0216 / 2009 ) .
rapporteur . - Mr President , when we are directly involved we always tend to overstate the importance of an issue , but on this particular issue I do not think we can overstate its importance .
We are dealing with a series of agreements here tonight that have the ability to affect the lives , the quality of the lives and the health of literally millions of people in the developing world .
Before turning to the substance of my report , I want to pay tribute to my colleague , Glenys Kinnock , who , as Co-President of the ACP-EU Joint Parliamentary Assembly , has been at the forefront of making concerns about economic partnership agreements ( EPAs ) and the development impact of EPAs heard , not just in this Parliament but giving a voice to ACP concerns throughout the world .
As many of you know , Glenys is giving up at the end of this Parliament , and I think we will very much miss the work that she has done in relation to the ACP , and EPAs in particular .
EPAs have a difficult history in this Parliament .
There has been real tension between trade and development objectives .
Some of that could have been avoided , but some of it is , frankly , intrinsic in the nature of the agreements .
Firstly , they were forced on us by a WTO ruling , and one-way liberalisation , which is essentially what EPAs required , is not easy to negotiate .
Secondly , the artificial deadline that was set for completing the full and interim EPAs meant that negotiations , which should have been between equals , were in fact not between equals , because the ACP side had something to lose if the deadlines were not met .
Finally - and this is not a criticism of them but of the reality of the negotiations - our negotiations were carried out by trade experts .
Trade experts by their nature aim to get the best possible deal for the European Union .
They did not necessarily aim to get the best development outcome .
I repeat : that is not a criticism ; that is what they are trained to do .
But that is the reality of the negotiations .
We have , as a Parliament , since the conclusion of the negotiations been trying to square the circle between trade and development .
I want to concentrate my remarks as rapporteur for the Cariforum EPA , which of course , at the moment , is the only full Economic Partnership Agreement .
As this EPA has been signed , we cannot amend the text , we only have an opportunity to say ' yes ' or ' no ' to it .
I believe that , if the Commission and the Commissioner are able to give us certain assurances and certain interpretations of the text , we could be in a position this week to give our assent to the Cariforum EPA .
Lewis Carroll , the author , had one of his characters , Humpty Dumpty , say in a scornful tone : ' When I use a word , it means just what I choose it to mean , neither more nor less ' .
Frankly , until recently , trying to understand some of the words in the Cariforum EPA has been a bit like that : trying to get clarity as to what the text actually means has not always been easy .
I would like to hear the Commissioner today reassure us on a number of points .
Firstly , that the review clause in the agreement is a genuine review clause and will be taken seriously by the Commission : that we will look at development priorities , such as the alleviation of poverty , sustainable development , economic diversification and the contribution to achieving the Millennium Development Goals at the five-year point to ensure that EPAs are working in the interests of all these things , not against their interests .
Secondly , I would like to hear the Commissioner reassure us on the finance for EPAs .
Calculations suggest that roughly EUR 580 million are available for the Cariforum countries over the existing EDF and other financial framework periods up to 2013 .
In my opinion - but of course I am no expert on this - this should be enough to meet the demands of the EPAs if they are properly programmed , if the money is all spent , if the Caribbean countries ' priorities are met in terms of where the money should be spent .
Furthermore , we have to make sure that the Member States deliver their part of the EUR 2 billion that has been promised for ' aid for trade ' across the developing world .
We also have to look at the post-2013 position ; we cannot get any assurances from the Commission on that , because that is for Parliament and the Council , but we have to be aware that the money runs out , the commitments run out in 2013 .
The third assurance I want is on the most-favoured-nation ( MFN ) status .
I have said to the Commissioner before that I entirely understand that the European Union should insist on exactly the same terms and conditions that the Caribbean countries give to the United States or another major developed power .
But we should not be invoking the MFN clause if the Caribbean countries do a favourable deal with , say , a group of African countries .
Fourthly - and I am coming to a conclusion here - on access to medicines , we need assurance that nothing in the Cariforum Agreement threatens the use of the TRIPS mechanism - the mechanism should be put in no doubt .
I want to hear these assurances from the Commissioner but , even in advance of hearing them , I want to conclude by saying that I firmly believe the Commissioner has changed the tone and the nature of the discussion on EPAs , and I pay tribute to her for the work she has already done in this area .
rapporteur . - ( DE ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the agreement with Côte d 'Ivoire is one which we now have to vote to accept .
We only have the choice of voting yes or no .
I hope that , one day , this will change and that Parliament will also be able to participate in the mandate negotiations .
That makes it a little more difficult .
There are two differences with respect to the Cariforum agreement .
First of all , we are dealing with a government that was not democratically elected .
Secondly , we are dealing with a provisional agreement , which is initially only to ensure that the old preferences are maintained .
The final Agreement will not be negotiated for some time .
What I would like to hear from Commissioner Cathy Ashton are assurances on a number of matters which I know will be extremely important for the Côte d 'Ivoire .
Last weekend , I was again involved in talks from which it became very clear that assurances from the Commission must be forthcoming , which is entirely in agreement with the assurances which the Commissioner provided in the case of the SADC .
Please allow me therefore to name some of the most important points .
The first point relates to significant flexibility .
This flexibility must encompass the following points .
Firstly , the inclusion of a review clause , which is also flexible , so that it provides not for a five-year timeframe , but one which can be constantly re-assessed at relatively short notice .
Secondly , sensitive matters should be discussed only when the country expressly wishes to do so .
In particular , this refers to the Singapore topics , but naturally also to the question of how to integrate TRIPS , as well as similar issues .
Thirdly , there is the issue of accepting regional differences when further negotiations take place towards a regional agreement .
The Côte d 'Ivoire faces a particular problem owing to the fact that the agreement is currently being negotiated and will be signed in isolation , while the aim in the future is to negotiate a regional agreement .
Fourthly , it would be important that at any stage during new negotiations it is possible to raise issues that have yet to be addressed at the current stage and that these topics are approved by the Commission .
In this context , Commissioner , you only really need to extend the concessions that you already made in the case of SADC to the Côte d 'Ivoire .
Doing so would increase the likelihood of a corresponding positive response from Parliament .
We are simply very concerned , and it is a concern that has been voiced by many non-governmental organisations , that especially in the case of the Côte d 'Ivoire the Commission initially appeared to show relatively little flexibility and this was the reason why the aforementioned issues were not taken into account during the transition from the provisional to the full agreement .
A concession would therefore prove exceptionally helpful and would enable us to approve the agreement .
Moreover , during my discussions with the representatives of the Côte d 'Ivoire I understood that they are very concerned that the technical aid will not flow rapidly enough and that here too not all of their concerns have been taken into account .
As I understand they are especially interested in the Commission and the international organisations that are providing them with help giving them SME market access so that they can actually make use of the access to the European market .
They are exceptionally cautious when negotiations touch on these Singapore topics , when they even discuss them , and are anxious for us to help them develop an understanding of how public goods can be used for society .
In addition , they are especially interested in us providing them with help in matters associated with technical standards because for them they often represent real barriers to trade .
My final comment refers to the point concerning Parliament .
As I mentioned previously , we only have the possibility of saying yes or no , and that obviously imposes relatively significant limitations on the extent to which Parliament is able to collaborate in shaping the vote .
I wish to expressly remind you , and you will also find this reflected in our texts , that a possible approval of the provisional agreement does not necessarily mean that we will also automatically vote in favour of the full agreement .
In fact , within the framework of the monitoring procedure , we expressly wish to be included in the continuing negotiations so that to a certain extent , in so far as it is within our power , we can follow up on the points that I have just raised .
Finally , I would like to ask you to say a few words to tell us to what extent the failed Doha Agreement will have an especially negative impact on the Côte d 'Ivoire , especially as far as bananas are concerned .

Mr President , Commissioner , Mr Solana , in this debate we are not simply discussing a package of sixteen oral questions to the Council and the Commission , eight resolutions and two reports under the codecision procedure , but also 79 developing countries , with which the EU is renewing its trade relations and mutual cooperation .
Trade and cooperation are important tools in the fight against poverty , as well as for building more economically and socially stable national economies .
Above all , this process involves providing support for the creation of infrastructure , for healthcare , food sovereignty , a functioning social system , education and cultural exchange .
In the past , our trade relations with the ACP countries were based on a system of non-reciprocal trade preferences , which allowed most of the products made in the ACP States duty free access to the common market .
In 2000 , it was agreed that a new partnership agreement would be drawn up by the end of 2007 .
Under this new agreement , unilateral trade preferences were to be replaced by WTO-compatible agreements , which aimed to reduce and , ultimately , eliminate poverty , as well as fostering sustainable development , regional integration , economic cooperation and good governance , helping ACP countries to develop their economic potential and gradually integrating them into the global economy .
In addition to this , the production capacity of these countries was to be expanded , and measures were to be taken in order to facilitate private enterprise and investment .
The Economic Agreements before us , especially the so-called Interim EPA or Goods-only-Agreement , are primarily trade agreements , as 90 % or more of what they address are issues related to market access and other areas of trade .
The aim is the step-by-step liberalisation of trade between the EU and the partner regions or individual states .
What kind of problems have come to our attention during the course of the negotiations ?
First of all , it seems rather questionable as to whether the timeframe was sufficient .
Of course , the Commission is in a good position .
It was able to lead the negotiations , call a vote and involve the Member States .
However , imagine that you had been one of the negotiating partners on the other side .
Were the negotiations really always held in parallel , so that the corresponding consultations could be conducted between civil society and Parliament in those countries ?
There was a lot of criticism regarding the contents .
First of all , although there were other expert opinions , the Commission understood WTO-compatibility to mean 80 % reductions in customs duties within the next 15 years .
Even if the liberalisation commitments are initially asymmetrical , in terms of steps taken towards liberalisation , the outcome will be open markets on both sides , something that the EU can easily afford .
Exports from the ACP countries will only make up a small percentage of its imports .
For the ACP States , the abolition of customs duties results in lost earnings from these duties , and a loss of funding needed for urgent public investment in infrastructure , the social sphere , support for economic development and improvement of administrative capacity .
Moreover , it means the slowing of the growth of the national economy and , therefore , continued dependence on exports from industrialised countries .
This affects foodstuffs just as much as industrial goods and , ultimately , creates a vicious cycle .
The increasing food prices in the ACP countries are the undeniable proof of this effect .
I have often asked the following question : if 50 years of non-reciprocal trade relations have not fostered any even remotely adequate development , how could this be achieved with the mutual opening up of markets ?
A further serious problem , which will be exacerbated by the proposed agreement , is the relationship between the partner regions and countries .
Within the East African community , and I am personally responsible for the relevant motion for a resolution , the problem of internal tariffs may be less significant , as a customs union exists , but the trade relations between neighbouring states may become more difficult as a result of the different degrees of liberalisation .
In this case , there are , of course , many problems that are linked to the country of origin regulations .
There are serious fears in relation to the negotiations on comprehensive EPAs .
They reflect certain conflicts within the blocked Doha development round .
Many states do not think that they are in a position to deregulate their service , investment and public procurement markets and open them up to global competition .
This is not even fully manageable , or even desirable , within the European Community itself .
In terms of the lack of control mechanisms for financial markets , we do not need to go into greater detail here .
Serious criticisms were , and are being , expressed concerning the transparency of the negotiations themselves , that is , the extent to which Parliaments and civil society have been involved in the process .
Finally , there are also questions regarding Mode 4 .
If goods are to move freely , should people not be allowed to do so , too ?
In this context , our Committee has formulated questions which , irrespective of the background they come from , always touch upon the same issues .
What financial , technical and administrative support measures are foreseen within the framework of re-establishing trade and development partnerships ?
Will the Commission , during the continuing negotiations , be flexible and take the needs of the partner regions into account , in particular in terms of facilitating export duties for development purposes , protecting fledgling industries , ensuring the freedom of movement of employees and special protection for the public procurement system ?
In addition to this , is the Commission ready to rethink its position on protecting intellectual property rights , in terms of ensuring that biological diversity and the transfer of knowledge are preserved , and that medical care at a reasonable price will be guaranteed in poorer countries ?
Are the Council and the Commission prepared to provide Parliament and civil society with adequate information concerning participation opportunities ?
Finally , is there the readiness to revise the negotiated agreement if it should turn out that certain points have a negative influence on development in the ACP States ?
Let me finally make a brief , personal comment .
I have now been chairman of the Committee for International Trade for two and a half years .
As I am not standing for that post again , I would like to take this opportunity to thank my Secretariat , Mr Rodas and especially Mrs Pribaz , very , very much for their great support , and also to thank my colleagues .
The collaboration was successful and I think we have achieved a great deal .
It would be wonderful if we could achieve success with the EPA as well .
I would like to wish all those who remain here all the best for the next parliamentary term .
I am actually very hopeful that trade will begin to play a larger role in this Parliament . Thank you very much .
author . - ( SV ) Mr President , I am very pleased that we are able to have this debate today .
At this time of increased protectionism and with poverty spreading instead of decreasing , it is particularly important for us to keep trade open between Europe and some of the world 's poorest countries .
This is essentially what the interim agreements are all about .
The Economic Partnership Agreements seek to guarantee continued trade and development in some of the world 's poorest countries .
These countries are at risk of being the hardest hit as the global recession surges forward and the protectionist arms race looks set to intensify .
I cannot , therefore , understand some of the criticism that has been expressed .
Some people claim that these agreements go too far and are too comprehensive .
Some critics would rather talk of lost customs revenue than of the potential for new trade .
I think , on the contrary , that we should be pleased that we have achieved so much .
I do not believe that there is an inherent conflict between trade and development as some speakers claim .
Quite the contrary : trade leads to development , duties lead to poverty .
I was responsible for the interim agreement with Ghana .
I acknowledge , first of all , that it contains a few flaws , such as the continued imposition of EU duties on rice and sugar for a transitional period , but it is , essentially , a very good agreement .
It is therefore important for us to ensure that it is signed as soon as possible .
The presidential election in Ghana previously presented an obstacle , but now I would like to urge the country 's new President , John Atta Mills , to sign the interim agreement .
I also hope that we in the EU will be sure to sign the agreement that we have negotiated .
It is unacceptable for it to take so long , and it is particularly unacceptable for it to take so long due to the failure of the translation service in the Council to function adequately .
I would like to take this opportunity to urge you all to support the agreement .
In these times of uncertainty , the world needs more trade , not less .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , from where I stand , the agreements signed between the economic partners are vital in terms of securing trade relations with African , Caribbean and Pacific states .
Cooperation is in the interest both of the European Union and of these countries .
We need urgently to avoid supplying the African countries with development aid , as we have done for the last fifty or sixty years .
We have to finally let these countries be free mentally too , so that they will be able to take their future in their own hands and so that they can build wealth for themselves , just as other regions of the world have done over the course of the last few decades .
Trade can provide an excellent contribution in this case .
I am thinking , on the one hand , of trade between the European Union and these countries , but I am also mainly thinking of trade between these countries themselves , namely with other developing countries .
I am quite sure that we might well have to put a certain amount of pressure on governments and states to remove their extremely high customs tariffs in many areas in order to create the necessary conditions for economic growth in this region .
Why do we have to do this ?
These states urgently need framework conditions that will allow people to create their own wealth .
During my discussions with representatives from these countries , I often had the impression that people were grateful that we , as the European Union , exert pressure in a number of areas , and that they were thankful that we make demands in many areas and force national governments to make a little progress in terms of economic policy .
I would be happy if we did not lose sight of this point of view during the coming weeks and months , and especially during the negotiations , so that not just the legitimate wishes of the governments are addressed , but also , at one point or another , our legitimate demands are upheld , and that we represent the legitimate demands of the people from these countries .
In this regard , I hope that our negotiations will be fruitful .
author . - ( FR ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , in this lengthy debate here today , I should like to take a few moments , if you would allow me , to reflect on the road we have travelled until now .
Let us remember the initial positions of some Members of this Parliament in the face of increasing concern in the African , Caribbean and Pacific ( ACP ) countries , in the face of demonstrations against the Economic Partnership Agreements ( EPAs ) , in the face of warning signals from NGOs from the North as well as the South , when we were demanding that the priority in these agreements should be development , something that seems obvious today , as the Commission is constantly repeating it .
Mr Mandelson , however , at the time , scarcely dared to answer us because , for him , it was primarily a matter of stimulating trade , as if simply removing customs barriers would somehow miraculously bring about development .
People called us idealists , manipulated by the NGOs , and were offended by our demands for instruments for protection , regulation and intervention by public authorities , but what happened ?
It appeared that we were not being irresponsible .
No , the governments of the ACP countries did not accept continuing negotiations under pressure or threats .
No , the risks involved in opening up trade are not an attitude of mind , they are real and will have real and immediate consequences : state budgets will be reduced through loss of customs revenues , new industries in the agricultural sector will be weakened and the food security of their people put at risk .
We were expressing these fears a long time ago , before the hunger riots or the financial crisis .
So , what is to be said about the situation today ?
The International Monetary Fund , the World Bank and the United Nations recognise that developing countries , contrary to what was said at the outset , will be seriously affected by the global recession .
Jacques Diouf , Director-General of the Food and Agriculture Organisation , emphasised this recently , asking whether we would dare to say to those we call partners that we are prepared to spend billions to save the global banking system but not to save their people who are dying of hunger .
I want to be completely honest , Commissioner , and I wish this to be quite clear .
If you do not make a strong and precise commitment on behalf of the Commission to give us a guarantee that the EPAs will be genuinely pro-development , I will not vote for assent .
Words will not be enough and nor will declarations of intent , we have heard too much of those .
We want specific commitments and I would like to list them one by one .
The EPAs will not be satisfactory agreements unless they promote regional integration and contribute to development in the ACP countries and to the achievement of the Millennium Development Goals .
When we call for the promotion of regional integration , that needs to be translated into practical terms .
For example , in Central Africa , Cameroon has been criticised , not to say strongly condemned , by its neighbours , for having signed this interim agreement with the European Union .
Out of the eight countries in the region , I note that five are Least Developed Countries , that is , countries that , automatically and fully in accordance with the rules of the World Trade Organisation , have free access to the European market for exports without any requirements for trade concessions in return .
I can quite understand their concerns when the Commission asks them to open up to 80 % of European exports .
Therefore , if the Commissioner makes a commitment to promoting regional integration , if she makes a commitment to greater flexibility so as to take into account the different levels of development of our partners , perhaps she can tell us why she does not accept the offer of 71 % liberalisation proposed by Central Africa ?
The second fundamental subject for which we are awaiting a response concerns the Singapore Issues .
These cannot be imposed in the negotiations against the wishes of the partner countries .
On this point , I want particularly to emphasise public procurement .
Of course , there must be transparency - I shall always defend that - but can we deprive our ACP partners of an essential instrument of their sovereignty in supporting their industry and their local services by imposing liberalisation of public procurement ?
The third point is services .
In our discussions about EPAs with Cameroon , the Commission stressed time and again that our partners wanted to negotiate about services .
That may be true , but , nonetheless , beware of those who would use this argument to impose liberalisation of services on all regions and all countries , and especially to justify liberalisation of public services .
Commissioner , I expect a firm commitment from you that public services will remain outside the scope of the negotiations , in all regions .
We know that the loss of customs revenue will cause a reduction in the budgets of our partners .
If revenues are reduced , the first sectors to suffer will be sectors such as education , health or research .
It would , therefore , be unacceptable for the ACP governments in this context to lose control of their public services and I call upon the Commissioner to give us her firm assurance on these issues .
The fourth point , and this has already been mentioned , is that food security must be protected .
This involves not only putting in place adequate safeguards , but also allowing our partners to sustain their exports in order to remain competitive in global markets .
I know that there have been some positive developments in this direction in the Southern African Development Community region .
Is the Commission prepared to propose similar measures in other regions ?
The last point is that we know that upgrading the economies of ACP States will require a huge financial commitment from the European Union both to protect infant industries from the negative effects of liberalisation and to develop the competitiveness of our partners ' economies .
Unfortunately , contrary to the repeated recommendations of our political group , it is the European Development Fund that is to be used as the primary source of funding for the EPAs .
We know that in the past the Commission has not been outstanding in the way it makes use of these funds , and I must , therefore , stress how important it is for these funds to be used quickly and according to the priorities of our partners .
Finally , Commissioner , these agreements are the image that the European Union will give to the rest of the world , the image that the European Union will give to the poorest countries in the world .
author . - Madam President , firstly can I apologise to the Commissioner and to my fellow rapporteurs for missing the debate until about five minutes ago ?
I have been delayed getting here and have managed to arrive at the last minute .
I hope that I will not be repeating what other people have said , or at least not too much , and can I ask them to bear in mind my apology for that ?
I am actually speaking on two issues : I am speaking as the rapporteur on the Interim Economic Partnership Agreement with the Pacific and as the shadow rapporteur on behalf of the Socialist Group on behalf of the Interim Economic Partnership with Eastern and Southern Africa .
The whole debate that we are having this evening was not triggered by any decision of the European Commission or the European Union that we wanted a new trade relationship with the countries of the African , Caribbean and Pacific , but by a decision - a decade or more or so now - of the World Trade Organisation that we were unfairly discriminating in favour of some developing countries at the expense of others .
Some people have said that this should be just about development - I am very much in favour of that - but we have to bear in mind that one of the underlying requirements is that it is actually about making our agreements with these countries WTO-compatible .
So we have to do that ; that it is the first thing .
On top of WTO compatibility , we must do whatever we can to try and improve the situation of these various regional blocks and to try and deal with the particular situations that actually face them .
With respect to the Pacific , for which I am the rapporteur , we have a collection of 14 - plus one if you include East Timor - very small nation-states .
One , in fact , is the smallest country in the world , with a population that is exactly one million times less than that of China - Nauru .
But even the biggest ones are actually comparatively small , and we need to take that into account in what requirements and demands we put on them .
We need to make sure that there are adequate transition periods for small and medium-sized enterprises because , quite frankly , apart from some mining enterprises in Papua New Guinea , they are all small and medium-sized enterprises .
We need to do what we can about regional trade and in particular to take into account the special relationship that countries of the Pacific have with Australia and with New Zealand .
Only two of the 14 have actually signed up for the Interim Agreement .
However , I know from my visit to Port Moresby at the last ACP meeting that there are other Pacific countries that would like to sign a final agreement provided it meets their requirements , which is why , in my case , I am actually in favour of the interim agreement .
That is the message I got , both from the governments of Papua New Guinea and Fiji .
Not that they are entirely happy - there are issues that they would like to renegotiate - but they see the answer as being signing up and accepting an interim agreement which would lead towards a final agreement which will be more development friendly and will enable more of the Pacific countries to actually engage .
We also need to look at a number of specific issues that apply in particular in Papua New Guinea and Fiji and elsewhere in the Pacific , but may apply to some other of these agreements .
We need to look at intellectual property right negotiations that cover not only Western technological artefacts but traditional knowledge ; we need to make sure that there is a transparency of government procurement with openness to European contracts triggered at a point appropriate to the needs of the Pacific nation-states ; we need to look in the case of the Pacific particularly at working visas to be made available in the European Union to Pacific island nationals for periods of at least 24 months for them to be able to work - not in the higher professions but probably working as carers and in similar occupations .
Can I say , with respect to eastern and southern Africa , that many of these points would apply there ?
I particularly would like to thank Mr Caspary for working together with me on this and , on the Pacific , let me say the work of Mr Audy .
But with respect to the ESA we need to look at good-governance issues in particular .
This includes Zimbabwe .
I do not have a problem with an interim agreement but I think a final agreement would be difficult for Parliament to accept unless there was a clear road map in the case of Zimbabwe to see an establishment of a properly democratic regime there and one that could find some way out of the difficulties it is in at the moment .
The last point I would like to make in relation to ESA , apart from to endorse the report of Mr Caspary - with some of the amendments which have been tabled - is to mention the situation of the Chagos Archipelago .
It is in there because I tabled an amendment , which was accepted .
Normally in these kinds of agreements we actually consult with neighbouring countries and neighbouring territories .
The Chagos Archipelago is in the middle of part of this region : Seychelles-Mauritius-Madagascar .
These people are currently refugees in Seychelles , and I hope that we will consult with them between now and any final agreement being made as to what the impact might be on them and on their territory should they get the right to return .
Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to begin first by thanking Parliament for allowing me at this key moment to address this sitting with a matter as unquestionably sensitive as the Economic Partnership Agreements .
I would also like to express my appreciation for the very positive role which Parliament has played in the course of these negotiations through the political debates .
I would particularly like to applaud the Committee on International Trade and the Committee on Development for their tireless work and to thank them for their unflagging interest in the discussions .
EPAs have always been a high priority for development ministries at their meetings within the framework of the Council for General Affairs and External Relations .
In recent years almost all of these meetings have included discussions with the Commission on the implementation of the Council mandate concerning EPAs , which have often resulted in the adoption of conclusions .
When the Czech Presidency presented its programme to this Parliament in January , we said that this was a key period and we promised to put maximum efforts into ensuring further progress .
We took the opportunity to respond to many different questions and we have devoted considerable efforts to a range of topics .
We continue to regard cooperation and constructive discussion between the institutions as the best way to create and develop the right policies .
Developed and developing countries are facing an unprecedented financial and economic crisis which has gripped the entire world .
If asked how the crisis is affecting their economies , developing countries reply that it has brought a downturn in trade leading to lower economic growth , restrictions on output and higher levels of unemployment .
The trade downturn and loss of export markets established after many years of effort are very painful for developing economies and for the living conditions and well-being of their inhabitants .
Under these circumstances we must exploit every opportunity within the context of our response to the global economic crisis to make trade the driving force for sustainable development .
The EPAs serve this end .
Through gradual regional integration they provide an opportunity for regional trade and the expansion of duty-free and quota-free access to our extensive market , enabling a higher volume of trade with the EU .
The EPAs thus operate in a way which conforms to WTO rules .
This factor constitutes an important legal aspect distinguishing the EPAs from the previous commercial preferences which were implemented under the Cotonou Convention and which were detrimental to trade between the ACP countries and the EU and caused considerable uncertainty .
Uncertainty is the opposite of trust .
Uncertainty scares off investment whereas trust attracts it .
We all know that developing countries have seen a dramatic decline in investment since the beginning of the current crisis .
In today 's uncertain world the EPAs can provide a measure of legal certainty and trust that will assist economic renewal .
These agreements are not a panacea but they do represent a positive instrument which can be combined with other instruments .
A series of binding reports have been published in recent months describing how the economic crisis may block progress towards the achievement of the Millennium Development Goals in many regions .
We should be very uneasy about this .
The EPAs make use of all the flexibility allowed under WTO rules in order to assist development .
They ensure for our partners from ACP countries the immediate and asymmetric opening up of markets with long transitional periods , exemptions and regular monitoring , and they also set out commitments to political reforms .
The EU has at the same time undertaken that it will not leave its partners to face this challenge on their own .
For the operation of these agreements we are also providing specially adapted financial support .
I am delighted that there has recently been a revival of interest in greater dialogue over EPAs on the part of both EU and ACP countries .
I would like to take this opportunity to thank Commissioner Ashton for her efforts and for the importance she has attached to listening to the views of our partners from the ACP countries .
Following the outline of her approach on EPAs to Parliament in October last year and to the Council in November , there was a strengthening of contacts with our political counterparts in the various ACP regions .
Significant progress is now being made in negotiations with various regions .
Each region has its own characteristics and is proceeding at its own rate .
In the months ahead , we should get a clearer picture based on all of these negotiations .
I believe that the European Parliament will support the EPAs with the Cariforum States and the interim EPA with Côte d 'Ivoire .
This will send an encouraging signal to all ACP countries .
It will be proof for them that patience in negotiations brings results that are acceptable and beneficial to both sides .
It will also show that the ACP-EU partnership is capable of reacting to new challenges , whether of a legal , economic or political nature .
At this time of unease every new international agreement represents a stronger partnership and a new hope for the future .
The signing of the agreements would send a worthwhile political message which will perhaps contribute something to the forthcoming meeting of the two joint bodies of the ACP-EU : the Joint Parliamentary Assembly taking place at the beginning of April in Prague and the Joint Council of Ministers at the end of May in Brussels .
The EU must continue to support its partners , and this means not only the Cariforum region which has shown the way to others by signing the first comprehensive EPA , but also those countries and regions that have taken the first steps and must be encouraged to go further .
Among these is Côte d 'Ivoire , whose interim EPA also awaits the approval of this Parliament .
Further EPAs are being prepared .
The Commission is working hard to create conditions for partner countries which will enable them to come together and to plot a course towards comprehensive regional agreements .
The Council always emphasises to the Commission and the partners that these agreements are a development instrument and that the advantages for development can be exploited to the full only through comprehensive regional agreements .
The overall political and economic context within which Parliament has been invited to approve the Cariforum EPAs and the interim EPA with Côte d 'Ivoire is important , but Parliament has nevertheless asked the Council and the Commission for a number of concrete explanations .
This step is an essential and legitimate part of the process and I am trying to make the fullest possible response to questions that fall within my area of responsibility .
I am aware that other questions have been raised which Commissioner Ashton is ready to answer .
I would like to begin by addressing some of the topics that have been mentioned .
One of the issues you raised concerned the question of whether , when and to what extent reviews would be conducted into EPAs with Cariforum States .
Both the Council and the ACP group fully share the concerns relating to this question .
I can confirm that comprehensive reviews of EPAs will be conducted no later than five years from the date on which they were signed , which was in October last year .
The reviews will of course be supplementary to the routine monitoring of the fulfilment of these agreements , as set out in Article 5 .
These reviews are mandatory under the terms of the agreements and they are one of the tasks of the joint bodies , including the parliamentary and advisory committees .
Impact assessments will be carried out within the framework of the reviews and these will include the costs and consequences of operating the agreements .
If an EPA is amended in any way or if there are changes to the way they are implemented the involvement of the parliaments is guaranteed , either under the laws of the signatories to the EPA or within the framework of the parliamentary committees set up on the basis of the EPA .
The second question that Parliament is interested in concerns the accompanying financial measures requested by the ACP regions and especially our undertakings to support trade .
As you are aware , in October 2007 , both the European Community and its Member States committed to increase assistance in the area of trade to EUR 1 billion by 2010 within the framework of the EU Strategy on trade assistance .
Almost 50 % of this increased amount will be available for needs prioritised by the ACP countries themselves , including needs arising from the operation of the EPAs .
All Member State commitments to support trade are supplementary to assistance from the European Development Fund and all our commitments are firm .
Thirdly I would like to reassure Parliament concerning the important matter of access to medicines .
In this case I can announce very clearly that none of the articles of the agreements can weaken the ability of the Cariforum States to support access to medicines .
We cannot conduct a detailed legal analysis here but from a political standpoint I can assure you again that these agreements do not include any such intention .
With regard to the advancing integration process in the Cariforum States it was natural that you should also draw attention to the compatibility of these agreements with other regional programmes , such as the Single Market and economic space of CARICOM .
Besides supporting the development and facilitating the gradual integration of the ACP countries into the world economy the main aim of the EPAs is precisely to support regional integration .
Article 4 of the EPA clearly states that in its implementation it will take proper account of the integration processes in the Cariforum States , including the CARICOM single market and economic space .
Special attention will be paid to strengthening the regional integration programmes and ensuring a sustainable future for them .
During negotiations the Cariforum States have already ensured that all of the obligations arising from the EPAs would be fully compatible with the regional obligations adopted by the Caribbean states within the framework of their relevant regional integration programmes .
However , the compatibility of the EPA with the regional integration processes is also important for all of the other regions which are at present negotiating comprehensive EPAs .
As an example we might mention here the comprehensive EPA intended for the West African economies .
A comprehensive regional EPA would strengthen regional integration , boost competitiveness and contribute to the development of the region .
The negotiation process has itself already contributed towards increased efforts on regional integration , since the creation of a joint external tariff scale for the Economic Community of West African States is considered an essential precondition for concluding EPA negotiations .
It is also possible to say the same about other regions , with due reference to their specific needs and integration processes .
Regional integration will undoubtedly be strengthened as soon as all regions sign comprehensive agreements adapted to their specific requirements .
Parliament has repeatedly called for a flexible approach in the transition from interim to the comprehensive agreements .
In this context I can only confirm that the Council shares the same view and emphasises the need for a flexible approach .
When several difficult questions remained unresolved in the negotiations we called on the Commission in May last year to exploit all of the flexibility and asymmetry compatible with WTO rules to take account of the varying needs and different levels of development of the ACP countries and regions .
In addition to these we also took other steps .
The Council declared that ACP countries and regions , if they so wished , could depart where necessary from the provisions agreed by other countries or regions during EPA negotiations .
There is a clear need to maintain cohesion between the individual EPAs , especially in the African countries .
However , each region has its own specific characteristics which must be taken into account .
The EPA signed with the Cariforum States provides an example but definitely not a template .
I hope that my comments on these specific points have helped to clarify them and have provided assurance concerning some of the questions raised here in Parliament .
I firmly believe that the Commissioner , who has negotiated these matters directly with political representatives of the Cariforum States and other ACP regions together with her colleagues , will want to address a number of other points in greater detail .
At this moment , in March 2009 , when we are experiencing the worst economic earth-tremors for a generation , I would like to emphasise how important it is for us all to appreciate successful results in the area of politics .
At a time of declining trade and with increasingly protectionist measures being adopted in this area , at a time of threat that the progress achieved in fulfilling Millennium Development Goals will be lost in some regions , the approval of the European Parliament for the EPA with the Cariforum States and the interim EPA with the Côte d 'Ivoire will provide a positive signal in support of regional integration and in support of trade that will assist development .
We must respond to the current crisis by establishing further partnerships and not by restricting them .
The European Parliament 's confirmation of the EPA with the Cariforum States will also bring hope and encouragement to other regions whose negotiations are at an advanced stage and who also need the sense of trust and strong partnership which these agreements can provide .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , it is a great pleasure to be addressing the plenary of Parliament on an issue , as David Martin described it , of fundamental importance to the European Union 's relationship with the African , Caribbean and Pacific ( ACP ) nations .
Before I say anything else , I would like to make one thing completely clear : I have absolutely no interest whatsoever in negotiating agreements with ACP countries that could make these countries poorer .
I know that is an obvious statement , but my experience suggests that it is one that I should firmly place on the record and I cannot assume has already been widely understood .
When honourable Members come to vote later on , I hope it will be on the basis of the discussion that we have had today and the arguments that have been set out here , rather than on any preconceived ideas you may have .
I believe that today 's plenary session is an important step forward on economic partnership agreements ( EPAs ) .
You will be asked for your assent on the full EPA in the Caribbean and the interim EPA with Côte d 'Ivoire .
You have tabled no less than eight sets of draft resolutions and oral questions reflecting , in my view , the strength of parliamentary involvement and opinion on EPAs .
I want to pay tribute , and place on record that tribute , to the huge effort that the Committee on International Trade and the Committee on Development have put into the debate on this issue .
Over the months , I have listened carefully to the views expressed , and my aim is to set out the case for EPAs and to dispel the myths around them so that every Member is able to cast an informed vote when the time comes .
I believe that what we have before us are good agreements that support economic development and integration in the ACP and provide stability in these economically turbulent times .
They are partnership agreements founded on the shared goal of development that make trade the servant of this objective and not the reverse .
Most of all , they are agreements that provide the opportunity for ACP States to lift their citizens out of poverty through the dignity of their own labour and the genius of their own ideas .
There is a perception that in EPAs the European Union is breaking with the past and unilaterally trying to redefine the EU-ACP partnership .
It is true , of course , that EPAs are different from the Lomé and Cotonou Conventions that embodied the Union 's relations with the ACP for 30 years , but the unilateral preferences that characterise those conventions became open to challenge in the World Trade Organisation by other developing countries .
The dilemma that we faced was how to safeguard the development requirements of the ACP while respecting international rules and , I would add , moral obligations .
The answer was twofold : ' Everything But Arms ' for the least-developed countries , and economic partnership agreements for the developing countries in the ACP .
The common theme that stretches all the way back to the first Lomé Convention was trade .
Trade has always been the defining factor of EU-ACP relations , and what was once confined to unilateral trade preferences for commodities and raw materials in the early days of Lomé has now been replaced by more diversified trade in manufactured goods , services and ideas in the 21st century .
EPAs offer the ACP the best ever access to EU markets and continue our commitment to provide opportunities for economic development .
Regional integration within and between ACP markets has also been a key objective of this process and a subject that has attracted - not surprisingly - a lot of attention in oral questions .
Our global economy means that size has become more important , a lesson that we have learnt in the European Union .
By simplifying trade rules and replacing the complex maze of bilateral agreements with a small number of region-to-region trade relationships , the ACP can create bigger regional markets that are more attractive to the investment which developing markets need in order to create jobs and growth .
The agreements are of course a two-stage process : interim agreements to ensure we do not face the WTO challenge and to create some breathing space for the second stage , the negotiation of full EPAs .
The run-up to the December 2007 deadline for interim EPAs has given rise to an impression of steam-rollering ACP concerns , but I want to reassure Parliament that these interim agreements are only a temporary solution to safeguard and improve ACP access to European Union markets .
I inherited this file at an advanced stage of negotiation .
Since then , I have met a large number of ACP ministers and representatives and other stakeholders in the EPA process .
I have heard them and I have listened to them .
One thing is clear : all put ACP development at the centre of EPAs .
EPAs are , if you like , where trade meets development .
And that means development must be the foundation of our trading relationship based on frank and open dialogue .
I firmly believe these partnerships will only succeed if they are anchored in an enduring partnership based on trust and mutual respect .
The key test of this partnership is whether we and our ACP partners have a shared vision of the future .
In southern Africa , I see a region that took conflict about EPAs and turned it into dialogue , and where we have now settled major issues of concern like export taxes , infant industry protection and food security .
In the Caribbean , I see a region that has set down clearly its own ambitions for an innovation-based economy .
In West Africa , I see an emerging regional market access position many thought impossible , and in East Africa I see an emerging customs union that did not exist when negotiations started and is now building an EPA around their own integration plans .
This looks and feels to me like the beginnings of successful partnership .
Going forward , my vision for the negotiations of full EPAs is one where each negotiation reflects and respects the regional specificity of the parties to that agreement - a flexible process .
This means both looking at content - because the EPA has to work for its signatories - but also the pace of negotiations .
It also means that EPAs should be dynamic and not static , able to react to future events and to account for different regional interests and needs .
In this process , the Commission will , indeed , continue to inform and involve the European Parliament in a transparent way .
While we should be ambitious , there must also be no imposed dialogue , which is why issues like government procurement have already been removed from some negotiations , and Singapore issues only included when they are welcomed and wanted by the countries concerned .
We will also take the time and provide the support to build up regional and national regulation as a prerequisite for further negotiation , and ' aid for trade ' and technical assistance will be absolutely key in that regard .
I can guarantee there will be no opening of public services , no pressure for privatisation .
The explicit right of the ACP to regulate their own markets will be recognised and there will be no limitation of access to essential medicines or collecting seed .
In fact , we would rather seek to strengthen than limit ACP rights and capacity in these areas .
All of this is overlaid by our commitment that ACP regions can draw on provisions agreed in other EPAs , so that each region can move ahead secure in the knowledge it will not be disadvantaged .
So , Côte d 'Ivoire can directly ask for and have anything of relevance to it that is part of the SADC negotiations and discussions or those for anywhere else .
This is a key aspect of the flexibility that you asked me to provide and of allowing EPAs to replace an all-ACP trade regime with one that matches regional solutions to regional needs without undermining ACP solidarity .
The case for dynamic rather than static EPAs has been highlighted by the current crisis .
We began EPA negotiations during a period of unprecedented expansion of investment , goods and services trade and soaring commodity prices .
Few predicted that in a few years the global economy would fall into recession , with dramatic price falls , exchange-rate and market volatility and a credit drought that would strangle the trade finance that exporters and importers need .
We do not need a fixed deal that is redundant by the time the ink is dry on the paper .
We need an agreement that establishes a relationship where institutions and monitoring can help identify and solve the problems as they emerge .
The specific problem that Erika Mann asked me about on bananas is included in the interim EPA - a guarantee of duty-free , quota-free access in that case .
As these problems emerge , we need to include safeguards and clauses that allow ACP countries to tackle any import surges , food-price pressures and fiscal crises : rendezvous clauses for specific issues , regular review clauses and , as in the Caribbean EPA , a role for parliamentary oversight and monitoring .
To return to where I began , Parliament has an historic opportunity today to give its assent to the first examples of a new generation of agreements that safeguard our special relationship with the ACP ; agreements based on genuine partnership , not paternalism ; that harness trade as the motor of development ; that promote and encourage the regional integration that will help ACP countries flourish in a globalised world ; that are flexible in terms of content , respectful of tradition , and are the latest manifestation of this long-standing trade relationship built on a respect for sovereign states .
In short , they are the future and I hope , on that basis , Members will give their assent .
author . - Mr President , my apologies for being late , and thanks to the staff for moving me back up the agenda .
Commissioner Ashton , you have basically said most of the things I was going to say , so I am going to just reiterate one or two for this House .
Interim Agreements are goods agreements aimed at preventing disruption of ACP trade and promoting gradual integration .
It gives the ACP the opportunity to trade its way out of poverty and I think recognising these agreements include a number of contentious issues : services , most-favoured-nation ( MFN ) rules of origin , which have been brought to my attention on many occasions .
These you will need to redress , I do apologise if I missed you saying that earlier on .
The assent procedure for Cariforum States and Côte d 'Ivoire is crucial to realising the potential of these reforms .
Approval of these signed agreements will allow for a formal negotiation procedure to progress .
This will provide a level of legality essential for protecting ACP markets and securing a more stable environment .
With regard to the resolutions on Cariforum - the only full Economic Partnership Agreement ( EPA ) - I call upon Members to support the original text of the Committee on International Trade .
It provides for a more balanced trade and development approach and is intended to support a number of the compromises proposed by the rapporteur .
I believe these resolutions highlight both the opportunities and challenges facing the negotiating parties in a key step to ensuring parliamentary oversight and approving of the relations with ACP .
Commissioner , you mentioned at the very beginning that trade was so important ; I totally agree with you .
We also said we are in a particularly difficult financial situation .
This is something which I believe you have taken to heart and that you are working extremely hard on .
I congratulate you on the way you have handled these - more power to your elbow , as we say in the UK .
We are at a difficult stage and trade will be the only option and not just for these countries but for the rest of the world .
It is so important .
Thank you for the way you have changed ; you took over halfway through at a difficult time .
Congratulations , and all power to your elbow again .
draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on Development . - ( DE ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I would also like to thank you , Commissioner Ashton , for your words , which we certainly should remember for a long time .
A few weeks ago , I attended the most recent regional ACP summit in Guyana .
The predominant opinion amongst my colleagues from the Caribbean States was that the time has come to look to the future , to stop crying over spilt milk and to single-mindedly implement the Economic Partnership Agreements .
In order to ensure successful implementation of these agreements , it is vital for the parliaments to control the process by means of their parliamentary scrutiny .
It is only if the parliaments are able to verify whether the new system of regulations can achieve what it was designed to do , that the Economic Partnership Agreements can operate as a driving force for development .
It is only when the parliaments take on this supervisory function that we can ensure that financial aid reaches the areas where it is needed .
This applies to the national parliaments of the Caribbean as much as it does to the European Parliament .
In all of the resolutions before us concerning the Economic Partnership Agreements , there are paragraphs which address the issue of parliamentary control .
However , these references are not consistent .
The text contained in the SADC-EPA Resolution presents a good compromise .
It ensures that the European Parliament 's Committee on International Trade and the Committee on Development , as well as the ACP-EU Joint Parliamentary Committee are involved in the process .
As I view this compromise as a success , I have , together with my colleague Mr Sturdy , tabled a number of amendments , which aim to standardise these paragraphs in all of the EPA Resolutions .
I would very much like your support for this initiative .
rapporteur for the opinion of the Committee on Development . - Mr President , as rapporteur for the opinion of the Committee on Development on the Interim EPA with Côte d 'Ivoire , I would like to thank our colleague Erika Mann for having taking into consideration some of the concerns raised in that committee , such as the urgent need for a democratically-elected government in Côte d 'Ivoire and the necessity for that country to receive an appropriate share of EU trade-related assistance .
More generally , I am pleased that both the Committee on International Trade and the Committee on Development came to a compromise on the scrutiny body that would enable the Joint Parliamentary Assembly ( JPA ) to play the role it deserves to play in the first place .
It is important that we bear in mind that this EPA is a stepping-stone agreement , which means that it is only a temporary solution .
In order for trade liberation to have a substantial positive effect on the whole region , it is essential that ECOWAS sign a full EPA .
Within this context , the Committee on Development proposes that Parliament give its assent , subject to ratification by the Côte d 'Ivoire of the stepping-stone EPA .
on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( FR ) Mr President , President-in-Office of the Council , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I had some notes prepared but I will put them aside and speak to you without notes , if you will excuse me , as many things have been said already and I do not want to repeat the words of my fellow Members .
We are on the eve of an important vote , an extremely important , almost historic vote because we are going to vote this week on the first Economic Partnership Agreements in this Parliament .
We have been talking about it for a number of years and these discussions have been the subject of many often very heated debates where agreement has not always been the order of the day , nor has consensus .
We can , of course , feel pleased today about the way the situation has developed .
The accounts you have given , as well as those given by the Presidency , show that there has been very positive development on this issue , especially since your arrival , Commissioner , it has to be said .
Unfortunately , and this is why I have some misgivings , for some of us there are issues , questions and fears that still remain in relation to these Economic Partnership Agreements .
First of all , we have to recognise that there is only one full Economic Partnership Agreement today .
The others are not there yet , we are at the stage of interim agreements while the fundamental approach has been regional integration .
There is only one that meets this criterion , and even then , one of the principal countries in this region of the Caribbean , Haiti , has not signed the agreement , which surely says a great deal .
Secondly , on the trade front , as you have pointed out , we have historic ties .
For a long time there has been trade between North and South , but look at how it takes place .
We plunder everything there is and take all the riches .
Of course , we sell the coltan that our companies have extracted from Kivu to sell in the North , but look at the disastrous consequences for the people of the South , and the unequal sharing , to say the least , that we see there .
Aside from that , you add a development policy that we have been employing for 40 years saying that we Europeans are the world 's biggest sponsor , but it is a policy that is failing now and has to be reviewed .
Most of the poorest countries in the world are doing badly , just as badly as 40 years ago , if not worse .
That , therefore , is the reason for our misgivings and our questioning .
What guarantees do we have with regard to this ?
I am not going to repeat what Mr Arif has said but I join him in saying that we would like to have a statement from you , on behalf of the Commission , on a list of points that he has clearly set out , and I should like to finish by speaking about national parliaments .
We have been asked , as Members of the European Parliament , to make a decision about the Economic Partnership Agreements , the consequences of which , if they are badly negotiated , will be tragic for the people of the South , but not for us .
No European citizen will be worse off if the Economic Partnership Agreements are a failure .
On the other hand , there could be citizens in the South who are going to be even worse off .
I shall finish by saying to you quite simply , Commissioner , that we would like the national parliaments of the partner countries to have their say , since they represent the people of the South in this matter , and not only us .
Mr President , as others have said , this debate is undoubtedly important ; indeed it has just been called historic , among other things because of the number of hours devoted to this work and because of the political debate that has led up to it .
I think it is a good thing that , amidst the commotion that has preceded this debate and to some extent surrounds it now .
I say commotion with all due respect for the contributions from civil society , NGOs and the national parliaments that are also involved .
In the midst of all this , it is important to understand why and how we have got to where we are today .
We need to understand that negotiating these association agreements with the ACP States is not a political decision taken at will by the European Union , as if it had various options on the table and chose this one rather than others .
It is essentially a legal requirement based on the rules of legality laid down by the World Trade Organisation .
It is a necessity born out of the circumstances surrounding our previous legal framework on trade with the countries of the ACP zone .
It should also be remembered , right here and now , that those who condemned the European Union 's relations with the ACP States were precisely those other developing countries that had perfectly legitimate claims for access to our markets but had been left out , for the simple reason that they were not former colonies of current EU Member States .
Thus the European Union had , and still has to some extent , two yardsticks : one for its former colonies and another for other countries with a similar level of development that do not come under this system .
That is what became unsustainable and what those same countries made it their mission to emphasise within the World Trade Organisation .
Apart from anything else , we must consider that the system we are going to replace , first the Lomé Convention and then the arrangement based on the Cotonou Agreements , in no way achieved the desired results .
No one can claim that the Cotonou system was entirely satisfactory .
If it had been , the figures - the volume of EU trade with those countries - would be far higher than they are today .
Therefore we should not claim , either , that we are going to replace something that has yielded results , because that is not the case .
For all these reasons , these Economic Partnership Agreements should be seen as a great opportunity , particularly for all those of us who believe that the development and growth of these countries cannot depend solely on external aid .
Clearly , I refer especially to those countries that are party to these agreements but are not among the least-developed countries .
In this regard the concept of ownership , of taking control of one 's own destiny and not depending exclusively on external aid , lies politically - and I may say philosophically - behind these partnership agreements .
In principle , my group therefore fully supports the negotiation of these agreements by the European Commission and the fact that they should be comprehensive and complete , covering not only goods but also services and the rules of competition ; that they should be agreed as a whole .
Another thing to consider is , of course , how these negotiations and the specific topics that are on the table have been handled .
On this subject I would refer to what each of the rapporteurs said concerning the different areas , because we are talking about the overall approach , whereas , in fact , each negotiation is being dealt with separately .
There are some points outstanding and there are concerns - for instance , to mention just one example , the situation of the outermost regions , which merit specific attention in the case of the Cariforum - but , as a whole - I mean politically - we fully support both this negotiation and the need for it to continue and for Parliament to monitor this negotiation effectively .
One of the several amendments we have tabled states that parliamentary monitoring of this issue should be carried out uniformly and not in different ways depending on the country in question .
on behalf of the UEN Group . - Mr President , I welcome this debate , which offers the opportunity to once again draw attention to the necessity of including and honouring child-labour provisions in all EU trade agreements .
By this I do not mean merely paying lip-service to the combat against child labour , or putting in place cursory or superficial monitoring systems .
All EU countries and an encouragingly ever-increasing number of other states have signed up to the ILO conventions on the minimum age for employment and on the elimination of the worst forms of child labour .
Let us now , in our trade agreements , in our GSP agreements and in our public procurement policies , live up to those commitments .
This means ensuring that companies operating in the EU are child-labour-free .
Child-labour-free does not only mean that there is no child labour being used in the parent company or even by its immediate suppliers : a company at the top of the supply chain must have the responsibility to ensure that all steps of , and conduits to , the supply chain are child-labour-free .
Today , over 200 million of the world 's children may be working illegally , denying them an education and childhood and putting their physical and mental health at risk .
Putting child-labour concerns at the core of all our trade agreements has to given priority .
( The President cut off the speaker . )
on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - ( DA ) Mr President , this debate is important because we are , of course , about to take a long break in our work on account of the elections .
We therefore need to ensure that the Directorate General for Trade takes note of our sustained criticism of the content of the Economic Partnership Agreements , particularly as the Directorate will soon sign these agreements .
In this regard , we need to emphasise the importance of the agreements returning to Parliament to obtain our approval .
On behalf of the Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance , I want to make it clear that what we are most dubious about is the way in which these agreements have been entered into .
No account has been taken of the issue of development when negotiations have been carried out with the ACP countries .
I therefore have a couple of specific comments relating to the two agreements that Parliament is to commit to on Wednesday , and I will explain why the Group of the Greens does not support them .
As regards the agreement with Cariforum , detailed analyses by the Overseas Development Institute show that the Economic Partnership Agreement with the Caribbean countries is probably the least development-friendly of all of the agreements that have been negotiated so far .
It will be a poor model for when other regional agreements are to be negotiated , especially when it comes to the aspect of development .
Of course , it is not up to us to decide whether our concern is justified when the governments of the Cariforum states are themselves in favour of these agreements , but it would be perfectly in order for the parliaments of the individual countries affected to be permitted to vote on the agreements before the European Parliament has given its approval .
However , our concerns regarding the agreement with Cariforum , which we are raising here in the EU , are justified in any case .
At the current time , when there is a great need for better control of the movement of money on the financial markets , we find it totally unacceptable that the Cariforum agreements allow full liberalisation of financial services with the eight tax havens that currently form part of Cariforum .
If you do not believe me , take a look at your documents before you vote on Wednesday .
In these documents you can read about the free movement of financial services sold over the counter , in other words what are referred to as ' unregistered speculative derivatives ' .
You can also read about the right to establish funds for individual inhabitants .
This all comes into the EU via our own tax havens , for example Malta and Cyprus .
This can happen as long as there is no monitoring or regulation across the EU , and therefore it is simply not the right time to protect these structures , which share a large part of the responsibility for the collapse of our economies .
With regard to the agreement with Côte d 'Ivoire , there is , of course , internal conflict going on there , and therefore it might not be the right time to enter into this agreement .
Mr President , we all know that there have been many criticisms of Economic Partnership Agreements ( EPAs ) .
I share some of those criticisms .
I agree that EPAs should not be a method for aggressively opening up markets for EU companies only : they should also be of benefit to entrepreneurs and consumers in poor countries .
I share Erika Mann 's concern over the ' one size fits all ' approach to EPAs , which does not take account of the differences between regions and between countries within regions .
I welcome the fact that we have actually signed interim agreements only with those countries that have shown an interest in signing such agreements .
I was also concerned at the view expressed by a Commission official , at a meeting of the Committee on International Trade ( INTA ) a few months ago , that EPAs were more than just about trade and development and that they were about regional political integration as well .
I believe , like many of my colleagues in this Parliament , that this decision should be left to the countries themselves , especially those which are democracies that do not want to sit in a regional assembly with dictatorships from the same region .
Despite these concerns , we should welcome the assent of the INTA Committee for these EPAs .
For a while I was concerned about some of the anti-trade rhetoric I heard from the Socialists , when they voted against or abstained in committee .
EPAs may not be perfect but many of my friends and family in poorer countries are fed up at the lack of access to goods and services and at being forced to rely on state-run monopolies or companies with links to corrupt politicians .
That the Socialists wanted to keep it that way is also a matter of concern .
Let us not forget that import taxes often mean poor citizens having to pay more for imported food and medicines .
I wish to thank the Commissioner for her determination in continuing the negotiations for the Economic Partnership Agreements .
They are not perfect , but we owe it to entrepreneurs and consumers in poorer countries to help them enjoy the access to goods and services that we in the EU currently enjoy .
Mr President , I can confirm , as others have done , that what we have seen since Cathy Ashton became Commissioner has been a sea change not only in style and tone , but also in vocabulary and now increasingly in substance .
I am sure the Commissioner will agree with me and many of us in this room that we still face a formidable task as we try now to build and rebuild trust after years of negotiation which have created enormous amounts of tension and acrimony .
In the almost exactly 10 years since Cotonou was signed , we have to remind ourselves what actually was said in the agreements about the trade prospects between ACP and EU .
The wording was ' a new framework for trade which is equivalent to their existing situation and in conformity with WTO rules ' .
We have to really work much more towards fulfilling those objectives .
The policy of concluding separate deals with separate countries has led to serious inconsistencies , and I can confirm to those who do not know the Joint Parliamentary Assembly ( JPA ) , and who do not have as much contact with parliamentarians in the ACP as I and others in this room have , that it has created really very difficult situations and severely damaged the cohesion that I perceived amongst the ACP in the past .
I know that just a few weeks ago the new President of Ghana wrote a letter on behalf of the entire ACP group to the EU Presidency , and he claimed that the EPA process continued to threaten the very existence of some of the regional integration groupings .
That is a recent comment by a new president .
ACP parliamentarians tell us at every single one of our meetings that there has barely been any engagement with them and little , if any , consultation with them .
I would like the Commissioner to tell us what she might think is appropriate in the future on this .
I am pleased to see what has happened in the SADC negotiations , but clear commitments on the modification of texts , transition periods for tariff regularisation , safeguards , rules of origin etc. are now up for grabs there with SADC , and hopefully you will confirm that they are options for all the ACP countries who will be continuing to negotiate .
Will you tell us please , Commissioner , that you will insist on precise commitments in an EPA to development programmes and that trade liberalisation has to be linked to development benchmarks ?
If that is the case , how will you do it ?
Will you see to it that there are legally binding commitments in EPAs to the provision of time-scaled and predictable funding ?
Commissioner , I think the ACP countries , as you said to us earlier , face a period of slower growth and , for the first time in 25 years , efforts to reduce poverty are being brought to a close .
I have just two final quick points , one on the CARIFORUM EPA : it is not a perfect outcome but it still needs safeguards .
On Côte d 'Ivoire , we need to have the reassurances that Erika Mann asked for and which Mr Van Hecke asked for .
That is very important for us .
( The President cut off the speaker . )
Mr President , if we take a step back to the start of the EPAs process , the Cotonou Agreement of 2000 established that the EU has a legal obligation to take developing countries ' interests into account in all policy areas that are likely to affect them .
In 2005 , the Commission identified this policy coherence on development as being key to the attainment of the Millennium Development Goals .
I regret the spat that has taken place between the Committee on International Trade and the Committee on Development over which has the lead role on EPAs , because Parliament itself could have reacted more coherently at certain points when the EPA negotiations were in practice , losing sight of the promise that these were development instruments .
Finally , I was glad the Commissioner mentioned services , because I am concerned about the opening-up of banking in particular .
Western countries failed to regulate properly the big international banks operating on their own territories , so you have to ask whether it is really wise to open up the banking sector in countries where there is much less of a regulatory regime in place , and when the WTO rules do not require such a move .
Opening up the banking sector may help big companies , but it can drive local banks to join the pursuit of high-value customers and ignore small businesses , leaving them with even less access to credit than before .

( FR ) Mr President , Commissioner , Mr Kohout , President-in-Office of the Council , ladies and gentlemen , first of all I must congratulate my fellow Member , Mr Ford , for the quality of his report and his sense of compromise .
We were able to work on this issue in Papua New Guinea during the Joint Parliamentary Assembly of the African , Caribbean and Pacific States , and of the European Union .
I saw him working with members of national parliaments and I am , therefore , happy about that .
I want to join , Commissioner , in the congratulations that have been addressed to you on these Economic Partnership Agreements which have been negotiated with the aim of avoiding any disruption in trade between the ACP States and the European Community .
These negotiations resulted in the Interim Partnership Agreement with the Republic of Fiji and Papua New Guinea , the only States in the Pacific regional grouping that have agreed to the provisional agreement , and we recognise the work needed to conclude full regional agreements .
This agreement includes all the measures necessary to establish a free trade area .
The resolution emphasises that the Economic Partnership Agreement must contribute to strengthening economic growth , regional integration , economic diversification and the alleviation of poverty .
It is important to remember that a genuine regional market represents an essential basis for successfully implementing the Interim Economic Partnership Agreement and that regional integration and cooperation are essential for the social and economic development of the Pacific States .
This agreement is an opportunity to give new impetus to trade relations and guarantees access to the European market with exemption from customs duties and without quotas for most goods .
I should like to insist on the aid of EUR 2 billion to be provided by 2010 , and in conclusion , I should like to add that it is very important that there should be no infringement , on the economic level also , of patent rights or of intellectual property rights which affect trade .
With regard to human rights , I am amazed that we have dealings with Papua New Guinea when this country still penalises sexual orientations .
Finally , on the political front , it is important for us to have an alliance with the ACP States within the framework of the World Trade Organisation .
( EL ) Mr President , the successful completion of negotiations on the conclusion of Economic Partnership Agreements between the European Union and APC countries is the ultimate challenge for European trade and development policy .
What we need are agreements which are compatible with the European Union 's international obligations , given that the unilateral preferential treatment which the European Union has granted APC countries compared with other developing countries has , as you know , been found to be incompatible with WTO rules .
However , over and above the legal question , the challenge consists primarily in achieving agreements which will promote the development of the countries in question through the strengthening of their trading capacity , the diversification of their economic base and regional integration .
The new trading regime which will govern relations between the European Union and APC countries should ensure that all these countries are integrated into the international trading system , into the global economy , an economy which is going through an unprecedented crisis , a crisis which is affecting both developed and developing countries and emerging economies .
We all agree that the opening of APC countries towards the European Union must be asymmetrical and gradual , with adequate flexibility in terms of quotas in sensitive sectors and effective safeguarding clauses .
As you know , the objective of the negotiations was to cover sectors such as services , investments , intellectual property rights and reinforced work on commercial matters , as well as access to the goods market .
We therefore support the extension of the scope of the agreements to the extent deemed beneficial to the APC countries themselves .
It is absolutely vital to include development provisions in Economic Partnership Agreements and to provide adequate aid for trade .
Mr President , I just want to touch on two issues as far as assent is concerned .
I mentioned CARIFORUM .
Everyone is feeling very comfortable and optimistic about the CARIFORUM Agreement , but of course there is still a need for certain safeguards .
Certainly , at the recent meeting in Guyana , that was made absolutely clear by the President and others in that country , as well as Members of Parliament .
The issue of bananas was raised .
Baroness Ashton , you said there will be duty-free and quota-free access , which is fine , but the issue is that the agreements that have been signed with Central America , and subsequently with Mercosur and the Andean Pact countries , will reduce the tariffs for them , and nothing we do is going to make it possible for banana producers in the ACP to remain competitive .
That is a critical issue , and the agreements have been reached before the ink has even dried on the CARIFORUM Agreement .
There are also deep concerns in the Caribbean about the implementation units , which have still not been set up .
There are still problems caused by the tensions that have been created between the various countries in the Caribbean .
There is also the issue of Haiti .
The Donors ' Conference did not produce as satisfactory an outcome as we would have liked , and there are some concerns about whether the EPA can be fully agreed or worked upon as long as Haiti is not involved .
As regards Côte d 'Ivoire , we would like very clear assurances .
It is a country which has experienced a great deal of turmoil , uncertainty and instability over many years , and it is very important that we give assent , but also that we have assurances that you will indicate , in the form of a letter to the negotiators in Côte d 'Ivoire and to the Côte d 'Ivoire Government , that we remain committed to negotiating in good faith for a decent outcome for the people of that country .

( FR ) Mr President , Mr Kohout , Mrs Ashton , I have listened to what you have said .
Mr Kohout , you spoke about economic sustainability .
The question I am asking myself today is what that means , apart from words .
Indeed , what does that mean at a time of economic , financial and environmental crisis ?
What guarantees can we give ?
Despite the reassuring words of the Commissioner , I am asking whether , since these agreements were discussed in another world , is the project we are proposing to our African , Caribbean and Pacific partners actually still appropriate in the current situation ?
Personally , I do not think so .
We meet with NGOs , we meet with SMEs .
We were in Guyana recently where the president said to us : you are asking us to diversify , but tell us what goods can our small country produce that can compete with Brazil or Venezuela ?
Today , therefore , I think that we must not close our eyes .
You speak on the one hand about flexibility and on the other about WTO rules .
I am sorry but the two terms are absolutely contradictory , because they would require restructuring and we know very well that restructuring causes greater poverty in these countries .
I do not think , therefore , that what we are proposing today and what we proposed in the past are at all appropriate .
Have we looked at the results of the development model that we have set up over the last 40 years ?
It is a failure and I think that has been said already .
This failure then , I think , will now continue ; the situation will get worse with these partnership agreements because they are absolutely not appropriate to the global economic , social and environmental situation .
( DE ) Commissioner , following the comments made by both the previous speakers , I would like to ask a question .
Do you agree that there are countries in the world which have , over the last twenty years , managed to significantly improve their level of prosperity without an EPA , and that perhaps the EPA could also represent an opportunity for these countries ?
Thank you Mr President and thank you first and foremost members of the European Parliament for the constructive and interesting discussion .
Allow me to respond to two of the points that have been raised .
The first concerns flexibility .
I have seen from the speeches made by some MEPs that there is a desire to ensure the necessary flexibility when negotiating Economic Partnership Agreements .
I would like to stress that the Council is very aware of flexibility at two important levels .
The first of these is flexibility in the sense of fully exploiting the options for asymmetric arrangements , timetables and protective measures within World Trade Organisation rules .
I therefore cannot agree either with the opinion or with the sweeping conclusion that 40 years of assistance to developing countries has been a catastrophe .
I believe that the situation would have been much worse without aid from the EU and other countries .
At the same time I think that the rules we have allow such a degree of flexibility that every one of these countries - and in this I have faith in the Commission and the Commissioner - should be capable of finding a solution which matches their needs and interests .
The second kind of flexibility is the one that we are offering in the transition from the interim provisions of EPAs to full regional agreements in the interests of supporting regional cooperation .
The second point I would like to respond to from the debate concerns the question of the development dimension of EPAs .
There is no doubt in my mind that the agreements are not conventional trade agreements as they have an intrinsically strong development dimension .
The agreements establish lengthy interim arrangements of up to 25 years and they also include exemptions - up to 20 % of goods coming from ACP countries can be exempted from liberalisation .
The agreements make provision for monitoring and reviews that will involve Parliament .
Their implementation will be supported by the Aid for Trade financial package .
I consider all of this to be proof of the developmental nature of these agreements .
At the same time I would like to say on behalf of the Czech Presidency and the Council that we will be closely monitoring the progress of negotiations over EPAs and I would like to express my support for the Commission and also Commissioner Ashton for the efforts she has made to date to fulfil the mandate that the Council gave her .
During the course of the Czech Presidency we will be focusing on EPAs at the May meeting of the Council for General Affairs and External Relations within the format of ministers for development cooperation .
If agreement is reached between us and our partner-ministers from the ACP countries then this issue will also be on the discussion agenda for the joint meeting of the ACP and EU Council of Ministers in May .
During the Czech Presidency , the Council also welcomes the ACP-EU Joint Parliamentary Assembly in Prague at the beginning of April , just a few days from now .
I am certain that EPAs will form one of the main topics of discussion and that the discussions will prove highly important precisely because they are taking place in a parliamentary context .
I look forward with personal interest to your vote tomorrow .
In my view this is a key moment in the development of EPAs .
As we have heard , negotiations are still continuing in many regions , but in the Caribbean region important and good results have already been achieved .
As far as Côte d 'Ivoire is concerned , we have reached a key point in respect of further progress .
Many countries await the approval of the European Parliament and with it the culmination of several years of difficult negotiations and I firmly believe that Parliament will give a positive signal to the world which is much needed at this point in time .
I believe and I am sure , even in the current crisis that has been referred to several times here , that this is an instrument that will really help , even during this great uncertainty that we all feel .
We all know that it will help the development of these countries .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , allow me just to refer to some of the comments that have been made .
Mr Guardans Cambó , Mr Hutchinson and Ms Hall , you all in different ways talked about the past and our need to do better .
I agree with that .
I may not completely agree with the analysis , but I do agree that this is an opportunity to look forward , and part of that is about looking forward to the involvement not only of this Parliament but also of parliaments across the ACP .
Of course , it is up to individual nations how they involve their own parliaments .
We have to be very careful - and I know honourable Members would want me to be - in not imposing what I think upon any other country .
Let me say to Mrs Kinnock , that I look forward to the meeting with the Joint Parliamentary Assembly ( JPA ) .
Mr Martin in particular , but others too , talked about the need to have our reviews and , again , I agree , particularly in this economic climate , it is absolutely essential that we monitor and review .
I will be very interested to continue the dialogue with honourable Members about how we engage Parliament in that , but also your ideas on how we can make this monitoring and review really effective and make those countries that are working with us feel very positive in that direction .
Mr Sturdy and Mr Martin , ' most favoured nation ' is , as has been said , designed to capture in a sense those large countries that have not supported the process we have been involved in .
It is not about damaging South-South trade or damaging in any way , shape or form the opportunities and the sovereignty of those countries that wish to open up trade .
That is why we have a ceiling on the amount of world trade that a country must be involved in before this particular provision kicks in .
I have to say we are always looking for any flexibility we might have within that too .
Concerning customs revenue : Mr Arif and Mme Jouye de Grandmaison , until 2013 the EDF covers this and we are interested in making sure that economic growth and fiscal change can also support nations so that they are not reliant upon this revenue solely , but actually find new ways of supporting their economies .
Whatever happens on bananas , the preferences will continue to be better for those countries than anywhere else .
But we are very mindful of preference erosion and , as we explore agreements which we have waited for many years to try and sort out , we need to take that on board , and I intend to that .
Mr Van Hecke , Ms Mann and Mrs Kinnock : what one gets , the other gets .
Let me be absolutely clear : I am happy to write to anybody anywhere , but certainly to Côte d 'Ivoire to say that the flexibilities that we have been in discussion with the Southern African Development Community ( SADC ) will apply to them because there are one or two things only specific to that region that they would not want , but those that they wish to have they can have .
I am very happy to put that in writing anywhere , any time to anyone .
So please just tell me what you want me to do .
Mr Ford and Mr Fjellner talked about the importance of trade generally and I agree completely with that analysis .
I think Mr Fjellner said that more trade rather than less trade is what we need in this economic climate , and I completely agree with that .
Mr Caspary , freedom to take on their own future to take into their own hands - I agree completely .
And those countries that have developed economically without EPAs - well , India and China would be two examples , I suppose .
Mr Kamall , too , echoed this theme that I think is very important , that we allow nations to develop and grow and allow them to do so by developing their economies and supporting them through development and trade linked together .
Mrs Kinnock , the development link is very important , but the binding aid commitment is in the Cotonou Agreement - it is already there .
What this is about , for us , is using EPAs to enable the preferences , the priorities on development to be established on a joint basis , which is extremely important .
Finally , I want to just do something I do not often get a chance to do , which is to pay tribute to the team who are working with me .
Our chief negotiator sits behind me .
He has been doing all the work with SADC .
My colleagues are here and I just wanted to make sure that you recognised that they are extraordinarily supportive and absolutely committed to the agenda I have spelled out .
For me , I hope that you will vote in the spirit in which I have put before you what I am trying to do .
I give you my full commitment to continue it , but I really hope I can get your support to take forward the agenda in the way that I have described .
That would be of enormous importance to me and I hope you are able to do so tonight .
rapporteur . - Mr President , firstly let me say that this has been a very good debate .
We have had very positive contributions from both the Council and the Commission .
I want particularly to pick up on what the Council said about the CARIFORUM being an example , but not a template , for other EPAs .
I absolutely agree with that .
It could be the basis for others , but each EPA has to have its own individuality , and we have to learn the lessons from the CARIFORUM negotiations as well .
Secondly , I was delighted that the Council was able to make a commitment on aid for trade , to the effect that the Member States intend to deliver on that aid .
I was pleased that both the Council and the Commission gave reassurances on access to medicines and that both the Council and the Commission reassured us that the five-year review will be a real review that looks at development objectives to make sure that they are being met .
I was delighted that the Commissioner said she believed that regulation had to be in place prior to any liberalisation and opening-up of financial services .
For some of us in this Chamber , that is also extremely important .
She indicated - as we already knew , but it was important to have it on record - that nothing in these agreements forces privatisation of services in any of the Caribbean countries and that there is no expectation , through this agreement , that privatisation of public services will take place .
I was pleased that she also made commitments on most-favoured-nation status .
Based on the fact that what the Commission has said and what the Council has said are now on the record in this House , I would , as rapporteur , be delighted to recommend to the House that it should give assent to the Caribbean EPA .
Let me turn to a separate issue , which is the resolution .
A couple of my Conservative EPP colleagues have made comments about this .
For the Socialists , there are still red lines in terms of the current state of the resolution , which is different from the assent vote .
Actually , all the things that the Council and Commission have committed themselves to are our red lines .
So if the House is supporting the Council and Commission , I see no reason why it should not support our compromises and compromise text and get those into the Parliament resolution .
I hope that , at the end of the day , we can vote both for assent and for a consensual resolution that both opens up trade and makes very strong development commitments .
rapporteur . - Mr President , I would like to thank the Commissioner and the Council .
What you have agreed on today is to give to Côte d 'Ivoire what Parliament has been requesting for quite a time and I think the country will be more than happy .
Commissioner , please could you make sure that you will send someone - or go yourself - to Côte d 'Ivoire as soon as possible to give this very positive message and confirm this by letter as early as possible ?
This is an agreement which really fulfils what we are asking for .
I would like to comment on a few things which you have not really dealt with in detail .
We would love to see monitoring .
I know that this is complicated and that we will need the Council 's help .
We would like to see monitoring between the European Parliament , the Council and the Commission taking place during the phase from interim to full agreement .
That is the only way we can understand what you are going to negotiate .
Otherwise , you will just send us a draft at the end of that period which we will have to agree or disagree with .
That is something we do not want to see .
We do not want to be part of the negotiating process but we would like to monitor what you are doing .
You do not have to do this today - although it would be helpful for us if you could give your agreement today - but I am happy , with my colleague , to negotiate the process with you .
We have done this before with different agreements and in different circumstances , but I am sure that - if the Council is willing - we will find something we can agree on .
My last point to the Commissioner - and to the Council as well - is to ask for an assurance that that they will do their best to secure the kind of achievements agreed during the Doha Development Round .
This was the case regarding bananas and on cotton for other countries .
There are other aspects involved which are important for developing countries .
I know you cannot say ' yes ' today , but please give us your assurance that you will try your best to secure those kinds of agreements .
My final thanks go to two colleagues , firstly to Glenys Kinnock , because she was more than helpful and I am more than pleased to hear that she recommends assent on the case of Côte d 'Ivoire .
I know how complicated it is and I am very grateful that she is helping me in this matter .
I would also like to thank my colleague Syed Kamall because he also helped as much as he could regarding the resolution .
I know that sometimes it is against his beliefs with regard to trade .
He is for open trade so it is not easy for him to come to an agreement .
That is why I am pleased to thank both colleagues and give my thanks again to the Commission and to the Council .
I have received nine draft motions for resolutions , tabled in accordance with Article 108 ( 5 ) of the Rules of Procedure .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place on Wednesday , 25 March 2009 .
Written Statements ( Rule 142 )
in writing . - The International Economic crisis should lead us to re-examine and to change EU policy concerning liberalisation and deregulation , not only in the EU , but in relation to developing countries .
But the Economic Partnership Agreements which are in front of the Parliament are instead proposing an intensification of this failed approach .
These agreements have been negotiated by the EU exerting strong pressure on governments of developing countries and without taking due consideration of the views of the people in those countries who would most suffer from their implementation .
Vague promises to be flexible in the implementation of the agreements are no substitute for concrete commitments .
Cosmetic products ( recast version ) ( debate )
The next item is Mrs Roth-Behrendt 's report , on behalf of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety , on the proposal for a regulation of the European Parliament and of the Council on cosmetic products ( recast ) - C6-0053 / 2008 - .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I will probably not need the four minutes that are allocated to me at the start of the debate , as it is really a very simple and very pleasant matter that we are discussing today .
We are discussing a new version of the Cosmetics Directive , which is now a regulation .
This Regulation will , in fact , be brought up to date , and we would very much like to update it , improve it and make it more coherent .
We have three minor improvements in mind .
On the one hand , the Regulation ensures that the use of carcinogenic substances in cosmetics has indeed been banned , but we have to keep a sense of proportion , so that substances which are permitted for use in foodstuffs are not banned for use in cosmetics , such as vitamin A or alcohol .
This is something that the Commission has correctly recognised and taken into account in its proposal .
The Commission also rightly recognised the fact that new technologies , such as nanotechnology , need special attention , in particular when we are dealing with microscopic particles which may be able to pass through layers of skin .
We simply want to ensure that they present no danger .
Here , too , I am satisfied that we have achieved a compromise which I can wholeheartedly support .
Finally , Mr President , there is something else we have to address , namely the product claims .
We also ought to examine them and bring them up to date .
If we got here today , having rushed to get here , and if our deodorant promised us this morning that we would be sweat-free for 14 hours , but we are nevertheless totally covered in sweat this evening , then we are likely to be very surprised and say that there is no truth to the claim at all .
Claims that deliver what they promise are an important part of an honest , credible product .
We have legislation to ensure safe products and , at the same time , to ensure genuine and clear products .
I am very grateful for the excellent cooperation with the Czech Presidency .
I would particularly like to thank Mrs Popadičová , who cannot be here today , but who really has done her best , something that has not always been easy in this Council .
I would also like to offer particular thanks to the Commission , whose cooperation was extremely constructive and successful .
That , too , is not always the case in this Chamber .
Moreover , I would like to thank my colleagues , namely my female colleagues who have been working on this issue for a long time .
I would like to thank Françoise Grossetête , Margret Auken , Hiltrud Breyer and also Fréderique Ries , who cannot be here today , for their cooperation .
We did not always agree on issues such as how to deal with notification in relation to nanotechnology and what should be done in terms of labelling , but we managed to reach an excellent compromise .
I am very pleased about this .
I would just like to say something about the issue of labelling .
I think that certain delegations , perhaps even my own delegation and my own Member State , need to take note of a few things .
Labelling has nothing to do with warning signs .
Labels allow consumers to make free and informed choices .
Consumers have a right to be informed about nanotechnologies and to know that a specific substance contains particularly small , even microscopic particles .
They have the right to decide whether they want to use sun lotion and whether they want to use the sun lotion on their children .
Consumers have the right to decide .
I myself would happily do it and would be happy to use the products myself .
Others would not .
However , it is important for us to make sure that all people are in a position to make these choices .
I know that you , Commissioner Verheugen , are going to make a statement today on the whole issue of preventing the counterfeiting of medicines .
I am very grateful and I hope that you will also address the matter of the threat posed by , or the opportunities related to , internet trade .
If you do this , then tomorrow when we vote on the version of the compromise which the Council already voted on last week will be a better day for some of my colleagues , who generally support this compromise , but would like some additional assurances . Thank you very much .
Vice-President of the Commission . - ( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to offer my sincere thanks to the rapporteur , Mrs Roth-Behrendt , and her two shadow rapporteurs , Mrs Ries and Mrs Grossetête , for their constructive and intensive collaboration , which helped us to reach consensus at first reading .
This is a regulation , which has three important consequences and achieves three important steps forward .
We are ensuring greater security and greater transparency for consumers and we have achieved a significant simplification of existing legislation .
The issue of security has , in particular , been at the core of our work .
I should just like to address a few points .
We are now , for the first time , really creating a mechanism that I would like to describe as a ' cosmetic watchdog ' , namely a constant monitoring of cosmetic products .
This is something we already have for pharmaceutical products .
We are increasing the level of market surveillance by the Member States and creating a system to ensure the compulsory traceability of cosmetic products .
All of these apply to all manufacturers , from the amateur to the wholesalers and retailers , in other words all of the stakeholders throughout the distribution chain .
Mrs Roth-Behrendt has already spoken on the subject of nanotechnology .
We have found a solution in this case , which I would like to describe as a model , as this same solution will be used again later this week with regard to other important pieces of legislation .
The specific provisions concerning the nanomaterials used in cosmetics introduce a mechanism for providing the necessary information before the materials are made publicly available on the market .
This ensures that relevant data on safety has to be presented and the authorities have time to take any necessary safety precautions .
There has been a long , intensive and fruitful debate on whether materials that are classified as carcinogenic , mutagenic or reprotoxic could be used in exceptional cases .
I am very pleased that the Council and Parliament have agreed with the Commission that we should retain the general ban on these substances in cosmetic products .
The minimal exceptions that the Commission has proposed are only intended to avoid discrepancies in relation to the legislation on foodstuffs , as it is not immediately clear that one can drink alcohol but not use it in cosmetic products .
In addition to ensuring product safety , the proposal improves the level of information provided to consumers .
An example is the addition to the list of ingredients of information on which substances appear in nano form .
Moreover , the legislation provides for a specific inspection of the information provided by manufacturers .
I am quite happy to confirm that the Member States and the Commission , through their close cooperation on this matter , wish to prevent the possibility of consumers being misled .
As I said , this regulation is also part of our simplification programme .
In this way , ambiguities and contradictions will be removed from a directive which is already 33 years old and which , during that time , has been amended 55 times .
There are probably few people around who could really understand it .
That is why we have come up with a significant simplification of EU legislation .
I would also like to point out that the creation of a central system for reporting of cosmetic products before they are put on the market in the EU will result in savings for the industry .
I have already indicated that the European Parliament , Council and Commission have worked closely and constructively together .
On behalf of the Commission , I am able to agree to all of the amendments tabled by the rapporteur , Mrs Roth-Behrendt .
The Commission has also provided the explanations requested by Parliament with regard to it being a regulation instead of a directive , regarding internet sales , counterfeit products , transitional provisions and the timeframe for entry into force of the regulation and with regard to the issue of the definition of nanomaterials .
In order to save time , I would like you to consent to all of the explanations being passed on to the conference services , as the contents are already known to Parliament .
Commission statements
The Commission takes note of the concerns of Member States on the recasting of directives into regulations .
The Commission considers that , where the existing provisions of a directive are sufficiently clear , precise and detailed , they may be capable of conversion into directly applicable provisions in a regulation by way of recasting .
This is true more particularly where the provisions at issue are of a technical nature and have already been fully transposed into national law by all Member States .
The Commission accepts , in the light of the different opinions expressed , that the specific case of the Cosmetics Regulation will not be used as a precedent for the interpretation of the Interinstitutional Agreement on this point .
The Commission commits to clarifying the situation regarding Internet sales of cosmetic products prior to the date of application of the regulation .
Like the European Parliament , the Commission is concerned by the fact that the cosmetic sector may be affected by counterfeiting which may increase risk for human health .
Therefore , the Commission will take action in order to enhance cooperation between national competent authorities in order to fight counterfeiting .
The Commission will draft an explanatory note regarding transitional provisions and dates of application of the Regulation ( in particular in view of Articles 7 , 8 , 10 and 12a ) .
On definition of nanomaterials the Commission notes that work towards a common definition of nanomaterials is still evolving .
The Commission therefore confirms that in future Community legislation progress on the common definition should be taken into account and notes that the comitology procedures contained within this proposal also allow for the updating of the definition within this proposal .
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - ( FR ) Mr President , allow me , first of all , to warmly congratulate not only the Council but also the rapporteur , of course , Mrs Roth-Behrendt , the European Commission , my fellow shadow rapporteurs and , in particular , Mrs Ries , for this work that we have done .
There have sometimes been some sharp exchanges between us , but in the end we have achieved a result that is very satisfying and that strengthens , on the one hand , the safety of cosmetic products for the benefit of consumers and , on the other hand , reduces the administrative burdens which had become pointless for our European industry .
This regulation was necessary because clarity needed to be restored to the legislation , which has been amended almost 50 times during the last 30 years .
Transposition of the directive was causing problems in the 27 Member States .
There were some legal uncertainties and the text had become very heavy and much too costly for our businesses in terms of implementation .
I recall also that cosmetics companies in the European Union are world leaders in this sector with more than 3 000 cosmetics manufacturers .
It is a highly innovative industry that represents a market of EUR 65 billion and directly or indirectly generates more than 350 000 jobs .
Therefore , it is important to be concerned about cosmetics .
This new regulation strengthens safety , as I have said , and the manufacturer 's responsibility through monitoring of the market , while at the same time reducing bureaucracy .
It ensures better traceability of cosmetic products , identification of the person responsible , an information file with a description of the cosmetic product and the method of manufacture .
We have , in fact , had much discussion about nanomaterials , which are used in cosmetics , particularly in sun protection products , and which must be subject to very strict requirements in relation to safety , but without standing in the way of innovation .
A product containing nanomaterials will therefore have to be notified by the person responsible and not the nanomaterial as such .
In conclusion , I should like to draw your attention to the fact that we really have to fight against counterfeiting of cosmetic products , because that is still a real danger .
We still have much to do in that area .
Safe cosmetic products are particularly important to European consumers , which is the reason why we must focus appropriate attention on them .
I regard as timely the initiative to review the directive and its replacement with a proposal for a regulation from the Commission .
This will allow inaccuracies and inconsistencies of a legal nature to be eliminated and discrepancies to be avoided between transpositions into national legislation .
In circumstances where experience at a European level has demonstrated that the ' ingredient by ingredient ' type approach is neither viable nor adequate , in my view , our priorities are to make manufacturers more accountable and to enforce tight control on the internal market .
The use of nanomaterials is a promising solution in this area , but they are to be assessed and declared safe by the Scientific Committee for products intended for consumer use , while the use of alternative methods is an initiative which must continue to be supported .
I believe that the involvement of the Committee which I referred to is vital with regard to the use of substances classified as carcinogenic , mutagenic or toxic in order to verify their use in the manufacture of cosmetic products .
In order to implement this regulation effectively , I believe that Member States must carry out adequate checks and , in the event of non-compliance , submit a report on a regular basis to the Commission .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - Mr President , Parliament is coming to the end of its term and some of us are starting to make preparations for the elections .
In the United Kingdom , at least , I see us faced with a sea of Euro-sceptics and Europhobes wishing to criticise everything we do at every opportunity .
And the history of this legislation will give them some ammunition : 55 significant changes over the past 30 years , making it more cumbersome and confusing and hardly helping the industry or consumers .
Yet , I find that the critics often tend to stop short .
They do not tend to actually look at what the European Union is doing to try and improve upon the existing situation and to put benefits into practice .
They assume we are always static .
So , here we have a piece of legislation that in practice has ensured that existing arrangements are simplified , that red tape is cut , that the legislation is clarified for all .
And we have a directive turned into a regulation .
Now back in my country that is terrible - that takes a way a bit of freedom for manoeuvre for Member States - but the reality is , as we have seen with REACH , as we now see with this , industry does not want 27 different interpretations of a European rule , it wants the facility of knowing exactly where it stands across this market , the greatest market of its kind in the world .
Will the critics stand up and say , ' We were wrong to insist that CMRs be banned ' ?
Will they stand up and say , ' We were wrong ' ?
Will they say what we should be putting into cosmetics , products that we would not put into foods , despite the fact that some of these cosmetics we put on our skins , in our eyes , even taking in our mouths ?
Will they oppose proper assessments being made of cosmetics or the centralised information service which the Commissioner has rightly said will actually save industry money ?
I do not think they will do any of these things .
My colleague Frédérique Ries , who cannot be with us tonight , wanted to ensure that steps were taken to try and avoid the marketing of counterfeit products , to strengthen product traceability and to tighten up restrictions on the making of false claims about the beneficial effects of these products .
She wanted to support clear labelling of products about the content of nanomaterials .
We have made progress on all these areas .
So , on her behalf , I would like to thank the rapporteur , the shadow rapporteurs and Commissioner Verheugen .
I think it is a good piece of legislation and I for one , as I go into this election process , will be very happy to hold this up as an example of what the European Union can do well .
on behalf of the UEN Group . - ( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the European cosmetics industry is a very important sector in terms of the economy and employment .
As has been said , it represents a turnover of more than EUR 35 billion and more than 350 000 jobs among sales , distribution and transport .
It is a high-innovation sector , but I too would emphasise that a high level of protection for human health and a high standard of consumer information must be guaranteed .
It is on precisely these grounds that I congratulate the rapporteur on her excellent work , and I would like to highlight certain points I believe to be of particular importance .
It is right to subject products to a safety assessment that also gives distributors a responsibility for completing the necessary checks before marketing the goods .
The ban imposed by the new regulation on more than 1 000 substances used in cosmetics that have been classified as carcinogenic or toxic is also a good thing .
Another important aspect is the list of permitted colourants , preservatives and solar filters , and greater clarity in labelling on the function of the cosmetic , its shelf life , specific warnings for its use and a list of ingredients in descending order by weight is also essential .
Most importantly , the label must feature words , marks or images that attribute realistic characteristics and functions to the product and not characteristics or functions that it does not possess .
It will therefore be necessary to guarantee product traceability , not least because we must prevent the worrying phenomenon of the counterfeiting of cosmetics and so-called ' parallel imports ' .
I will finish , Mr President , by pointing out that in Italy alone , EUR 120 million of cosmetic products , including perfumes and toothpaste , in fact come from the parallel market , with potential serious effects on health .
on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , protecting human health is also the primary objective when it comes to cosmetic products .
We are making history with this vote .
This is the first time that specific regulations have been drawn up for the use of nanomaterials in cosmetic products , and we are breaking new ground .
I am , of course , particularly pleased to be able to say that it was an initiative of the Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance that led to this groundbreaking event .
We Greens were the driving force , we placed it on the agenda , and I would like to wholeheartedly thank the rapporteur , Mrs Roth-Behrendt , for her clear and unwavering support .
I am also pleased to be able to praise the Commission for changing its mind .
Until now , it had continually stressed that the existing legislation was sufficient to guarantee the safety of nanomaterials .
Now , it has clearly stated that we do indeed need specific regulations .
This does not apply only to the Cosmetics Regulation , but also to the regulation which we have yet to discuss this week on new foodstuffs , as nano-technology has , until now , been a kind of black hole .
It was brought onto the market without sufficient explanation of the risks .
This is , therefore , a good day for health and consumer protection , even though I find it regrettable that the definition of nanomaterials has not been made sufficiently comprehensive , but has merely been restricted to insoluble and bio-persistent materials .
However , it is nevertheless important and , for us , vital that nano-specific regulations have been adopted .
I also hope - and would already like to ask for your support in this matter now - that a regulation on new foodstuffs also proves successful this week , as that case does not have such broad support from the Commission .
We need consistency - and not just concerning the matter of alcohol - when it comes to both cosmetics and foodstuffs .
The same generally also applies in the field of nanotechnology .
There , too , we need consistency between cosmetics and foodstuffs .
I also sincerely hope that we will finally have an open debate on the purpose and uses of nanotechnology .
I am also pleased that we have not watered down the ban on CMR substances , agreed in 2008 , which was proposed by the Greens .
on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group . - ( SV ) Mr President , my group and I welcome the compromise that the Council and Parliament have managed to achieve in this recast of the Cosmetics Directive .
The biggest stumbling block in the negotiations with the Council was precisely nanomaterials .
This relates to the use of extremely small structures to make new materials , which attain new properties or functions precisely because the particles are so small .
For instance , the material may become harder , firmer , thinner , water-repellent , heat-retaining or obtain some other characteristic .
In fact , we still do not know very much about it .
Some make-up and creams contain nanoparticles and it is possible that these particles may penetrate damaged skin and find their way into the body , where they absolutely should not be .
Should we , then , allow an active substance in cosmetic products with absolutely no means of control ?
The answer , of course , is no .
More knowledge and information must be obtained on nanomaterials .
I am therefore pleased about this agreement that we are to vote on tomorrow .
It is a step in the right direction .
The agreement will entail better protection for European consumers when nanomaterials are used in hair dyes , UV filters and so on .
They will undergo a safety assessment before the products are allowed onto the market and the cosmetic products industry will also need to notify the Commission of the use of nanomaterials in any of their other products and the Commission , in turn , will be able to consult with the Committee on Internal Market and Consumer Protection as to whether there are any suspicions that the nanomaterials pose a health risk .
I would like to say a big thank you to the rapporteur responsible and to the Commission for producing such a good recast .
- ( SK ) I would like to thank the rapporteur .
Bravo , Dagmar , for your work on the draft of the European Parliament and Council regulation presented to us by the Commission .
It is a highly important document for protecting consumer health .
We all no doubt use cosmetic products , as these include not just beauty products but also so-called cosmetics for everyday use , such as toothpaste , deodorants , shampoos , products for the hair and nails , lipstick and so on .
It is now 33 years since the last directive and that is a long enough time , in spite of the amendments .
After all , developments in chemistry and in cosmetics itself have brought enormous and fundamental changes .
I am referring here to the use of nanomaterials , so frequently mentioned here .
These can have both positive and negative effects on human health .
I therefore agree with the opinion that all materials used in cosmetic products which have a carcinogenic effect should be banned .
We should also think very carefully about using materials whose mutagenic and toxic effects cannot be ruled out .
Consumers often purchase cosmetic products on the basis of misleading advertisements or incomplete information so through our European agencies , including now the European Chemicals Agency and the European Office for Food Safety , we must try to draw up the directives and guidelines for monitoring .
We must not forget that cosmetic products are the most frequently counterfeited products and this only increases the likelihood of harmful materials being present .
Besides these warnings we should try to inform consumers of the potential risks to health even from products made by well-known firms .
( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , in my opinion , the decisive point in the report before us is the change to the legal basis .
Although the Member States of the European Union have developed at different rates and there are still large differences between them in terms of development , we will only achieve more legal certainty if the regulation is the preferred method of choice and remains so in the future .
There are directives that have caused more damage to competition and more injustice than was previously the case as a result of the different ways in which they have been implemented in the Member States .
Therefore , it is right that , in this report , the directive and the national implementation have been concentrated in one comprehensive regulation .
In this way , there is , naturally , an increase in the level of legal certainty , which is extraordinarily important especially for companies in this sector that are also involved in research .
Of course , the Commission 's commitment shortly to reduce 25 % of compulsory registrations is also very welcome .
We have taken the first step with this regulation .
Congratulations , Commissioner .
The present report also makes it clear how quickly new products can appear on the market and force the legislative authorities to act .
We addressed the issue of changing the Cosmetics Directive as recently as a few years ago .
The use of nanomaterials has forced us to address the issue again .
Within the framework of preventive consumer protection , the decisions concerning labelling are welcome , while the opportunity of provisional acceptance , in view of the state of scientific discoveries is also acceptable .
At this point , I would also like to warn against panic-mongering , as has happened in the case of other developments , and would instead advise a scientific examination of the whole matter .
With the requirements we have implemented , namely that advertising claims and labels only reflect the true features of the product , we are acting as advocates for the consumer .
However , the case of the deodorant which Mrs Roth-Behrendt mentioned , is a different matter .
It works on one person , but does not work on another .
Sometimes the same substance works on me one day , but does not work the next .
Therefore , we should not take the matter quite as seriously .
I only hope that the legal approach will not be diluted by the Commission as a result of far too many measures within the comitology procedure .
Therefore , I ask you not to prolong this procedure too much .
( DA ) Mr President , we all use cosmetic products .
They are not luxury goods that are only relevant to a particular gender or only to adults .
Soap , shampoo , toothpaste , lotions , deodorants , suntan lotions - they are all around us and affect us all .
It is important for them to be safe and for all countries to have sound , clear rules , and that is what we have achieved with this proposal .
I would like to take this opportunity , like everyone else , to say thank you to Mrs Roth-Behrendt for her fine work .
We are happy that our prohibition on CMR substances has been retained , but made more appropriate .
If ethanol had been prohibited in cosmetic products it would probably have created problems and at the same time it would have seemed a little strange , as we drink it in relatively large amounts .
However , it is good that the Council did not succeed in weakening the provisions .
Derogations from the prohibition are now to be restricted to substances that are approved in food and have so far not been shown to cause problems and that vulnerable groups , such as small children and pregnant women , are able to tolerate .
However , the most important thing is that nanomaterials have at last been included .
This has been a tough fight .
It is as though the industry has tried to stifle the debate on the safety of nanomaterials .
They would be very pleased if we would just accept these substances as unproblematic and wonderful .
There has been no hint of the public concern that there has been surrounding GMOs , for example .
We , in the Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance , are proud that nanomaterial has now been included .
It is to be tested , labelled and , where a number of products are concerned - UV filters , dyes and preservatives - it will now be the producer who has to guarantee safety , while the Commission is to provide detailed information and find time to monitor the rest .
Finally , we have also managed to include labelling so that consumers can see what they are buying and putting on their skin .
We have also included a provision concerning revision , requiring the Commission to ensure that both the definition of nanomaterial and the safety procedures are satisfactory .
Finally , it is a good thing that it is to be impermissible to advertise a product as having properties that are beyond what it can offer .
It will be interesting to see how all of the anti-wrinkle cream that we put on our faces , and which clearly does not work , will be sold in future .
( HU ) In the cosmetics industry , as in many other sectors , a revolution is currently underway .
A few years ago , nanotechnology began to conquer this branch of industry as well , and , as a result , unprecedented opportunities and prospects have now opened up .
Of course , nanotechnology is far from being a new invention : human beings have been using the technology for four thousand years , albeit it is only in the last twenty years that have we become aware of it .
At the same time , it is important that we handle this matter with due caution ; without delaying new discoveries and their implementation , we should nevertheless pay attention to the health risks as well .
We must protect our citizens from these potential dangers , notably by means of a differentiated , risk-based approach .
There are nano-applications and products intended for direct consumer use , such as clothing and food , including cosmetic products , in the case of which an inadequately circumspect approach may result in people experiencing , literally in the flesh , the potentially harmful consequences .
It is precisely for this reason that it is important for people to know what kinds of preparations they are using ; appropriate and detailed labelling is therefore indispensable , and the responsibility of the manufacturer is essential .
We are talking about a gigantic , and ever-growing sector , for the EU cosmetics industry generates annual revenues of EUR 65 billion .
One of the leading European cosmetics firms - one of the 3000 - spends EUR 450 million per year on research and development alone , and employs nearly 3000 scientists and researchers .
According to the European Commission 's estimate , in 2006 , 5 % of cosmetics contained nanomaterials , a figure that may even have doubled by now .
In order to overcome some of the global problems that we have caused , we need nanotechnology , and so I will vote in good conscience in favour of this legislative resolution , but we must not forget that every coin has two sides .
I congratulate Mrs Roth-Behrendt , Mrs Grossetête and Mrs Wallis , who have tabled the motion for a resolution - they have done an excellent job .
- ( CS ) Mr President , the introduction of minimum standards for the safety of cosmetic products marks an important step towards ensuring substantially higher levels of safety for European consumers .
This modern regulation at the same time reduces the administrative burden for European producers employing more than 350,000 people .
The extensive discussion here has focused mainly on labelling because this often misleads consumers , and I therefore warmly welcome the fact that new claims about the effects of products must be documented .
There has also been a very lively discussion here - and not only here - on licensing nanomaterials and of course the elimination of carcinogenic materials from cosmetic products .
I do not agree that messages about the content of nanomaterials in products should take the form of warnings .
It is important for us to have a list of licensed nanomaterials that are not harmful but improve the quality of a product .
There is , of course , no point in scaring consumers .
Minimum standards should ensure consumer safety .
I certainly consider counterfeiting to be a serious problem and I would also like to draw attention to the limited capacity of monitoring bodies at national level to actually monitor everything .
I am delighted that the text includes a uniform definition of nanomaterials and I also welcome the fact that we will be able to amend it so that it keeps up with the latest scientific developments .
I also welcome the fact that the directive will actually become a regulation and will have greater legal emphasis .
I therefore welcome this piece of work and I congratulate all of the rapporteurs for managing to reach a consensus over an issue as sensitive as the introduction of cosmetic products onto the European market based on scientific developments .
( FI ) Mr President , the compromises made at first reading during the last legislative year have very quickly become commonplace , owing to pressures of time .
Besides , that suits the small groups , as the agreements made at the negotiating table make them more powerful than befits their size .
If this practice spreads , however , it will gnaw away at the credibility of parliamentary democracy in this House .
This time , however , democracy won , because the biggest groups found common ground and the result achieved has the genuine support of the majority .
It was obvious that the Cosmetics Directive needed to be redrafted .
Its provisions needed clarifying and bringing up to date , and the guideline directive had to become a regulation , and nothing less , to be able to guarantee high levels of protection of human health everywhere in the EU as well as the workings of the internal market .
These principles follow on logically from the work that was started when REACH was being discussed .
Obsolete legislation in the cosmetics industry poses a special threat to health and the extent to which we can rely on the law .
Claims about nanoparticles and cosmetic products are a good example of this .
Whereas the positive characteristics of nanomaterials are more or less familiar , the risks are largely uncharted .
Similarly , the special characteristics of cosmetic products , which have a direct effect on the decision to purchase them , have been impossible to verify with any certainty .
That is why it was important to establish a common policy among the three largest political groups , to be able to take account of considerations of health , the environment , commerce and society , so as to make possible the agreement with the Council .
Accordingly , I value highly the work that my colleague , Mrs Grossetête , has done as shadow rapporteur .
She , in cooperation with Parliament 's rapporteur , Mrs Roth-Behrendt , and her liberal colleagues , ensured that there was a majority position , which made this final result possible .
Real democracy listens to everyone , but reflects the majority view .
No-one has expressed a wish to take the floor .
Thus , before I give the rapporteur the floor , I would like to inform you that , so far , fourteen Members have spoken , eleven of whom were women .
Vice-President of the Commission . - ( DE ) Mr President , I was going to briefly comment on your last remark , but I have decided not to .
Men are also interested in cosmetics - more and more so , in fact .
In any case , they are interested in ensuring that our cosmetic products are safe .
There is only one thing left for me to do at this point .
I would like to sincerely thank you for your agreement and support .
As Mr Davies said , we have really provided a good example of what European legislation can achieve .
If I may personally give you a piece of advice , Mr Davies , it is the following .
In your homeland it is perhaps also worth noting that we in Europe have regulations on cosmetics which do not exist elsewhere , namely the prohibition of the testing of cosmetics on animals .
That is not permitted in Europe .
Moreover , a few days ago , a regulation came into force which stipulates that products that are tested on animals cannot be placed on the European market .
Given that the British are well known for being a nation of animal lovers , this is an argument that you , too , may be able to use .
Mr President , thank you very much , Commissioner , thank you very much , ladies and gentlemen .
I am particularly grateful to Commissioner Verheugen for once again highlighting the ban on animal testing , as it has reminded me that this is now the third revision of the cosmetic products legislation that I have had the privilege to be involved in , these revisions being the sixth amendment , the seventh amendment , and now the change to a regulation .
We have , indeed , succeeded in banning animal testing .
We have , for example , managed to ensure that consumers know the shelf life of a product , by means of a small box containing a number which tells them how long a product can be used for .
I am also addressing these comments to certain colleagues , such as Mrs Roithová , who unfortunately were not able to be present at the start of this debate .
Labels have never , at any point , been warnings .
If a product is not safe , it should not be brought onto the market , it should not be marketed .
All products on the European market have to be safe and harmless .
However , labelling allows consumers to choose .
That is what democracy is all about , and that is what freedom of choice is all about .
We have an excellent piece of legislation .
I have tried to make the process very transparent .
I have tried , as Mrs Grossêtete has said , to bring together various opinions .
This is because I wanted to ensure that we draw up legislation which is good for everyone , namely for the consumers in the European Union , for industry , which will have to work with this legislation , and , finally , for everyone who benefits from it .
I would just like once again to say to Mr Schnellhardt that yes , deodorants work differently on different people , but the claim is nevertheless made that they ' keep you sweat-free ' .
That is why it is important that the claims concerning the deep rings around my eyes after a week in Strasbourg are , to a certain extent , true and reliable .
Once again , I would like to thank the Commissioner , particularly for the explanations he has given , as well as my colleagues and my co-workers , who have done most of the work . Thank you very much .
It was an extremely fruitful and interesting debate .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow , Tuesday , 24 March 2009 .
The placing of biocidal products on the market - New biocides revision proposal ( debate )
The next item is the joint debate on the following :
Mrs Sârbu 's report , on behalf of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety , on the proposal for a directive of the European Parliament and of the Council amending Directive 98 / 8 / EC concerning the placing of biocidal products on the market as regards the extension of certain time periods - C6-0346 / 2008 - , and
the Commission statement on the new proposal for a revision of the Biocides Directive .
I would like to emphasise that I regard as a success the agreement which we have reached together with the Commission and the Council on extending the period for evaluating active substances until 2014 in order to create in good time a regulated market for biocidal products .
This has also been reflected in the result of the vote taken by the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety .
This is why I would like to thank my colleagues who supported this compromise between the three institutions .
Extending the transitional period is extremely important for guaranteeing that all biocidal products containing active substances will be placed on the market legally .
I felt that it was essential for the review of this directive to be carried out at first reading so as not to risk going beyond the 10-year period for the systematic examination of biocidal products and , by implication , avoid the risk of their withdrawal from the market as from 2010 .
The extension of the period will ensure that Member States have sufficient time to evaluate these substances up until 2014 when the substantive revision of the Biocides Directive will most likely come into force .
Another item proposed in the draft report is to limit to a maximum of two years the possibility of further extending the deadlines for the remaining dossiers through comitology in order to avoid the possibility of endlessly delaying the whole process .
This measure is essential for the situation if the revision of the directive is not completed by 2014 .
We hope that the aspects linked to data protection and the practice of ' free riding ' , whereby companies use the information registered by other companies as part of a national scheme , will be addressed during the substantive revision of the Biocides Directive .
I would like to mention that the amendments adopted within the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety form part of an agreement with the Commission and the Council as they feature in the final draft due to be voted on in plenary tomorrow .
Once the vote has been completed in the plenary , we will have the Council 's support to reach an agreement on first reading .
Member of the Commission . - ( EL ) Mr President , I should like to thank the rapporteur , Mrs Sârbu , on her diligence and efforts to achieve agreement at first reading on the proposal to amend Directive 98 / 8 on the placing of biocidal products on the market .
I should like to say that the European Commission is prepared to accept the compromise package , especially the point relating to the need to extend the transitional period by four years instead of three and the point relating to the two-year limitation on any further extensions , in order to facilitate the review programme .
Mr President , Commissioner Dimas , ladies and gentlemen , we can be proud of the fact that we have achieved such high health and hygiene standards in the European Union .
The use of biocides has made a significant contribution to these achievements .
When used as disinfectants and pesticides , they protect us from dangerous diseases , or as the case may be , from their carriers .
Biocides are indispensable .
They have to be harmless to humans and to the environment , and that is why we now need a review of all biocidal agents .
Safety requires time , and the review is now taking longer than initially planned .
We cannot run the risk of losing important products because their registration has not been completed .
That is why I welcome the fact that Parliament , the Council and the Commission have , at the first reading , agreed to a quick extension of the deadlines for the Biocides Directive , until - I think , Commissioner , - 2014 .
However , why has this proposal appeared so late ?
The danger that substances might fall by the wayside due to expired deadlines , was something we could see coming for a long time , and our discussions in Parliament now have to take place under greater time pressure .
Commissioner , we have been waiting for some time now for a proposal from the Commission on the revision of the Biocides Directive .
Important areas now have to be urgently harmonised and regulated .
Examples include the definition of the approval criteria , the length of the approval and , most importantly , data protection .
Manufacturers need clear regulations and certainty .
Regulations are also needed when it comes to the use and handling of the products .
The testing of an active agent costs several thousand euros , and this investment can only be recovered if the results , at least for a certain period of time , are not accessible to other applicants .
No-one wants us to lose our high hygiene standards .
We must keep them in order to meet new challenges .
I hope , that the Commission will present a clear and well-founded report that meets all of these requirements and I hope that it does so as soon as possible .

on behalf of the ALDE Group . - ( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , thank you , Mr Verheugen , for coming and giving us the opportunity to discuss this document together .
With regard to the proposal to amend the directive concerning the placing of biocidal products on the market , Parliament has agreed on the need to grant certain extensions to the review period required to correctly assess the main active substances of certain biocidal products , in view of the specific nature of the necessary tests and market requirements .
However , you should be aware that we are awaiting the more thorough revision of Directive 98 / 8 / EC on biocidal products to express our views regarding the content .
I would therefore like to suggest some ideas for the Commission to think about .
First and foremost , it would be beneficial to make the transition from a directive to a regulation , a legislative instrument that would enable the same provisions to enter into force simultaneously in all Member States , thus regulating the sector uniformly .
One key point will be the sharing of data , in accordance with EU guidelines , and , as already implemented with REACH , testing on vertebrates should be avoided or significantly reduced for biocidal products also , thanks to the mandatory sharing of data obtained through such tests among those who register the same active substance , thereby avoiding any duplication of studies .
Data sharing would allow for greater efficiency in the file evaluation system and would cut the cost of drafting these files , which would be significant both for small- and medium-sized enterprises and the national authorities responsible for examining applications .
Emphasis must be placed on simplifying procedures and applying mutual recognition of authorisation for a given product and its use among the different Member States , in order to speed up both procedures and the placing of the biocidal product on the market in the aforesaid States .
Following this , the scale of charges and common time periods for examining applications in the different countries should be harmonised , and the authorisation process should be simplified in the case of formulations with minimal differences or variations in colour , for example , thus avoiding extra specific tests requiring further evaluation by each Member State .
Lastly , we must avoid discrimination between European producers of goods treated with biocidal products and extra-Community goods containing such products .
I leave it up to the Commission to come up with a solution that the new Parliament , we hope , will be able to support .
on behalf of the IND / DEM Group . - ( PL ) Mr President , harmonising the legislation on biocidal products in the European Union seems all the more necessary given that regulations in specific countries are very varied .
The lack of common legislative provisions poses a danger to people 's health and lives , as well as being an environmental threat , especially under free market conditions .
However , the proposal contained in the initial version of the text , namely a ten-year implementation period for the legislation , seems to be unrealistic , in view of the extremely complicated and expensive registration procedures for the chemicals used in these products .
These procedures , which were intended to ensure a high level of safety , could , ironically enough , contribute to reducing the level of control , which is all the more problematic if we consider the fact that , in some cases , national regulations controlled the biocidal products introduced onto the market .
However , removing these mechanisms and introducing less efficient and expensive assessment procedures may restrict the sales of biocidal products .
A central , European register of active substances used in biocidal products will not ensure safety , either , especially in view of the fact that biological agents are extremely variable and are resistant to active agents .
Having a limited choice of effective compounds will only serve to increase resistance levels .
Moreover , the high costs and complicated procedures involved will push small companies out of the market , leading to the market becoming monopolised by large companies working in this sector .
The proposal to have an extended , 14-year transitional period , which could be extended by another two years , has become all the more invaluable due to the fact that it will not be possible to register active substances or transpose these regulations into national law before 2014 .
- ( CS ) Mr President , I would like to put a question to the Commissioner as I have rather a different opinion .
I find it regrettable that the EU cannot manage in ten years , in other words by 2010 , to complete a review and registration of the 900 or so disinfectants , preservatives and pesticides that are sold on the European market .
It surprises me that we need a further three years for this , and the rapporteur has added another year on top of that .
This means delays in harmonisation and therefore in greater protection for the market in respect of these harmful materials .
Apparently we had no choice but to announce a postponement because otherwise many products would have to disappear from the market .
Permit me , however , to offer a reflection .
It might be beneficial if some of the products imported from uncontrolled Asian markets would have to leave our market .
That would accelerate the development of alternative safer materials .
I would be interested to hear whether the Commission has tried to cooperate with test centres and institutions in the Member States and to make use of their resources in order to achieve the original shorter deadline .
Can the Commission or the rapporteur give me an answer to that question ?
( PL ) Mr President , due to the specific nature of this legislation , and potential danger of any incorrect interpretation of it , we should pay particular attention to the issue of biocidal agents .
I agree with the rapporteur , who spoke about the fact that it is vital to extend the transitional period , for assessing active substances used in biocidal products , until 2014 , in order to use EU legislation to regulate the market .
If we were not to take this step , would the national provisions - which expire in 2010 - result in the sale of a significant number of biocidal products becoming illegal , which would lead to a variety of paradoxical situations ?
During the transitional period , national legislation should be used to monitor strictly this specific section of the market .
It is worth adding here that we should be particularly careful when dealing with any legislation concerning biocidal agents , and remember that these products are intended to destroy and repel harmful organisms and that they contain active chemical agents .
Any carelessness on our part may have irrevocable consequences .
I would like to thank again my colleagues , the shadow rapporteurs , with whom we cooperated very well .
We were very efficient in completing this report , although this is not as important as the actual revision of the directive will be .
As you have seen , all my colleagues have talked about this revision and less about the report which we are discussing today because it is a revision that we are waiting for .
We have heard here , admittedly , that this extension of the transitional period from three to four years is not desirable , but I believe that it is much more important for us to guarantee that all products will be placed on the market legally and that a proper evaluation of these products will be carried out .
Thank you once again and , as I was saying , we are waiting for the revision of the Biocides Directive as soon as possible .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place on Tuesday , 24 March 2009 .
One year after Lisbon : the EU-Africa partnership at work ( debate )
The next item is the report by Mrs Martens , on behalf of the Committee on Development , on One year after Lisbon : The Africa-EU partnership at work .
Member of the Commission . - ( FR ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I would first of all like to thank the Committee on Development and its rapporteur , Mrs Martens , for this report which makes a first assessment of the Africa-EU Strategic Partnership one year after the Lisbon Summit .
It is , of course , with great satisfaction that I note the number of positive elements underlined by this report and the progress that has been made during the course of a year , which is relatively short for such a vast and , above all , politically ambitious exercise .
To mention just one of these , we have this afternoon had a meeting between Parliament 's ad hoc delegation for relations with the Pan-African Parliament of the African Union and the Pan-African Parliament of the African Union 's ad hoc committee for relations with the European Parliament on the role of parliaments in implementing and monitoring Africa-EU strategy .
That in itself is a concrete result .
A new institutional architecture between the two continents is being put in place and I wish to congratulate the two presidents for the work that they have completed .
Rather than elaborating on the positive aspects of the Martens Report , I would like instead to touch on three key points that the report highlights for improving the EU-African Union partnership .
The first point is on the role of parliaments .
You know how much of a believer I am in the role of the parliaments , both as actors and as scrutineers of the democratic process .
It is in this twin capacity that the European and Pan-African parliaments are invited to take part in the Africa-EU Strategic Partnership .
I can therefore assure you of my total support for the proposals made in the European Parliament and Pan-African Parliament joint proposal and repeated in the report .
These consist firstly of participation at the appropriate level in the joint panels of experts relating to the four thematic partnerships which concern you .
Secondly , involvement in drawing up the annual progress reports .
Thirdly , participation in the joint taskforce , and fourthly the participation of the presidents in the Africa-European Union Summit .
Some of these proposals have , I might add , already materialised , or are in the process of doing so .
As regards civil society and non-state actors , I am more convinced than anyone that the principle challenge for 2009 consists of speeding up the achievement of tangible results before the mid-term assessment planned for autumn 2009 and achieving the ambition of a partnership centred on people outside of institutions .
In this context , non-state actors are being brought in to play an important role ahead of becoming involved in the joint panels of experts for each of the eight thematic partnerships .
On the European side , a civil society steering group has already been established last spring to monitor and participate in the implementation of the partnership .
On the African side , a civil society steering group has also been recently put in place under the aegis of the Economic , Social and Cultural Council of the African Union .
European and African civil society should meet in a forum at the end of April 2009 to draw up concrete proposals for commitment to the joint Africa / European Union ministerial Troika .
As regards strategic partnerships , and specifically the one dealing with governance and human rights , I welcome Parliament 's move towards a notion of government that is very dear to me : the good execution of the executive functions and the powers conferred by public law by a state that is impartial and capable of meeting the needs and aspirations of its citizens .
It is , therefore , with this in mind that two years ago we set up the EUR 2.7 billion governance section for all the ACP countries .
This approach is based on three principles : dialogue , incentivising reforms and ownership of these reforms by the partner country .
However , the report expresses doubts and concerns , particularly as regards the governance profiles : how they are drawn up , how they are used and their possible negative impact on the African Peer Review Mechanism .
I would remind you that the governance profiles that cover all dimensions of these - that is the political , economic , social , institutional and environmental dimensions , and so on - were only the starting point and in no way guided the programming of this section .
Moreover , the results and conclusions of this analysis were discussed with the government of the partner country during the programming dialogue .
On the basis of this , the government was encouraged to explain its own reform plan or , if need be , complete it or go into more detail ; to demonstrate the relevance , ambition and credibility of these reforms on the basis of three evaluation criteria , which then allowed the level of financial incentive for each country to be determined .
In this context , particular attention was given to countries which are committed to the African Peer Review Mechanism and which have completed the review , showing their desire to continue along these lines .
This exercise threw into stark relief the very different situations of each country ; the respective needs for reform as well as the different capacities for drawing up and proposing a governance plan .
Flexibility and pragmatism have therefore been necessary when apportioning the governance incentive fund .
In January 2009 , the Commission published an interim report on the incentive fund process and sent it to all the institutions of the European Union , for whatever purpose it may serve .
rapporteur . - ( NL ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , we are discussing the report ' One year after Lisbon : The Africa-EU partnership at work ' , which is to say the implementation of the Joint Africa-EU Strategy for the development of Africa , as set out at the EU-Africa Summit in December 2007 .
That Summit was a momentous occasion .
It was , in fact , the first time that the European Union and the African Union had together laid down a strategy on the basis of shared values and principles and mutual respect , that they had reached agreements to achieve the Millennium Development Goals together and to find solutions together to common challenges in the areas of , for example , security , migration and the climate .
We are all aware of the criticism in our own countries , where people wonder whether it really makes sense to continue investing money in Africa , especially in these times of economic crisis .
I would like to emphasise once again how important our efforts continue to be for the development of Africa , and that applies to both continents .
Commissioner Michel was spot on when he said , in a meeting in this regard just a short while ago that the more poverty there is , the more instability there is .
This is also important from the point of view of demographic trends .
Before long , Africa will account for 20 % of the world 's population , while Europe will account for just 5 % .
We have common problems , we face common challenges .
When people lack opportunities in Africa , it is only natural that they will seek them in Europe .
Africa deserves our support , and not only for that reason .
Today , we are discussing the implementation of the agreed strategy and we have an action plan .
We must continue to act together in order to realise the strategy and the action plan .
I am pleased with the results that have been achieved so far in relation to the partnerships .
In my previous reports I have always expressed concern about the lack of a clear specific role for the parliaments when it comes to the implementation of a joint strategy .
In 2007 , the Pan-African Parliament and the European Parliament issued a joint statement which actually quite pithily sums up what is involved .
I will now read it in English .
' As institutions representing the peoples ' will , our parliaments must see to it that their needs are satisfied , their concerns heard by decision-makers , and that their wishes are reflected in the policies proposed by the institutions that govern them .
Our parliaments have an essential part to play in shaping the debate on the joint priorities for the future of our continents ; they reflect the various currents of opinion in our societies , and are therefore the place where the debate must be conducted , and where differing views can be reconciled and compromises sought . '
( NL ) I am therefore pleased that , at this meeting , we agreed what the role of the parliaments would be .
It is also thanks to Mr Gahler , our colleagues in the Pan-African Parliament and all those involved that an agreement has been reached on the role of the parliaments .
It is about participation in the group of experts in connection with the eight partnerships and the coordinating task force .
The parliaments are to give their input in the annual progress reports and the presidents of the European Parliament and the Pan-African Parliament are to be invited to give their visions at the Africa summits .
That is an important detail .
I will conclude with one more question for the Commissioner .
We know that the definitions of ODA will shortly - in April - be on the agenda again in the EU-SEDAC talks and that the European Commission will be involved .
Can the Commissioner tell us what his vision for this discussion is and what the input of the European Commission will be ?
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - ( PL ) Mr President , development policy , one of the most important areas of EU policy , aims to resolve global problems .
It was fortunate , and by no means an accident , that the first joint partnership strategy was created for Africa , and involving Africa .
One of the reasons for the great importance of development policy is the fact that it has become an instrument of historically-oriented policy .
In this context , the fundamental aim of cooperation on development issues is to counteract past processes and mechanisms .
Jomo Kenyatta , the father of Kenyan independence , described this in a vivid , albeit simplified , manner .
I know that the Commissioner is familiar with this famous quotation .
Mr Kenyatta once said : ' When the missionaries arrived , the Africans had the land and the missionaries had the Bible .
They taught us how to pray with our eyes closed .
When we opened them , they had the land and we had the Bible . '
Historically-oriented policy is not , however , the only reason for Europe 's involvement in development-related problems .
There are also more pragmatic reasons .
Africa remains the poorest continent in the world .
Nevertheless , for the first time in 30 years , it is experiencing a period of economic growth .
In any case , we may add , this economic growth is higher than in Europe .
There are , of course , African countries which , as a result of the work of inept governments , have indeed managed to destroy their own economies .
Generally speaking , we can state that Africa is a continent with untapped potential .
I am pleased that the EU is helping to revive and activate this potential .
That is why one of the aims of the strategy is to ensure broader dialogue and cooperation , in fields other than those typically related to development issues .
The strategy covers a wide range of policies , including security , energy and climate change .
It is worrying , however , that little progress has been made in most of these areas .
We must also admit that certain EU Member States have not been as committed to the partnership with Africa as others have .
I am convinced that the second year of partnership will be better and that we will be able to achieve our goals more rapidly .
Mr President , Commissioner , for a year we have been celebrating the development of this new process , this new agreement between the European Union and Africa .
This being the case , you will allow me to be less reserved than usual , Commissioner .
I believe that on the occasion of its first anniversary , a certain number of acknowledgements must be made .
Down there , there is a shortage of everything .
There is a shortage of managers , doctors , teachers and technicians .
Here , there is talk of managed immigration , yet we still have not taken the measures necessary to allow diasporas , for example , to put themselves at the service of their states .
Down there , they do not even manage to feed their populations .
Here , we are renewing the export subsidies on our agricultural products and promoting biofuels , which leads to huge monocultures down there .
Down there , everything continues to fall apart , destitution spreads , disease kills and water is short .
Here , we talk a lot , we make promises , we debate and we vote on resolutions ; but what is happening in practical terms for the people of Africa ?
I think - as do you for that matter , and I know that you are firmly convinced of this - that it is time to bring together the parliaments of these countries , and thus to bring together their peoples .
I believe that no process between the European Union and Africa will succeed as long as we remain at the level of politicians and technicians .
The peoples of Africa must be brought together and it is through their parliaments that we must do it .
I am delighted to hear that there is a will to develop this special relationship at parliamentary level .
However , I have my doubts , Commissioner , because just before this debate we had a long debate with your colleague Mrs Ashton about Economic Partnership Agreements .
Bizarrely , it is almost impossible to achieve the involvement of the parliaments of partner countries in those agreements .
We are not managing to convince part of this House , but also the Commission , that it would really be necessary for their parliaments to have their say first , before asking us - the European Parliament - our opinion on issues that will directly affect the lives of people down there .
That being the case , I hope that things will change in this regard .
Likewise , I believe that it is important - thankfully , you also emphasised it - to involve NGOs and African civil society in the process a lot more and a lot better ; I also mentioned diasporas , but that relates to here .
I do not know what practical things have been done with respect to this , but in any case I think that they give the process which you have set in motion a chance of success .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - Mr President , the year 2007 was unfortunately the second year in a row when contributions to official development assistance decreased in the developed world .
I am therefore glad that the rapporteur has reiterated the need to urge the European Union Member States to uphold their commitments .
I find that the Member States ought to revise their current assistance to target countries , as the 2008 Millennium Development Goals Progress Chart indicates that Sub-Saharan Africa is the only region lagging seriously behind the progress expected .
I would like to use this opportunity to encourage Member States to increase their contribution to Sub-Saharan Africa , which is the least developed region in the world .
Also , target countries are not always too receptive towards the conditional nature of EU assistance .
We should continue with the efforts to involve those countries more intimately .
The global economic crisis burdens us all , yet we must not forget or ignore the fact that the least developed countries are also the most vulnerable now .
Furthermore , with the stagnant situation in Africa , Europe is more and more intimidated by flows of immigration that might become strenuous to the welfare state .
It is much wiser to deal with the problems of the people of the developing countries before those problems spill over to concerns that we need to address here in Europe .
Mr President , Commissioner , once again we are discussing Africa in the European Parliament .
Today , we are not talking about war , human rights or aid for developing countries .
Instead , we are trying to sum up the current state of play regarding the partnership between Africa and the European Union .
Unfortunately , this partnership is virtually non-existent .
To be fair , we do have lofty aspirations for achieving understanding and cooperation between the African Union , the Parliament of the African Union and the Commission of the African Union .
However , Africa still remains the poorest continent on our planet , where people have the shortest life expectancy in the world , where there is famine and disease on an unprecedented scale , while the level of education and health , especially in poor urban areas and villages , is almost zero .
The positive impact of the African Union on the economic situation is so small that , in practice , it is merely a sham organisation , with no influence in terms of solving everyday problems .
It is an organisation of politicians , who use it to participate in global political life .
Africa is a continent with rich natural resources , which are used by the whole world .
However , this has had no positive impact on the living standards of the population or in terms of reducing poverty .
Various organisations are trying to tackle the problem of poverty , but progress is barely noticeable .
The rapporteur , Mrs Martens , has clearly stated this fact .
We really do not know how to help Africa , and the report does not provide a solution , either .
Let us remember how a peaceful Kenya became drenched in blood within the space of a few days .
How can we ensure that financial aid from different countries is properly distributed ?
This is an issue we discussed a few months ago .
We also spoke about the steps China is taking .
Perhaps China has found the right path ?
We should examine this path carefully .
on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group . - ( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the joint EU-Africa Strategy is first and foremost a great challenge , a time for us to show that we are capable of taking a fresh look at ourselves and our policies .
I believe we still need to think through relations between our two continents , and our development strategies , very carefully .
It is a long process ; we cannot expect to solve everything at once , and it is also very complicated , but primarily it must , in my opinion , be an inclusive , participative process built from the bottom up : a partnership between equals .
The Lisbon Summit was not able to achieve this in full , perhaps because of the haste with which it was concluded , and neither the European Union nor the African Union wanted or was able to give a structural role to parliaments and civil society , in Africa or Europe .
It is now a year since the summit and , as the Martens report strongly emphasises , our Parliament , the Pan-African Parliament and civil society still do not have a real say in determining the strategy .
It is therefore vital - not least in order to meet the Millennium Development Goals on overcoming poverty and disease and on agricultural and educational development - that these should be included , along with all the topics that have been raised , from desertification to climate change and energy .
It is essential to have complete ownership and a democratic partnership open , therefore , to the public and not confined solely to governments and committees .
We , as the European Parliament , have enhanced our relations with the Pan-African Parliament and there is no doubt that these steps forward have had a positive impact on the joint EU-Africa Strategy .
A number of doubts emerged back in 2007 , however , regarding funding .
Will the funds be found to achieve this joint strategy ?
What is the future for the ACP States and the Cotonou Agreement ?
What will be our relationship with international organisations - the World Bank , the International Monetary Fund and the WTO ?
Let us work together to make these institutions more democratic .
To conclude , I believe that we should take heart and press ahead with this challenge because Africa - as we have learnt in recent years - is a continent rich in human and economic resources ; a genuine partner .
It is fantastic to see - Commissioner Michel , whom I know well , is aware of this - that there is great wealth and not just death , destruction and war , although we must , of course , work on those areas to build peace and democracy .
on behalf of the IND / DEM Group . - ( NL ) Mr President , first of all , I would like to thank the rapporteur , Mrs Martens , for this solid report .
It is good that Parliament not only welcomes the announcement of a partnership , but also really does monitor the tangible results .
That is what Africa needs : The foundations for a successful partnership with Africa require good governance and human rights .
This is essential in a continent where mayors can overthrow presidents and where another president has been crippling his own population to carry out witch hunts .
The Council and the Commission should make this a key priority .
When I mention good governance I am also thinking of the role of China , which is only mentioned in passing in this resolution .
It strikes me that there is a failure to sound any critical note about the sometimes disastrous consequences of China 's involvement in Africa .
The European Union can perhaps learn a lesson from the EUR 2 billion that the China-African Development Fund invests in Africa .
The fact that Beijing also invests in countries such as Zimbabwe says it all about China 's contribution to long-term democracy and good governance in Africa .
I also have a comment to make to the rapporteur .
In paragraph 46 she refers to African food security and food sovereignty .
What I believe is lacking in this resolution is any text going into a problem that has been around for a number of years , namely the lease or even purchase by outside states or companies of large areas of agricultural land , with the harvest going to foreign investors and therefore not benefiting the malnourished local population .
Such situations are really quite distressing .
Furthermore , these investments do not provide any jobs .
It is a shame that the resolution does not address this specific problem , which is currently receiving a lot of attention in the media once again .
( DE ) Mr President , as chairman of the Ad-hoc Delegation for Relations with the Pan-African Parliament , I would like to take the opportunity today to thank the many people involved .
First of all , I would like to thank Maria Martens , who has prepared an excellent report on progress made regarding the agreed EU-Africa Strategy .
Secondly , I would like to thank the institutions involved .
We have managed , within the framework of a hexalogue - that is , involving six interlocutors - to reach an understanding between the two Parliaments .
Both Commissions have agreed , as have the two Parliaments as well as the two Councils .
As far as the Council is concerned , I would specifically like to single out the legal service , which is always particularly important when it comes to such matters , as common positions sometimes fail here .
However , following the first meeting in Adis Ababa , we have managed , in our second meeting today , to implement and finally agree on what we had agreed concerning the involvement of the two Parliaments .
I would like to comment on what Mr Hutchinson said .
What is really happening ?
Yes , many bad things are happening in Africa .
However , my impression - and perhaps this is coincidental - is that , since the agreement of this common strategy , Africa has reacted differently to coups .
In Mauretania , Guinea , Guinea-Bissau and Madagascar , Africa has reacted by suspending the membership of these countries .
That did not happen in the past .
Back then , it would have been business as usual .
In this regard , I would also like to state that we , as European governments , should also take these facts into account .
If this partnership is based on common values , then the Europeans also have to react when Africans react when something goes wrong in Africa .
That is why I am confident that if we , as Parliaments , are more involved in the implementation of this strategy in the future , we will be able to deliver added value to this partnership .
( PT ) I want to congratulate Mrs Martens on this important report and point out how vital this Parliament 's role is in monitoring the implementation of the Joint Africa-EU Strategy and the respective Action Plan .
Some important steps have been taken with regard to several of the eight partnerships involved in the strategy , particularly the establishment of joint expert groups and implementation teams and the commencement of dialogue in the context of these partnerships .
However , I regret that , by the end of the first year , some partnerships are still in the process of defining working methods and have not yet established deliverables , timetables or budget allocations .
I hope that the next joint annual progress report will be much more specific than the first in its presentation of the results and in its indication of the financial envelopes .
It is particularly important that we are vigilant in terms of honouring the commitments made by the European Union and its Member States with a view to selecting the Millennium Development Goals .
We must also ensure that the global recession , which is affecting everyone , does not disproportionately penalise the countries and peoples of Africa , given that they are already the most vulnerable .
Development and democratic governance in Africa must form part of the crisis exit strategy for all of us .
In this respect , we also need to see more significant progress in all the partnerships , including those which are politically more sensitive , as is the case with governance and human rights .
The European Parliament 's role in this process must be reinforced by officially giving it monitoring functions and involving it in the work of the strategy implementation teams .
It is also vital to ensure the involvement in this process of actors representing both European and African civil societies , particularly national parliaments , NGOs and the media .
( PL ) Mr President , I would like to draw attention to three issues in this debate .
First of all , in December 2007 , the European Parliament adopted a new EU-Africa Strategy , which aimed to ensure equality between the two sides .
The main issue at the heart of this Strategy was to reduce poverty in African countries .
However , not much progress was made in this field last year .
Secondly , the continuing financial and economic crisis may , unfortunately , worsen the situation facing African countries .
The leading global financial institutions are making the following predictions for 2009 .
The IMF estimates that global GDP will shrink by 1 % , while the World Bank estimates a fall of 2 % .
The WTO predicts a decrease in the value of global trade of as much as 9 % .
It will be the first time that this has happened in 50 years .
The crisis facing the most developed countries will , according to the IMF , go on to affect developing countries , including those in Africa , while rising unemployment and poverty might cause civil unrest and , in some cases , may even lead to war .
I hope that , in view of this crisis and its repercussions , which will continue to be felt during the next few years , the EU-Africa Cooperation Strategy will be amended in an appropriate manner , in order to prevent this kind of civil unrest , or perhaps even armed conflict , being caused by the global economic crisis .
( ES ) Mr President , in Lisbon in December 2007 , the Heads of State or Government of the European Union adopted the Joint Africa-EU Strategy and the first Action Plan for its implementation .
There were three facts that brought about this strategy .
The first was the fact that , on the African continent , peace processes and the gradual consolidation of democratic systems coexist with persistent conflicts such as that in Darfur , high levels of poverty and the emergence of situations such as the massive waves of illegal immigration .
The second fact is that sub-Saharan Africa is the poorest region on the planet .
The population has low life expectancy , low levels of education and literacy and high demographic growth .
Three hundred million people live on less than EUR 1 a day .
The third fact is that Africa is the physical location of the big pandemics , the place where more than two thirds of those infected with AIDS live and the site of 90 % of deaths caused by malaria .
In the last year we have made little progress on the targets we set ourselves and , given that the action plan covers the period up to 2010 , we must take immediate action in two important areas .
Firstly , we must cooperate on democratic governance , the strengthening of institutions and enhancement of the role of civil society , with particular attention to gender policies .
Secondly , we must cooperate to address basic social needs , the fight against hunger and the launch of development programmes in education , health and access to basic resources such as water .
( PL ) Mr President , the partnership we are discussing today is the answer to Africa 's needs , as it provides support for the process of democratisation in African countries and for human rights and , at the same time , it ensures strong , bilateral involvement in the fight against climate change and in the field of energy security .
Today , in view of our growing global co-dependency and shared responsibility , we also need commitment from potentially weaker partners .
Let us take the fight against climate change as an example .
Although Africa contributes the least to polluting our atmosphere , it feels the repercussions most acutely .
That is why we need to include African countries in the fight against climate change , especially in terms of making the broadest possible use of the renewable energy sources which are at these countries ' disposal .
Certain countries are aiming to draw African countries into their sphere of influence .
This should not happen .
Africa does not need to be controlled .
Instead , it needs our help and support .
At the same time , we should also treat Africa as an equal partner , rather than simply as a recipient of financial aid .
Being on an equal footing fosters a greater degree of commitment .
Member of the Commission . - ( FR ) Mr President , I would like to thank the various speakers .
I am pleased that there is satisfaction with the first results , but it goes without saying that this is not yet enough .
We must understand that things have only been in place for one year and that we should be moving up a gear in 2009 .
I accept the essentials of the various speeches and the issues raised correspond perfectly to my convictions .
It is obvious that there can be no development if there is no ownership , as Mr Hutchinson and Mrs Morgantini were saying .
It is equally obvious that the role of the national parliaments and that of civil society are eminently important .
Moreover , I regret that it was not possible to conduct a thorough reform of the institutional mechanisms governing Parliament 's responsibility for development policy .
I remember that you asked for the country strategy papers to be debated not just here but also in partners ' national parliaments .
The European Council did not allow me to do that , which is why I sent the country strategy papers to the joint parliamentary assembly .
Through that channel , you sent them on to the various parliaments of Europe , but all that does not add up to any sort of institutional rule , as I sincerely wish were the case .
As a reminder , I add that that will continue to be one of my absolute priorities , because we would make enormous progress if the European Development Funds were included in the budget .
While this will not be included in the budget , we will still have poor reasons for not letting Parliament play the role that it should , and as a result the commissioner in charge of development will sometimes be powerless .
It would be far simpler if I could discuss the priorities , programmes and projects here in Parliament ; I could move forward , strengthened by this backing .
Unfortunately , that is not yet the case .
I hope that we will get there .
I do not want to skip over issues that do not seem right to me either .
I would remind you that last year , at European level , we spent the contribution of the Commission and Member States , knowing that each one put in EUR 46 billion .
However , we are EUR 1.7 billion behind on the programme or , shall we say , on the objective that had been set .
I am not at all satisfied with that and I think that we will have to fight for it in the future .
Parliament will need to be a true ambassador for this message and exert pressure .
We will need all our available strength at political level simply to hold Member States to respecting their 2005 commitments .
It will not be easy .
I still remember the struggle for the billion for the food facility .
That was not easy , but we obtained good conditions .
We got an additional billion , however it was spread over three years instead of two .
Fortunately though , the projects are moving forward and their implementation is progressing in a positive way .
I am therefore , naturally , entirely in agreement .
We do not intend to reopen DAC issues .
There are some adjustments à la marge under discussion , for example peacekeeping missions .
( FR ) Therefore we have no intention of reopening that debate .
Moreover , I must say that I am very cautious .
I am not particularly in favour of reopening this debate , because if we do that you will even see certain Member States participating in order to include anything and everything in the budget for this .
I must tell you , Mr Cook , that I do not agree when it is said that we have lost our ideals .
I do not think that is the case .
I think that you only have to hear the voices in this House to realise that we are still extremely committed to defending developing countries .
It is not true to say that we are not contributing to the solution .
Obviously , we cannot be expected to be able to solve everything , but I shudder to think how poor the world would be without European aid .
It is not enough , I fully agree , but it represents 57 % of aid worldwide .
Unfortunately , I do not think that we can discuss that now , but the issue of knowing whether European aid from our Member States or from the Commission is still achieving its goals or is still effective - whether it is a good way of working - is another matter .
I would like this debate to return to the issue of the establishment , or not , of budget support and conditionalities because , like you , I am very unsure about the latter .
That said , we still need to know what we want .
If we want to get a government to make approaches to civil society or get its population - or its parliament in some cases - to participate , we must all the same accept that we must impose conditions .
This is because it is sometimes not enough to simply say to a government ' we hope that you are going to do that ' , to make impassioned pleas or simply friendly suggestions .
The issue surrounding conditionalities - I do not like the word conditionality and prefer to talk about criteria - is still important .
When you talk , for example , about profile , I believe that it is still quite normal to be able to set one up .
That profile has not been used to set the budget for the initiative .
It is still quite normal for us to analyse the governance profiles of each country when we are getting ready to grant them up to an extra 25 or even 30 % in financial incentives .
All of these debates are still open .
I do not wish to close them , but I do hope that we are able to do so at some point .
I shall miss out everything to do with China .
Obviously I think that it is a good discussion .
I think , naturally , that developing countries have the right to put the cooperation that they want out to tender .
Africa is no longer the exclusive territory of Europe and that is very good .
This is something I consider important .
It is indeed advisable to question the quality of the development policies set up between China and Africa .
We cannot criticise them for doing it , but we can wonder .
I have , for example , been receiving reports for several months of Chinese contracts in the Democratic Republic of Congo .
I am not saying that these are bad contracts .
I am simply saying that a whole series of issues merit responses .
We are busy responding to them at the moment , particularly the issue of the state guarantee because it is an agreement that is made with a private enterprise .
We are also dealing with the percentage of loans compared to gifts , the fact that they did not go out to tender and the fact that it is almost the same amount as the country 's debt to the European Monetary Fund .
These are all issues to which a solution must be found , but not by denouncing this type of relationship .
African countries have the right to make partnership agreements with the Chinese too .
I will not return to this point .
I think , Mrs Morgantini , that you have put your finger on some issues which had already been raised by Mr Hutchinson .
It is clear that the real problem will always be in ensuring that the relationship between us and the developing countries is a genuine partnership .
I think that the Lisbon Summit was a considerable step forward because we at least forged in the texts the beginnings of a new philosophy of equal partners in terms of rights and responsibilities .
However , we are obviously still not fully there and this is one of the issues that is linked to ownership and to - where possible - budget support .
It is linked to ownership by civil society and by debate at parliamentary level .
I believe that you are right and that these are the areas we must work on .
You asked another question which is of real concern to me and which is , in my opinion , an essential subject for debate .
It was ' how can we achieve better harmonisation : getting people to work together better , dividing up the work better , supporting global development policy better between the various partners ; the role of the World Bank , the World Trade Organisation , the International Monetary Fund , the Commission and all the large-scale donors ? '
It is true that for the moment - as was said in another meeting - there are superimpositions and duplications .
There is even competition and it is not always useful competition .
I can tell you that a lot of progress has been made in the last two years , particularly with the World Bank .
I can tell you that seeing the new message , strategy and philosophy that I detect at the World Bank makes me quite optimistic .
There is therefore room for another type of cooperation ; for collaboration between the various partners , and I think that you have really put your finger on a fundamental point , which we will need to take a close look at .
Of course , good governance is a major element ; it is the reason why we made provision for the governance package .
Mrs Gomez broached the important subject of the effects of the financial crisis on the economic and social situation in developing countries .
Pretty much all the experts are currently in agreement in saying that there will be at least a 2 % reduction in growth , which represents up to 50 million more poor people .
We must be very aware of that .
As far as we are concerned , I will already be very pleased if the Member States keep the promises they made in 2005 .
I assure you that together we will have to fight extremely hard to force the Member States to do so .
Secondly , I am busy preparing a communication - the April package that I promised - which goes beyond public development assistance .
It will attempt to mobilise a whole series of the Commission 's sectional budgets for development policies .
I must tell you that there are some really interesting leads .
I am also working with the European Investment Bank on that package , particularly regarding supportive infrastructure to try to develop them quickly and have quite a quick impact .
I will come to Parliament with that in April .
I would just like to say that I still have one more very important issue to cover , which is the role of civil society and national parliaments .
I will finish with that .
Mr Hutchinson once suggested that some experiments could be carried out with Members of this House , and perhaps members of the parliaments of Member States , to go wherever it were possible to do so , and hold debates on the country strategy papers .
I have had the opportunity to do so in three different countries .
It worked very well , but it is obvious that it worked well because in those three countries we had the support of their governments , because without such support on this issue it is extremely difficult .
I therefore think that you are right : mobilising parliamentary action is certainly one of the priorities .
In any case , believe me that I will do everything in my power to ensure this .
rapporteur . - ( NL ) Mr President , I actually do not have much more to add .
This is the first debate about the implementation of the strategy .
We have made a start , but we are still at the beginning .
There is still an exceptional amount left to do .
Africa remains the poorest continent .
You have all pointed out where our concerns lie and what challenges we face , be it in relation to peace and security , economic growth , good governance , building capacity or the role of the parliaments and civil society .
The Commissioner has made the necessary remarks in that regard .
I would like to thank you , my fellow Members , the Commissioner and our colleagues from the Pan-African Parliament .
We will continue to follow this process .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place on Tuesday , 24 March 2009 .
The MDG contracts ( short presentation )
The next item is a short presentation of a series of reports , eight in total , therefore I would kindly ask all Members to adhere strictly to their allotted speaking time for this particular procedure , and I would also ask the Commission to please keep their answers to the point , otherwise we will have problems in keeping to the agenda .
This will also assist the interpreters .
The next item is the report by Mr Hutchinson , on behalf of the Committee on Development , on MDG contracts .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , for almost three years the European Union and the Member States have been committed to improving the effectiveness of our cooperation with developing countries .
Things have been done , but there is strong resistance , above all within the Member States , and therefore there is enormous progress that has yet to be made .
Access to healthcare and basic education is just a dream for millions of people , many of whom are women .
Every day , 72 million children - mainly girls - do not go to school .
Every minute , a woman dies from complications linked to pregnancy or in childbirth , while a child dies every three seconds from a disease that a doctor could have easily prevented .
From a geographical perspective , it is sub-Saharan Africa , as we just recalled as a matter of fact , which continues to experience the most catastrophic situation and , with things going as they are , the risk is that this will continue for many more years .
In this context , it is true that budget support - that is , financial aid directly included in the budget of beneficiary countries - could usefully contribute to providing more predictable aid that is targeted at priority sectors and is therefore more effective .
That is why the Commission has come up with the idea of concluding Millennium Development Goal ( MDG ) contracts , which it intends to propose to certain countries in order to commit funds for a six-year period and put in place annual monitoring that emphasises the achievement of results regarding health and education .
Our report stresses the importance of such an initiative , but it also raises a series of questions that require clear answers .
What criteria , for example , will the Commission propose that developing countries must meet in order to aspire to concluding this type of contract ?
What will the lifespan of such a project be and what will be the conditions for carrying it out ?
We would also like to emphasise that the Commission has not yet published any official communication on the subject ; if you wish to know more there are currently no internal documents to which to refer , only the basic information available on the Committee on Development 's website .
Although the Commission 's budget support has several positive features , such as being linked to the achievement of results regarding health and education , or generally being planned over three years , you should know that it is far from perfect .
For example , I remind you that the Commission , just as with the majority of other aid providers , will only grant budget support to countries that have implemented an International Monetary Fund programme .
This situation is particularly problematic when we know that such programmes can limit the government 's capacity to invest in development and when overly ambitious goals are set , particularly as regards inflation and the budget deficit .
Then , even if the Commission decides to provide budget support in the long term , there is nothing to guarantee that this aid will not itself become the object of bureaucratic procedures that , as we know , lead to significant delays in disbursement .
Finally , budget support suffers from a serious lack of transparency and ownership by the countries involved and their populations .
Financing agreements are only rarely made public , nor does the Commission include as a matter of course civil society organisations and members of parliament in its dialogues with the governments of developing countries , as we mentioned earlier .
Nevertheless , it is widely recognised today that for the sake of effectiveness , development must be fully in the hands , not just of the governments , but also of the peoples of developing countries .
In summary , the MDG contracts project will only be an opportunity to improve the effectiveness of our aid if it is defined very clearly , along with its conditions of eligibility , execution and evaluation .
Our report therefore stresses the initiative 's importance , whilst urging caution and stressing the need for the Commission to be far clearer about its intentions and respond to the specific questions raised in the report .
I do not want to finish without touching for a moment on the Court of Auditors ' recent Special Report on European Commission Development Assistance to Health Services in Sub-Saharan Africa .
The report 's conclusions are worrying .
From a financial point of view , we see that public aid contributions to the health sector have not increased since 2000 .
Furthermore , it appears that budget support has been very little used for the health sector in sub-Saharan Africa .
Consequently , Commissioner , you understand why in our report we return to the idea that it is absolutely essential for us to be more focused on the health sector , but also that there is nothing to guarantee that it is the MDG contracts that will enable us to achieve this .

Member of the Commission . - ( FR ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I wish first of all to thank the Committee on Development and its rapporteur , Mr Hutchinson , for this report which returns to a number of issues and concerns that we completely share .
More and better development aid is necessary if we want to achieve the Millennium Development Goals ( MDG ) by 2015 , but also aid that is far more predictable and less volatile , as your report very rightly reminds us .
These efforts will obviously be made using a combination of multiple instruments .
However , from my point of view , in the countries that allow it , budget support , whether general or sectional , remains the best adapted and most appropriate instrument .
Budget support is the best way of strengthening national systems and processes , increasing ownership by the countries , facilitating harmonisation , reducing transaction costs and so improving the management of public expenditure , and accelerating the achievement of development goals .
The Commission has already greatly increased the use of budget support and will do so again over the course of the next six years , within the framework of the tenth European Development Fund ( EDF ) .
It is to make this instrument more effective and more predictable and so the Commission has , in consultation with the Member States and other stakeholders , devised a longer-term form of budget support , which we have called the MDG contract , for countries that meet certain criteria : good past performance , reliable public finance management , appropriate sectional policy , and so on .
The MDG contract is the natural evolution of general budget supports , not just because it is more predictable but above all because it is focused on results and can have a response that is graduated according to performance .
These are partner states that commit to focusing their policies , and consequently their spending , on the MDG .
The MDG contract offers the following key elements : a six-year commitment , that is six full years as opposed to the normal duration of three years for general budget supports ; a guaranteed , fixed payment of at least 70 % of the total commitments , provided that there is no breach of the conditions in which payments become due or of the essential and fundamental elements of the cooperation ; a variable component of up to 60 % , intended to reward performance with a view to achieving the MDG and linked to results indicators , mainly in the fields of health and education , as well as progress in public finance management .
Countries are eligible if they have already put budget supports into practice in a satisfactory way as part of the ninth EDF , as well as those that demonstrate a strong commitment to ensuring the monitoring and achievement of the MDG .
This is to improve the budgetary resource management of countries where donors have their own coordination .
After evaluating 10 countries , the Commission awarded MDG contracts in seven of them : Burkina Faso , Ghana , Mali , Mozambique , Rwanda , Uganda , Tanzania and Zambia .
These programmes were presented to and awarded by the Member States last December .
Three contracts have already been signed : Zambia and Rwanda - which I signed personally - as well as Mali .
The others will be finalised in the next few weeks .

Collectively , these seven programmes represent approximately EUR 1.8 billion .
In other words : some 50 % of the overall general budget support and some 14 % of the tenth EDF 's total for national indicative programmes .
It is understood - in fact , your report encourages this - that we will seek to extend this measure to other countries , including non-ACP ones , according to experience gained from these first countries .
Obviously , other approaches will have to be devised for countries that are still not eligible for budget support , but the MDG contract already constitutes an important contribution to improving the effectiveness of aid and the acceleration of progress towards achieving the Millennium Development Goals .
The presentation is closed .
The vote will take place on Tuesday , 24 March 2009 .
Written Statements ( Rule 142 )
in writing . - The MDG contracts promise to constitute a significant shift towards a clearer road map for achieving the Millennium Development Goals .
It is of course important that the potential of those contracts will not be diminished by excessive administrative procedures of the Commission , as the rapporteur has pointed out .
The conditional nature of the EU development assistance could only prevail if the EU operated in a monopoly , being the sole provider of development assistance .
At the moment our efforts in Africa for example are to quite some extent in vain as the People 's Republic of China is exercising ' political dumping ' , when providing aid with no requirements for transition to democracy , rule of law and respect of human rights .
Some governments in Africa might cut the Commission red tape by disregarding our offer of development aid , which is extremely dangerous , since by that we lose our opportunity to guide those countries in the right direction .
I would like to ask the Commission to address this concern by simplifying procedures while retaining sufficient control over the disbursement of the resources that are provided .
Social Responsibility of subcontracting undertakings in production chains ( short presentation )
The next item is the report by Mr Lehtinen , on behalf of the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs , on the social responsibility of subcontracting undertakings in production chains .
rapporteur . - ( FI ) Mr President , Commissioner , subcontracting chains are commonplace in business .
They help organise work efficiently and flexibly .
They are essential for the internal market to function properly and constitute a necessary economic and logistical network .
For the sake of the viability of the markets and consumer protection , however , it is crucial to use legislation to establish the key responsibilities of contractors and subcontractors .
In this report the Commission is urged to establish a clear-cut legal instrument introducing contractor 's liability at European level , while respecting the different legal systems in place in the Member States and the principles of subsidiarity and proportionality .
Eight Member States already have legislation along these lines in place , but we also need to be able to regulate relationships between subcontracting chains at Community level .
Common European problems have to be solved with common rules .
Otherwise , those countries that have not regulated this area of business can distort competition at the expense of the others .
This is therefore not just a matter of the protection of workers , but of safeguarding the competitiveness of companies that respect the rules .
In a word , it is about prevention of the grey economy .
As long as subcontracting chains are a surreptitious way to keep wages down and avoid paying tax and social contributions , the burden will fall on the taxpayer and competing companies , most of which are small- and medium-sized enterprises .
The subcontractors too , which are frequently small firms , need clear rules when they are working for very big contractors .
We have already seen how country-specific systems also act as preventive forces .
The threshold for neglecting employers ' obligations will be higher if people can expect to be punished for criminal activity .
It is in the interests of all Europeans to adhere to minimal conditions of employment and clear rules .
Then the workforce can confidently move from one country to another , businesses can trust contracts , and consumers can be sure that the cost of a product or service is the right one and has been transparently determined .
It is no coincidence that the report talks specifically about the social responsibility of undertakings .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the Commission very much welcomes this report .
However important subcontracting may be for increasing productivity and competitiveness , we fully recognise the need for effective measures to ensure that it neither encourages nor facilitates non-compliance with employment conditions , particularly where there are long subcontracting chains .
Adequate , effective , deterrent penalties are needed to ensure that subcontractors meet their legal and contractual obligations in full , in particular in relation to workers ' rights .
Greater transparency in the subcontracting process will lead to greater overall protection of workers ' rights , an issue to which the Commission is - and will remain - very attached , as you know .
Whilst I might approve of your general principle , according to which European problems require European solutions , I would be more prudent in relation to the conclusion set out in paragraph 14 of the report , which says that the problem can only be resolved by introducing a clear-cut legal instrument that introduces joint and several liability at European level .
The report also seems to go in this direction in paragraph 15 , where it calls for an impact assessment on the added value and feasibility of such a Community instrument .
As regards the call for the Commission to guarantee effective compliance with the directive on the posting of workers , made in paragraph 25 , I would like to point out that we have recently set up a high-level working party on the posting of workers .
This working party consists of representatives from the Member States and the social partners and is aimed at improving the practical application of the directive and , in particular , administrative cooperation among Member States .
It will hold its first meeting on 25 March .
In this regard , I would like to mention a study entitled ' Liability in subcontracting processes in the European construction sector ' , published in 2008 by the European Foundation for the Improvement of Living and Working Conditions , which highlights both the major differences between the national joint liability systems and their level of effectiveness .
This study also highlighted the fact that there would appear to be no universal solution and recommended further debate and research , particularly in relation to cross-border issues .
The problem that we are trying to solve is of a social nature , but the solution proposed clearly has implications that go well beyond the social domain .
We therefore need to study its economic and legal repercussions in detail .
I fully agree that this problem deserves more complete research and that , before presenting draft legislation , we must study carefully various non-regulatory methods for dealing with some of the issues raised in the report , in other words : improved cooperation and coordination among national authorities , inspection and other national enforcement authorities ; an awareness of good practice within companies ; current guidelines and standards ; initiatives on social responsibility ; and transnational company agreements , into which are already built innovative provisions relating to risk assessment procedures and the supervision of subcontractors .
The presentation is closed .
The vote will take place on Thursday , 26 March 2009 .
Written Statements ( Rule 142 )
in writing . - The rise of sub-contracting in Europe has had far-reaching consequences for labour relations .
It is not just labour that is subcontracted .
The associated legal and financial obligations , such as , observing standards on wages and working conditions , and , the payment of taxes and social security contributions are also thereby externalised to subcontractors and employment agencies .
Worryingly , subcontracting may increasingly be used as a way of reducing direct social responsibility .
Thus , the idea of ' joint and several liability ' is crucial for ensuring that companies are responsible for their sub-contractors ' practices .
Clearly , the enforcement of legal obligations becomes more difficult in long and complex chains of interconnected companies .
This is especially so across borders where various levels of contractors can be established in different Member States and subject to different rules .
At the moment only eight Member States have national legislation covering the responsibility of subcontracting undertakings .
I strongly support this ETUC endorsed report which calls on the Commission to establish a clear-cut Community legal instrument introducing joint and several liability at European level , and , also requests the Commission to launch an assessment of the feasibility of an instrument on chain liability as a way of increasing transparency in the sub-contracting process .
An EU-India Free Trade Agreement ( short presentation )
The next item is the report by Mr Karim , on behalf of the Committee on International Trade , on an EU-India Free Trade Agreement .
deputising for the rapporteur . - Mr President , I spend a lot of my time in this Parliament telling people that I am not Mr Karim and that I am , in fact , Mr Kamall .

It must be confusing for people to hear Mr Kamall speaking on a Karim report .
I am speaking on his behalf as , owing to unforeseen circumstances , he cannot be here tonight , for which he apologises .
His report effectively covers trade in goods , services , investment and intellectual property , and development issues .
A joint alternative resolution by the PPE-DE , ALDE and UEN Groups has now been tabled , because it was felt that the original committee decision was the upshot of a rather unrepresentative vote , which left the report with several protectionist clauses intact .
The alternative resolution better highlights how important a trading partner India is for the EU and the benefits that the liberalisation of trade can bring to both countries .
The EU and India launched negotiations in June 2007 on what is termed a free trade agreement , but what many would probably more correctly call a preferential trade agreement .
The report calls for the conclusion of a comprehensive , ambitious and balanced free trade agreement between the EU and India , which should improve market access to goods and services , covering substantially many areas of trade , and including provisions on regulatory transparency in areas relevant to mutual trade investment , as well as things like sanitary and phytosanitary standards , intellectual property protection , trade facilitation and customs .
The main points of the report indicate that , if you look at trade in goods , India 's average applied tariffs have decreased to levels that are now comparable with other countries in Asia - notably India 's average applied tariff , which is now 14.5 % compared to an EU average of 4.1 % .
It also notes India 's concerns about the implications of REACH , costly certificates for exporting fruit to the EU and costly conformity procedures for the EC mark , and stresses that those issues must be resolved in the preferential trade agreement .
The report also points out that services liberalisation must in no way hinder the right to regulate services , including public services .
However , it should also be recognised that quite often the state is unable to provide so-called ' public ' services , and we should recognise that there is a role for non-state actors - the private sector - in providing essential services to the poor , especially when the state itself cannot do this on its own , quite often owing to a shortfall in income .
Trade in services between the EU and India is relatively unbalanced , with the EU exporting 1.5 % of its services to India , while India exports 9.2 % of its services to the EU .
The report also encourages India to develop appropriate data protection legislation to ensure that , in our trade in services , we can have confidence in the ability of Indian companies to handle large amounts of data , since there are concerns about data protection .
The report also recognises that the investment chapters have often come accompanied by a commitment to liberalising capital movements and renouncing capital controls .
So we ask the Commission to refrain from including such clauses , given the importance of capital controls , especially for poorer countries , to mitigate the impact of the financial crisis .
The report goes on to welcome India 's commitment to strong intellectual property protection and to the use of TRIPS flexibilities to meet certain public health obligations .
Once again , we should all be aware that too many obligations on public health can often leave citizens in poorer countries unable to access medicines , because there is no incentive for pharmaceutical companies to develop medicines for those countries .
Finally , the report recognises that a substantial development chapter is an essential part of any trade agreement , and that we should ensure trade and foreign direct investment .
It also recognises that there is concern , particularly in this House , over issues such as environmental standards and core labour , occupational health and safety legislation .
We should also recognise that , in seeking some sort of balance between trade issues and environmental protection , ILO standards etc , the pendulum can often swing too far one way and we end up with these taking precedence over trade and condemning poor countries to even more poverty because we make it difficult for entrepreneurs in those countries to develop capacities .
Mr President , I would like to thank the European Parliament for the keen interest it has shown in our negotiations on a free trade agreement between the European Union and India .
In particular , I am grateful to Mr Kamall and the Committee on International Trade for the excellent work that they , along with the associated Committee on Foreign Affairs and Committee on Development , have done in preparing the report on the EU-India Free Trade Agreement .
The exchanges with Parliament have been very comprehensive , and the draft motion for a resolution deals with almost all possible aspects of the negotiations on a free trade agreement between the European Union and India .
The opinions expressed are a useful tool for our negotiations on free trade agreements .
When we talk about the European Union-India free trade agreement , it is important to take into account the general context and complexity of our strategic relations with India , including the 1994 Cooperation Agreement and the Joint Action Plan , to mention but two of the major initiatives and dialogues that we have established with India .
We are convinced that it is extremely important to work with India to bring to a successful conclusion negotiations on an ambitious free trade agreement that will allow both parties - the European Union and India - to emerge as winners .
The more ambitious the free trade agreement , the greater the economic benefits that will accrue to each party - the European Union and India .
That is one of the main conclusions of the impact and sustainable development study that has been carried out by an independent consultant , in parallel with the negotiations .
The objective of the impact and sustainable development assessment was to analyse the economic , social and environmental impact of the future free trade agreement and to identify any necessary support measures .
The impact and sustainable development assessment is currently in its final phase and should be available in April , in other words , in time to support the negotiations under way .
Allow me to give you a brief progress report on these negotiations .
Six negotiating sessions have been held since the launch in June 2007 , with the sixth session taking place last week in Delhi , from 17 to 19 March .
We are expecting to convene two extra sessions this year , ideally after the Indian elections in April and before the European Union-India Summit in November .
As for the substance of these negotiations , progress has been made on all issues pertaining to the free trade agreement , but much work remains to be done .
More specifically , we have exchanged tariff proposals , we have had good discussions on several key service sectors and we have made progress in discussions on texts in almost all areas of the agreement .
However , we are still far from an agreement .
Before concluding , I would like once again to express the Commission 's gratitude to Parliament and to the rapporteur .
The Commission eagerly awaits other opportunities for effective cooperation with Parliament .
The presentation is closed .
The vote will take place on Thursday , 26 March 2009 .
Written Statements ( Rule 142 )
On Wednesday , our Parliament expressed its opinion on the future free trade agreement between the European Union and India .
Thanks to the work of the socialists , the text adopted in committee points out the economic and social fragility of India , a country in which 80 % of the population lives on less than USD 2 per day .
To confront this reality , the Socialist Group in the European Parliament has tabled a number of amendments pointing out that any strengthening of the EU 's trade relations with India should be accompanied by a strict framework , to prevent any liberalisation of public services , to guarantee access to public healthcare and essential medicines , and to protect the interests of the most vulnerable people and sectors .
Unsurprisingly , the right in Parliament has formed an alliance to propose a much more liberal text in plenary , calling in particular for the liberalisation of banking , insurance , postal services and public procurement .
In Wednesday 's vote , I will be defending the socialist vision of fair and equitable trade and I will oppose any attempt by the right to go back on these principles .
The EU 's trade in goods with India has more than doubled in value between 2000 and 2007 .
Exports rose from EUR 13.7 billion to EUR 29.5 billion , while imports rose from EUR 12.8 billion to EUR 26.3 billion .

In 2007 India accounted for 2.4 % of EU exports and 1.8 % of EU imports , and was the EU 's ninth most important trading partner .
I welcome this report because it calls for the conclusion of a comprehensive , ambitious and balanced Free Trade Agreement ( FTA ) between the EU and India which will improve market access for goods and services , covering substantially all trade , including provisions on regulatory transparency in areas relevant to mutual trade and investment , as well as conformity standards and assessment , SPS , IPR including enforcement , trade facilitation and customs , public procurement , and trade and competitions , as well as trade and development and the human rights clause as an essential element of the FTA .
I want to stress that the FTA must help :
achieve growing bilateral benefits for an ever-increasing number of citizens
achieve the Millennium Development Goals , including those for preventing environmental degradation and observing social standards .
India is a country of contrasts .
Its global image has been influenced by overpopulation , poverty ( 80 % of the Indian population live on less than USD 2 a day ) and disease .
Recently , progress in the field of economics has helped to turn India into a leading global economy .
However , India 's contribution to progress in the fields of medicine , technology and space research is in contrast to the shortages of food and clean water which affect the country .
The EU is India 's biggest foreign investor and trade partner .
In 2007 , EU investment amounted to 65 % of all investment in India .
India 's investment in the EU has also risen , many times over , during the last few years .
The EU should focus on ensuring a multilateral trade system , based on certain principles , as set out by the WTO , which offers the best opportunities for fair and honest international trade .
However , we should stress the fact that India needs to combat the large-scale problem of hunger in terms of global hunger indicators , India ranks 66th out of 88 countries .
India , which is a global nuclear power , has not signed the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty , either .
Another worrying issue is the problem of child labour , with children generally having to work in dangerous and unhealthy conditions .
Clauses concerning human rights and democracy should constitute a fundamental part of any free trade agreement signed with India .
We must also ensure that social and environmental agreements and standards are respected .
Food prices in Europe ( short presentation )
The next item is the report by Mrs Batzeli , on behalf of the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development , on the Food prices in Europe .
rapporteur . - ( EL ) Mr President , I should like to start by thanking the shadow rapporteurs in the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development and the four jointly competent committees of the European Commission with which we collaborated in depth in order to produce this report .
Commissioner , I should like to start by asking a very simple question : when consumers go to supermarkets to buy milk or yoghurt , why do they buy it ?
For the milk and the yoghurt or for the bottle and the tub ?
I put this question to you because the perception and attitude have been skilfully conveyed to consumers that they are buying a foodstuff where the industry that processes it , markets it and transports it is now more important than the agricultural product , the raw material itself .
About 15 years ago , agricultural produce accounted for approximately 50 % of the final value of the product ; today it does not exceed 20 % .

Farmers , both arable and livestock , are now ' anonymous ' persons for consumers .
Their bargaining power , on the question not only of the final price but also of the preservation of the qualitative and nutritional elements in the final product , lags behind the role which they should have .
We are not attempting to draw dividing lines , to classify the productive sectors in the supply chain , the farmers , manufacturers , wholesalers and retailers as ' the good ' , ' the bad ' and ' the ugly ' , because I do not believe that we are living in a ' Wild West ' society and economy ; I believe that we are living in an economy based on the regulations of the internal market of the European Union , a market which provides opportunity for growth and competitiveness when it operates transparently , but which ousts or eliminates producers and economic activities when unfair and opaque functions penetrate it .
The question we therefore have to deal with here today and in the future has two aspects :
firstly that of a rapprochement between consumers and producers through a quality policy in the food sector and by strengthening and jointly formulating ways of giving consumers more direct accessibility to productive agricultural areas and agricultural producers ;
secondly that of safeguarding - and I do not mean determining - the income of producers and consumers through a transparent pricing policy which will include mandatory arrangements for controlling and supervising intermediate productive sectors along the entire supply chain .
Obviously here we mainly mean the small and medium-sized enterprises at local and national level , as well as the large parent and subsidiary companies based in Europe and the workers , which must operate on the terms of a transparent internal market and not on the terms of economic offshoots such as cartels and oligopolies .
Today , therefore , where ( among other things ) :
real producer prices are falling dangerously ;
consumer prices are nearly five to ten times farm gate prices and , despite the reduction in inflation , consumer prices remain very high ;
the degree of concentration in the retail trade and in other processing companies has quadrupled over the last five years and the concentration will increase as a result of the economic crisis and the bankruptcy of small- and medium-sized and local enterprises , a state of affairs that will make negotiations between producers , companies and consumers ever more difficult ;
the malfunctions in the supply chain and its practices are evidently putting terms of healthy competition at risk ,
it is absolutely vital for there to be a coordinated European plan and integrated interventions in the food sector , from the farm to the fork .
It would not be an exaggeration if the Commission 's next intervention after the regulation and supervision of the financial system were to be in the food sector which , moreover , is also directly linked to the speculative moves of the said sector .
Citizens have the impression that it is the supply chains , the manufacturing industry and the retail trade which regulate the housewife 's shopping basket and not the income policy of the state and of the European Union .
I therefore believe that , in voting for the report by the Committee on Agriculture and waiting for the final proposals of the European Union on this matter , we shall address the perennial problems of the operation of the food market , which in turn must also operate impartially for the benefit of European citizens , European farmers and developing countries and create a sense of security in the laws of the market and the institutions .
First of all , I would like to thank Mrs Batzeli and the members of the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development , who drew up this report .
We are discussing it at a time of major difficulties , at a crucial time for the European Union food supply chain .
As you all know , the recession has led to a sudden slowdown in activity in most economic sectors in the European Union .
The agricultural sector has seen a real collapse in market prices , something which puts a serious question mark over farm incomes .
The situation is particularly serious in sectors of high added value , such as meat and dairy products .
In this context , it is essential for the food supply chain to work effectively if we wish to mitigate the effects of the crisis on farm incomes and ensure that consumers enjoy food products at more modest prices .
That is why the food supply chain and the issue of food prices remain at the forefront of the Commission 's concerns .
In addition , analysis of the structural factors leads us to fear a further escalation of prices of agricultural raw materials in the medium and long term .
By improving the operation of the food supply chain , it ought to be possible in future to avoid such high rises in food prices and to curb the instability of consumer prices .
I share most of the concerns raised in the report in relation to the need to improve the overall operation of the food supply chain .
In particular , there is a need for increased transparency all along the chain , in order to offer consumers better information and to improve the way added value is shared out along the chain .
Since last year , the Commission has introduced a series of initiatives aimed at improving the operation of the food supply chain .
As a result , the High Level Group on the Competitiveness of the Agro-Food Industry has just drawn up a set of strategic recommendations .
In addition , a Green Paper on Agricultural Product Quality was presented last year .
In the communication on food prices adopted in December , the Commission also proposed , in the form of a road map , several solutions for improving the operation of the food supply chain in Europe .
It is absolutely essential to make progress in the implementation of this road map .
In particular we must make progress in the introduction of a permanent European Observatory on the food supply chain and food prices .
By supplying reliable information on prices from one end of the chain to the other , we will be able to help combat the lack of transparency , whilst improving our understanding of how the chain operates .
We must also make progress in analysing how added value is shared out along the chain .
I attach particular importance to this issue .
As is recognised in the communication on food prices , imbalances between the negotiating power of agricultural producers and the rest of the chain are having a serious effect on producer margins in the agricultural sector .
It goes without saying that an effort to bring clarity and understanding to the question of how added value is shared out would be a first step towards restoring the balance of negotiating power all along the chain .
In this regard , it should be stressed that the competitiveness of the European Union 's food chain cannot be built to the detriment of some of its component parts .
It is essential for food producers and retailers in the agro-food sector to be able to continue to rely on a sustainable , competitive agricultural production platform within the European Union .
I am convinced that once it has been fully implemented , the road map proposed by the Commission will allow us to answer most of the questions and concerns raised in Mrs Batzeli 's report .
The presentation is closed .
The vote will take place on Thursday , 26 March 2009 .
Written Statements ( Rule 142 )
The report on which we must reach a decision on Thursday attempts to respond in practical terms to the difficulties of millions of our citizens who are suffering increased food prices .
In a context of decreased purchasing power in Europe , it was important that Parliament reach a decision on a problem for which the solutions are , nevertheless , known .
In fact , the difference in prices between the beginning and the end of the food supply chain can be as high as a one to five ratio and , even if the liberals still refuse to admit it , the problems of the market need tackling to ensure reasonable prices for consumers and decent revenues for farmers .
I myself have proposed that the importance of market-regulation instruments - more necessary than ever in the face of the crisis that we are going through - be reaffirmed in the text .
However , to ensure that ' accessible price ' does not become another way of saying ' poor-quality product ' , I have also asked for the notion of incentives for organic sectors to be inserted into the report .
It is desirable for consumers to be able to access quality products at reasonable prices , and this thanks to an ambitious policy of financial incentives aimed at this type of agricultural production .
Food prices have seen a very sharp rise recently .
There are two reasons for this : firstly , the global agricultural and food product crisis and secondly , market concentration , which has increased from 21.7 % in 1990 to over 70 % at the moment .
The prices paid by consumers are on average five times higher than those paid to producers .
Supermarket chains very often impose unfair conditions and make it difficult for farmers and small suppliers to access the market .
I support the European Commission 's idea of creating a European market monitoring system .
I also support the idea of a European competition network .
The funds from the Rural Development Programme should provide larger allocations in favour of producers .
The idea of revamping the ' local products ' concept and more effective support for traditional food markets are solutions which I strongly support .
I welcome the Batzeli report which highlights the large discrepancies between the prices of food products in supermarkets and the prices paid to producers .
This is , unfortunately , the reality too in countries with a standard of living far below the European average , like Romania .
If we reject any proposal for price controls , we cannot then fail to notice that the supermarkets ' negotiating power is excessive in relation to the producers .
This is also an area where we can take more firm action as part of the policy for protecting competition and consumers .
Artistic studies in the European Union ( short presentation )
The next item is the report by Mrs Badia i Cutchet , on behalf of the Committee on Culture and Education , on artistic studies in the European Union .
Mr President , although artistic education is now a mandatory subject in almost all Member States , there are substantial differences in the way it is taught .
Historically , artistic studies were linked to education during the earlier years .
Today , however , the lifelong learning approach and the development of new information and communication technologies ( ICTs ) have expanded the area traditionally devoted to art and culture , and have generated new forms of access and display for the sector .
The constant advance of ICTs has also favoured the promotion of a knowledge-based economy , in which intellectual capabilities and creativity occupy a pre-eminent place .
The motion for a resolution , which we will vote on tomorrow , is based on the idea that artistic education forms the basis for vocational training in the field of the arts and promotes creativity , as well as physical and intellectual development in that sphere ; it considers artistic education to be an essential component of learning in childhood and adolescence and argues that teaching it in schools will lay the foundations for truly democratising access to culture .
In addition , it values training as a very important factor for the success of professionals in the artistic and creative sector , since artistic studies that focus on developing a career and profession require of the students , in addition to talent , a solid cultural basis that can only be acquired through multidisciplinary and systematic training .
This increases the opportunities for access to employment in the sector in so far as it provides a general education , a research methodology , entrepreneurial abilities and business knowledge , as well as skills in various areas of activity .
Also , in a very special way , it recognises the economic and employment potential of creative , cultural and artistic industries in the European Union , which make a greater contribution than other highly recognised industries such as both the chemicals and the foodstuffs industries .
What is more , we should not forget that schools and centres for art and design education help to create new artistic styles and movements and to open up different cultural worlds , which strengthens the European Union 's image in the world .
The draft report considers that artistic education should be a compulsory element in syllabuses at all school levels and encourages the Member States to coordinate their policies with regard to artistic education at European Union level and to promote mobility of both students and teachers in this sector , paying increased attention to the recognition of qualifications among Member States .
We are also calling on the Council , the Commission and the Member States to define the role of artistic education as an essential pedagogical tool in enhancing the value of culture , to establish joint strategies for the promotion of artistic education policies and policies for training teachers specialising in this subject , and to recognise the important role played by artists and creativity in our society , as demonstrated by the European Year of Creativity and Innovation .
Lastly , the report emphasises the importance of using the resources provided by new information technologies and the Internet as channels for modern teaching geared to contemporary practice when introducing the artistic dimension into school curricula , and recommends that a European portal for artistic and cultural education be developed jointly in order to safeguard the development and promotion of the European cultural model .
For all these reasons , I would ask for majority support for the report , which will send out a clear message of support to professionals , students and businesses in the creative and cultural sector .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I would like , first of all , to thank Mrs Badia i Cutchet for her own-initiative report on artistic studies in the European Union .
This issue is occupying an increasingly important place at European level .
In fact , we all agree that culture and the arts form a fundamental part of education .
They help to develop sensitivity and self-confidence , essential qualities not only for our role as citizens but also for the role of economic operator that is in each of us .
There can be no doubt about this .
Artistic education is a vector of well-being , creativity and social integration .
It is essential that it be promoted in Europe 's education systems from as early an age as possible .
We share this vision and we are glad that your report refers to a number of significant initiatives taken at European Union level , such as the European Year of Creativity and Innovation .
The importance of the arts and artistic education in building a better society goes hand in hand with its impact on economic life .
According to recent estimates , the contribution of the cultural and creative industries to the creation of economic wealth is estimated at 2.6 % of European GDP .
In addition , any economic activity can benefit from the arts and cultural education .
Innovation encourages the creation of synergies between traditional areas of activity and more innovative ones .
Today we must combine technology and design , whilst integrating the principles of sustainability and economic viability .
This combination requires a redefinition of the ways in which knowledge is transmitted and acquired .
These different issues are set out in the European Reference Framework document that defines key competences for lifelong learning in 2006 .
In this framework , it is stated that artistic and cultural expression is essential to the development of creative competences , which are so useful in the context of working life .
The European Agenda for Culture has introduced new methods , particularly the structured dialogue with civil society and , recently , new open methods of cultural coordination .
The implementation of these methods has been made possible thanks to an initial three-year work plan , adopted by the Council on 21 May 2008 , which defines five priority action areas .
In this framework , a working group made up of experts from the Member States was set up around the theme of synergies between culture and education .
This group will be drawing up recommendations to identify good practices at national level and will also make a number of recommendations to the Member States and the European institutions .
In addition , it will provide methods for assessing the progress achieved in the policy areas that fall under its mandate .
Finally , this group should make a valuable contribution to the European Forum for Culture scheduled to take place on 29 and 30 September 2009 , in Brussels .
I have just been reading an answer from my fellow commissioner , Mr Figel .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place on Tuesday , 24 March 2009 .
Written Statements ( Rule 142 )
The European Parliament report on artistic studies in the EU is part of the continuing efforts to develop intercultural dialogue and is vitally important in the context of the European Year of Creativity and Innovation .
Greater and more specific attention must undoubtedly be focused on artistic studies .
It is important that it is a compulsory part of the education programme and from the earliest age too , because it stimulates emotional and cultural development in the young generation .
Giving these studies a stronger practical purpose and including interactive teaching would result in a deeper understanding of national and European cultural values .
Providing greater mobility for students , teachers and professionals employed in this sector is the direct way to create an awareness of European identity and foster cultural and religious tolerance .
Member States must invest in creating better opportunities for informal and independent artistic studies and prevent a drop in the number of programmes in this area .
Their support for artists ' professional life will increase the general interest in different forms of artistic studies .
Public-private partnerships in this area will help modernise the education programmes and encourage more active integration of new technologies in the teaching process .
The majority of resources for a coordinated European policy on artistic studies take the form of investments for boosting Europe 's cultural influence globally , for creativity and , indirectly , for the EU 's economy .
Active dialogue with citizens on Europe ( short presentation )
The next item is the report by Mr Hegyi , on behalf of the Committee on Culture and Education , on Active dialogue with citizens on Europe .
Europe is the promised land for people from distant continents or the Balkans who wish to join Europe .
At the same time , Europe is in many respects the symbol of disappointment , of boredom or of bureaucracy for those who are already inside the gate : EU citizens , whether opinion-shaping intellectuals or ordinary citizens .
When I received the report , I began to read it with great enthusiasm .
I must say , my enthusiasm declined to some extent by the end , since I myself realised how many obstacles there are to engaging in active dialogue with citizens , and how far removed the bureaucratic machinery of the European Union is from the daily lives and wishes of its citizens .
In any case , I realised thanks to the report that - perhaps unsurprisingly - the lower the educational level or status of our citizens , the less they understand integration and the more eurosceptical they are .
I think , therefore , and this is the most important part of my report , that beyond young people - who can easily be won over to the cause of European integration via educational means - we should primarily target those whom we have so far not been able to reach .
This includes inhabitants of small villages , the working classes , pensioners , and generally those of more modest means and circumstances .
We need to try somehow to communicate to them the idea of Europe and the values of European unity .
In my report I recommend that many more students be enabled to obtain an Erasmus scholarship than is currently the case ; a separate proposal to this effect has been drawn up by the youth branch of the Hungarian Socialist Party .
Only a small percent of Hungarian university students are able to take advantage of this student exchange programme , although it would be desirable for everyone who obtains a university degree to have spent at least half a year studying abroad .
My own idea was that there should be a unified , one-year common European curriculum in history teaching .
Students should study the same European history in all 23 official languages and all 27 Member States for at least one year .
The Commission did not lend much support to this proposal , and included a watered-down version of it in its text .
I suggested , based on the recommendation of Hungarian university teachers , that we create a European open university , in other words a sort of ' Volkshochschule ' , a popular community college .
European citizens should be able to enrol anywhere in Europe , regardless of their school certificates or diplomas , for a relatively freely structured training programme that offers education in the history of the European Union and of its creation and workings .
It has long been the wish of Members of the European Parliament , their desire but one might also say their demand , that Euronews , which is funded - at least in part - by EU money , should broadcast programmes in each Member State 's official language .
There is something absurd about the fact that Euronews broadcasts in Arabic or Russian but not in Hungarian or in some other Member States ' languages .
I am sad to report , by the way , Commissioner - I presume that you are hearing this for the first time - that cable television packages in Budapest have dropped the English-language Euronews , and are offering a Chinese-language programme instead , for unfortunately there is more demand for Chinese television than for Euronews , given that the latter is not broadcast in Hungarian , whereas there is a considerable number of Chinese people living in our country now .
There was much debate , and I would like to inform the Commissioner , if he is present , that I would also have liked to recommend that European Union officials be able to communicate with the media more openly than has hitherto been the case .
The problem , however , is that often there is no one who can competently explain the Commission 's position , and therefore only the opinion of its opponents is heard .
Finally , as my time is up , my last sentence is that I recommended that local non-governmental organisations become involved in EU campaigns , for these are much better acquainted with local communities , and know the language in which they can reach their populations .
Mr President , allow me just a small but completely personal digression that has nothing to do with the question that my colleague asked .
I do not fully understand your desire to see NGOs participate in the election campaign .
I do not understand , but I will pass on this request to my colleague .
The current political and economic situation is obviously increasing the need for an active dialogue with the citizens .
The latter must be informed of the changes to the European Union that have a direct or indirect effect on their daily lives and in which they must be able to be involved .
This has formed the basis of the Commission 's work during the last four years .
I very much welcome the report by Mr Hegyi entitled ' Active dialogue with citizens on Europe ' .
We are striving to give the citizens of the 27 Member States of the European Union a wide range of basic information on the European Union , so that they can not only understand how the European Union could help to respond to the major challenges facing Europe and the world today , but also exchange and share their opinions on this issue .
We are also looking to create many more accessible forums in which to pursue this debate , using all the resources and all the technologies available today : in on-line forums , via the media and at local level .
Whilst agreeing with a number of the recommendations set out in the report , my colleague is unable to support the idea that communication has not worked up until now .
She also says that , whilst our communication has certainly improved over recent years , we still have to be realistic about what can be achieved with a budget of only EUR 100 million for 27 Member States , 23 languages and almost 500 million people .
In addition , the Commission can certainly not be alone in communicating with the citizens on the issue of Europe .
A collective effort from all the institutions and all the Member States is needed .
This is why we have negotiated an agreement with the Member States and with Parliament for joint communication on Europe .
This political agreement entitled ' Communicating Europe in Partnership ' was signed on 22 October 2008 .
This is the first time that the institutions of the Member States of the European Union have made a common commitment jointly to communicate on Europe with the citizens of the European Union .
It is important for us now fully to implement this agreement .
I am in complete agreement about the importance of the process for consulting the citizens and about the need to extend the dialogue to all levels of society .
Regular dialogue between the Commission and representatives of civil society began over thirty years ago .
It takes account of the policy of openness and inclusion that the Commission has been applying for many years and illustrates the great variety of fields of action and the diversity of the parties involved .
I would like to stress that cooperation between the Commission 's delegations and Parliament 's information offices in the Member States is working very well overall .
The forthcoming European elections are a very good example of the political will of these two institutions to cooperate in order to establish joint communication priorities .
As regards the need for information at local and regional levels , aimed particularly at young people , first-time voters and women , I note with satisfaction the congratulations the Commission has received for the choice of projects under Plan D.
I will take this opportunity to announce that the Commission also intends , in the context of the European elections , to run special activities in the framework of the Debate Europe Plan D initiative .
As for the creation of a new website and the establishment of links with local television stations , I would like to say that the Commission is in the process of creating networks of radio and television operators that will broadcast programmes on European issues .
Once they are all up and running , these networks , together with Euronews , will reach between 60 and 90 million citizens each week in all the languages of the European Union .
As for the importance of introducing courses in European law and European history into the school curriculum , the Commission shares the opinion that young people should be taught the essential facts about the European Union at school .
We hope that the Member States will follow up this suggestion on this important issue .
There are many other interesting recommendations that are worthy of our attention , but unfortunately we have only a limited amount of time .
Allow me to conclude by returning to an essential aspect of the framework of efforts made by the Community institutions : effective communication is possible only with the close cooperation of all the parties involved .
The Commission appreciates the unfailing support it receives from Parliament .
For my part , I applaud your personal commitment as a member of the European Parliament .
The presentation is closed .
The vote will take place on Tuesday , 24 March 2009 .
Written Statements ( Rule 142 )
in writing . - This is one of the most important issues which needs to be addressed .
The European population doesn 't feel that they are European citizens .
The concept of citizenship of the EU is still unclear whilst the citizenship of the individual nationality remains predominant .
Most citizens do not feel part of the process and they view the European Union as an institution apart .
Positive reconnecting includes enhanced dialogue between the citizens and the European institutions , the need to ratify the Lisbon Treaty , the importance of a consultation process and joint open debates .
A year ago in April 2008 we came up with the idea ' Debate Europe ' which gives an opportunity to break the often artificial divide between national and European issues .
At the end of the day , however , the citizens of Europe must have a clear idea of the direction which the European process is to take .
There are two approaches which cannot continue to exist in parallel .
A choice has to be made .
Are we for a fully integrated Union or are we for a fine running of the present status quo .
When citizens see their governments wavering from one to the other , who can blame them if they feel alien to the process itself ?
Gyula Hegyi 's report sheds light on an important contemporary problem .
The ratification of the Lisbon Treaty , which is a guarantee of a more effective , democratic European Union , was rejected by the Irish in a referendum .
Since then , this has been the source and origin of uncertainty and disorientation in Europe .
We must make it possible for European citizens to have a more effective voice in shaping European Union policies .
To do so , appropriate education is needed , for there is greater opposition to integration among those with low levels of education .
For instance , it is essential to provide education in general EU and citizenship knowledge in open universities or as part of secondary school curricula .
It is important for people to know their rights , to know that the EU is not working above their heads , but with them .
We need to ensure that appropriate information sources are made available in the less developed regions .
The guarantor of a functioning democracy is not the bureaucracy but the citizens themselves - this is the core of democratic culture .
It is indispensable that the media help develop communication between institutions and citizens , as well as communication among citizens .
We cannot expect responsible decisions , or any decisions at all , on the part of citizens , if we do not provide them with suitable information .
Providing information is our responsibility and our duty , whereas decision making is the citizens ' right .
This May it will be five years since Hungary joined the European Union , and we can already see that the European Union is not faceless , but that the EU is us , the sum of all individual citizens .
We need to know that decision making is in our hands .
So let us take advantage of this opportunity .
in writing . - ( FI ) My thanks go to the rapporteur for an excellent job .
To his credit , he raises many important aspects and problems associated with the interaction between the EU and its citizens .
The EU is not the number one favourite with the people in any of the Member States of the Union .
The Irish referendum last July seemed to show that the Irish , at least , did not want more Union .
For some reason the negative messages and fears of the state getting swallowed up by a faceless Brussels get across better than any news about all the good the Union has achieved .
The great unknown is always too easy a threat , and it is easy to join that particular chorus .
A stronger commitment on the part of individuals and NGOs to all the activities of the Union would make it more acceptable .
With regard to legal issues in particular , individuals and organisations should be given more scope for having an influence and expressing their opinion at all stages of the legislative process .
The rapporteur also mentions an interesting fact in regard to the most recent EU referendums : that women voted against the EU more often than men .
Obviously , for some reason women in particular feel the EU is somehow alien to them .
One reason is obvious : the Union has a very male face .
The President of the Commission is a man , as are almost 70 % of the Commissioners .
Likewise , it is a man that strikes the gavel of the President of the European Parliament and a man that is Chairman of most of the parliamentary committees .
It is important that gender equality is implemented as much as possible in the forthcoming term when ' top ' posts in the EU are being filled .
At least one woman should be appointed to these .
Active dialogue with civil society is the most important way to bolster the Union 's legitimacy .
As always , the approaching European Parliament elections make the issue of the level of information provided and deficiencies in the dialogue with citizens , specifically at a European level , very topical .
In this context , I welcome the motion for a resolution for active dialogue with citizens , which underlines the importance of involving European institutions , the trans-European education system and the mass media .
The rejection of the Constitutional Treaty in France and Holland and Ireland 's opposition to the Treaty of Lisbon expressed through a referendum have highlighted that initiating a campaign targeted at citizens with a lower level of education is a viable and necessary strategy , which I fully support .
Given the increased level of Internet access in the European Union 's Member States , we should deploy this tool and use it to make dialogue with citizens more effective .
This could allow people 's opinions to be recorded , which would be evaluated later on and incorporated as part of our decision-making process .
I also think that the EU 's history , the way it works and citizens ' rights should feature as basic components in the curriculum at European level .
I therefore strongly believe that the conditions can be guaranteed for a coherent dialogue with citizens , which will deal with Europe and the European Union from a different perspective , based on accurate information and knowledge .
Ladies and gentlemen , I would like to congratulate Mr Hegyi on his wonderful report which I am sure will make a vital contribution to initiating civil dialogue in the European Union .
The successful achievement of the European institutions ' overall communication priorities in partnership with Member States will be an important step towards making the European Union 's citizens better informed .
Only well-informed Europeans can make use of the opportunities offered to them and take part in an active dialogue on Europe .
We have all witnessed the consequences resulting from the problems with ensuring people are kept informed : ' No ' votes in referendums and the blocking of European development .
As chairwoman of a citizens association in Bulgaria , I strongly believe that getting citizens involved in the decision-making processes will give them the opportunity to contribute directly to the political process at EU level .
I believe that this is one of the important areas which must be quickly reformed and improved .
I believe that this report will enable the European Parliament to give the necessary guidelines and recommendations to the other institutions , but also to the civil organisations because citizens are the key element in Europe 's future development .
Without their cooperation and involvement , it will be impossible for us to achieve the objective which we have set ourselves .
Combating female genital mutilation in the EU ( short presentation )
The next item is the report by Mrs Muscardini , on behalf of the Committee on Women 's Rights and Gender Equality , on combating female genital mutilation in the EU .
rapporteur . - ( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I think it is particularly fitting that Commissioner Michel is taking part in our debate .
As we know , he always pays great attention to human rights issues and tragedies in Africa .
In fact , Mr Michel 's presence gives me hope that the Commission may give serious consideration to an issue that today not only affects 28 African countries and various countries in the Middle East and neighbouring countries , but is now a particularly distressing problem within the European Union itself .
The mass immigration that has taken place in recent years has brought this tragedy to EU countries .
Tens of thousands of girls and young women are at risk every day of suffering a terrible practice that injures them irreversibly from a physical point of view , but also does extremely serious psychological damage .
That is why - although Parliament has already condemned this practice on several occasions in previous years and in fact gave funding through DAPHNE to 14 projects to combat female genital mutilation - that is why today we again find ourselves discussing this topic , because the phenomenon has unfortunately not become less prevalent , but remains on the increase .
We must have the courage to adopt a more appropriate serious method of prevention through cultural campaigns able to make immigrant women , but also the fathers of these girls , understand that following a tribal rite , which has nothing to do with religion , is no way to integrate or create a future for their daughters .
Consider a girl who attends a French , Italian or Belgian school and suddenly , after having socialised with her peers , finds herself snatched from normality and forced to suffer a tragedy that will mark her for life .
This girl is not only physically mutilated , but it is impossible for her to resume a normal relationship with other people ; she feels diminished , different , and in our society we do not want people who are different .
We want people who , no matter what their religion , skin colour or geographical origin , can work together to build a better Europe , closer to its citizens .
For this reason , Mr President , Commissioner , we as Parliament - and I would like to thank all my colleagues from the committee who helped me draft this report - want the laws of all Member States to be harmonised so that female genital mutilation is classed as an offence .
We do not want palliative proposals such as ' pricking ' .
We want women to be truly equal with men ; we do not want initiation rites , but real integration instead .
We want NGOs to be able to carry out their work , we want a prevention policy that involves immigrant women 's associations , we want to punish anybody who seeks to mutilate girls and drag them into a perverse spiral of desperation and marginalisation .
The report covers many areas and I think Members have had the opportunity to examine and evaluate it .
I believe everyone should join in this call for a purposeful Europe that combines the efforts of its three institutions to combat this horrible crime that violates human rights .
Mr President , both on my own and my colleague 's behalf , I would like to thank Mrs Muscardini for her speech , as I believe that she has put her finger on what is both a tragedy and a scandal .
I would really like to thank Mrs Muscardini for her excellent report on this major issue of the fight against female genital mutilation in the European Union .
The European Commission has very clearly denounced , both within the Union and in third countries , the unacceptable nature of traditional practices that seriously undermine the fundamental right of women and young girls to respect for their physical and mental integrity .
We are obviously in full agreement with the report .
We think that all the Member States of the European Union should take strong measures .
I would say much stronger measures should be taken to put an end to these practices , both within the European Union and in third countries , because it is totally unacceptable and quite incredible that this can still go on within the European Union .
We must also ensure , in the framework of all the political dialogues that we hold with third countries , that the latter fully understand our position .
I would like to move away from the text for a moment to say that I can assure you that this issue is always on the agenda in all the political dialogues that we hold with developing countries .
Just recently , President Compaoré of Burkina Faso called me and said that they were just about to adopt a law to prohibit these practices , although this will be no easy matter .
It should be pointed out that there are obviously some clans and some tribes that still carry on this practice , and it is quite a sensitive subject in the country , but he really had a desire to make progress and that , I believe , is important .
You will also be aware that the Commission regularly releases Community funding to support projects in Europe and third countries that aim to prevent and eradicate female genital mutilation and to give help to the victims and young girls at risk .
In Europe , our main instrument is the DAPHNE III programme , which supports European non-governmental organisations and local and regional public institutions and authorities in their fight against female genital mutilation .
Since its launch in 1997 , DAPHNE has cofinanced 14 projects specifically dedicated to this issue , providing a total amount of around EUR 2.4 million .
The DAPHNE projects have enabled us to implement community training and support programmes , to carry out awareness campaigns , to analyse national legislation , to gather information and statistics , to develop tools and to establish best practices for use by the actors on the ground , and to recommend policy directions to European and national decision makers .
We are evidently determined to maintain our support for such actions and to continue to deal with the issue within the European Union , not only in the context of violence prevention and victim support , but also in the areas of immigration , asylum and criminal justice .
I am going to turn my attention away from the text again for just a moment .
I have to tell you that I am somewhat shocked by a certain kind of cowardice on the part of our governments and some politicians who consider this to be part of culture and therefore untouchable .
I am sorry : the minimum we should expect of people who come to Europe is that they comply with the rules in force .
I believe that there can be no two-speed justice ; there can be no concept of two speeds .
This has no effect on the capacity of a European country to welcome incomers , rather the contrary .
This is a debate that I myself have experienced in my own country in the past .
I must say that I am shocked that some people , on the pretext of respecting the culture of migrants , basically refuse to penalise this type of thing .
I think that if we want at least to sort out this issue within Europe , we must reach the stage where we penalise these practices .
We need to have this political courage , and I do not think that it would hamper a country 's ability to welcome incomers if we were to say : ' This is our constitution , these are our rules , these are our human values , and you must comply with them . If you do not comply with them , you will be acting outside the law and you will be punished . '
That is the end of my aside , but I am glad I have said these things because I fully share your irritation regarding this issue .
In the framework of its external aid to third countries , the Commission is also applying three policies to combat female genital mutilation .
First of all , as I told you , it is making the issue of the emancipation of women , their human rights and their health an integral part of any political and strategic dialogue it conducts with the partner governments .
Secondly , it is supporting actions that argue and lobby for improved national legislation as well as for the creation of national policies suitable for promoting and protecting women 's rights and for banning all harmful practices .
Thirdly , it is supporting initiatives intended to strengthen the scope for action of political leaders , along with awareness campaigns aimed at all sectors of society .
The multiannual Hague Programme , covering the various actions that will be carried out to develop the area of justice , freedom and security , comes to an end in 2010 .
We are going to present the new Stockholm programme 2010-2014 in a communication in Spring 2009 .
I can confirm to you that this programme will lay great emphasis on the aspect relating to the protection of fundamental rights and of victims , including the promotion and protection of children 's and women 's rights .
Although the Commission has not yet drawn up a specific strategy for combating female genital mutilation , we are determined to continue our support for actions aimed at preventing it , and we intend to carry on raising this issue within the framework of the Union 's internal and external policies .
The presentation is closed .
The vote will take place on Tuesday , 24 March 2009 .
Written Statements ( Rule 142 )
Each year in Europe , 180 000 migrant women suffer or are at risk from suffering genital mutilation .
It is important to remember that these mutilations constitute a violation of human rights that has very serious physical and psychological consequences .
These practices cannot be justified on the grounds of cultural or religious traditions .
In order to put a stop to them , the Member States must enforce compliance with the prohibition laid down in their criminal law , and the practice of mutilation must be considered a criminal offence .
At the same time , actual or potential victims must be given access to legal and medical assistance .
The EU must increase its support for those NGOs that are doing remarkable work on the ground in the areas of prevention and assistance .
At national and European levels , targeted information and education campaigns would remove the taboos associated with these practices whilst informing families of the criminal consequences of such mutilations .
It is therefore important for the EU to tackle this problem by defining joint preventive actions to prohibit the practice of mutilation in the EU and by referring to this prohibition in all cooperation agreements concluded with third countries .
Genital mutilation is a social problem that concerns us all .
Multilingualism : an asset for Europe and a shared commitment ( short presentation )
The next item is the report by Mr Graça Moura , on behalf of the Committee on Culture and Education , on Multilingualism : an asset for Europe and a shared commitment .
The Commission Communication entitled ' Multilingualism : an asset for Europe and a shared commitment ' follows on from an already long series of documents produced by Parliament , the Commission , the Council , the Committee of the Regions and the European Economic and Social Committee , in which the issue of multilingualism is tackled from various angles .
In my report , I reiterate the positions previously adopted by the European Parliament and generally endorse the Commission 's view that the linguistic and cultural diversity of the EU constitutes an enormous competitive advantage and that there is a need for full support for language teaching and exchange programmes in the educational and cultural spheres , both inside and outside the Union .
I also highlight the importance of language as a factor of social inclusion .
I confirm the importance of dialogue with other regions of the globe , paying attention to the specific links existing in terms of language , history and culture between the countries of the EU and third countries .
I indicate the need for policies supporting translation , both literary and technical .
I tackle the issue of multilingualism in the audiovisual sector , the need to support language teachers , and the extension of language competence indicators to all the official EU languages , without prejudice to their also being extended to other languages spoken and studied in Europe , including classical Greek and Latin .
With regard to the teaching of languages , both at school and in adulthood , I maintain , among many other aspects , that education in the mother tongue is fundamental to all other teaching .
Parents and guardians must be able to choose the official language in which their children are to be educated in countries with more than one official language or where an official language and regional languages coexist .
I also maintain that no schoolchild should be deprived of education in the official language of the state .
I would underline that at no point in my report is the importance of regional or minority languages disputed .
I clearly recognise and respect these languages and at no point try to obstruct them .
There is not one aspect of my report which is incompatible with these languages .
However , an alternative proposal has been tabled by Socialist , Liberal and Green Members , which quite simply omits the three points that I have just mentioned .
As a result , principles which are connected with fundamental rights and people 's freedoms and which for a long time have been enshrined , accepted and practised in the European Union are about to be eliminated due to pressure from Galician , Catalan and Basque nationalists .
If this alternative proposal is adopted , the European Parliament will have given way .
These intentions are perfectly clear .
In today 's edition of the Spanish newspaper El País , you can read on page 37 that , just three months ago , the Supreme Court decided that a box should be included on the pre-enrolment form , asking parents in which language they want their children to receive their primary education , which is something that the Catalan Government has not done .
I do not feel that this alternative should be accepted .
In contrast to the points made in my report , it results in unacceptable protection of extreme nationalist tendencies and also unacceptably contradicts our fundamental rights and freedoms and even the principle of subsidiarity , not to mention that this alternative is also contrary to principles that are already enshrined in previous texts of the European Parliament and the Council and that have never been called into question .
I therefore urge this House to be very careful .
The alternative tabled must be rejected and my report must be adopted , as occurred in the Committee on Culture and Education on 17 February , with 20 votes in favour , 3 against and 8 abstentions .
Mr President , the European Union must be a place of respect for democracy and pluralism , not a place of exclusion or unreasonable curtailment of fundamental rights and freedoms .

Member of the Commission . - ( FR ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I would like first to thank Mr Graça Moura for his own-initiative report on multilingualism .
This report supports the Commission 's approach and lays emphasis on the quality of language teaching and teachers , on an integrated approach to reach all strata of our society , on linguistic diversity , whilst facilitating our understanding of the role of the media and of literary translation , and on linguistic and cultural links with third countries .
I share the rapporteur 's opinion that multilingualism has a major impact on the daily lives of Europe 's citizens , given the abundance of communications , growing mobility and migration , and increasing globalisation .
The principle of mother tongue plus two and foreign language learning at an early age are the reference points of our multilingualism policy .
Our approach is based on this established right .
It reinforces the importance of lifelong learning , and its objective is to include the most vulnerable groups in our society .
I am referring in particular to those people who have abandoned their studies , immigrants and those who speak only one language or who are linguistically less competent .
In addition , we wish to increase our efforts in relation to apprentices , adults and older people who are no longer in education and who may miss out on the development .
I welcome your support for our approach .
To reach these groups , individual motivation and the implementation of appropriate teaching methods are essential .
New technologies , such as the Internet and interactive audiovisual media , offer many possibilities to reach these groups and to develop and adapt teaching methods to their specific needs and abilities .
At European level , our lifelong learning programme promotes all languages : the official languages of the European Union , regional and minority languages , and the other languages spoken around the world .
This is a reflection of the new reality in the Union and also of the linguistic needs of our citizens .
In a context of increasing mobility and migration , it is essential for people to master the national language or languages if they are to become fully integrated into society .
However , I would like to point out in this context that it is the Member States that are the main decision-makers as regards language policy , including regional and minority languages whose framework is laid down in the Council of Europe 's European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages .
I welcome the general support Parliament has given to our approach to multilingualism .
The presentation is closed .
The vote will take place on Tuesday , 24 March 2009 .
Written Statements ( Rule 142 )
The linguistic and cultural diversity of the EU 's 27 Member States is beneficial to understanding and cooperation , as well as to cross-border labour mobility and the assimilation of European values .
It is important to constantly improve EU policies aimed at encouraging education in the mother tongue and guaranteeing full mutual intelligibility between languages .
We need cooperation between national authorities and the European Commission to implement practices as efficiently as possible in order to achieve integration through accepting linguistic differences .
Romania is one of the EU Member States which guarantees a level of protection and support above the European average for minorities , promoting education in their own languages .
The Babeş-Bolyai University in Cluj-Napoca is an outstanding example of the promotion of multilingualism .
Unfortunately , demonstrations have been organised , even at the European Parliament , and initiatives have been launched which have called for the dismantling of the Babeş-Bolyai University on the grounds of wrongful discrimination based on ethnic separation .
This is why I wish to draw your attention to the danger posed by the deterioration in the tone of the debate on ethnic matters .
Respect for minorities ' rights and the promotion of multilingualism must not be perverted by being turned into smokescreens behind which actions are being carried out against the European spirit and interethnic harmony .
Multilingualism must be a common denominator , not a factor of division for the European Union .
There are practical arguments supporting multilingualism : it reduces the risk of unemployment , increases the chances of finding employment , helps increase the quality of the services provided and labour productivity , and facilitates mobility .
We all know what they are , and opinions tend to agree from this point of view .
I would like to stress at this point the importance of another reason for upholding multilingualism and related measures .
Multilingualism contributes to the affirmation of values and attitudes which are essential for the European social model : mutual understanding , trust and solidarity .
It can help achieve unity effectively in a world of diversity .
In this respect , we also insist on the need to preserve linguistic diversity in Europe .
One way to achieve this objective would be to learn as a second foreign language languages other than international languages .
The languages of neighbouring countries can be learnt , or of ethnic minorities in one 's own country , as well as languages spoken in emerging economies with which relations are flourishing .
I would like to express the belief that the positive effects of such a policy can be demonstrated later on in everyday life .
in writing . - ( DE ) Linguistic diversity is important .
It is part of the day-to-day reality in the European Union and is gaining increasing significance in the relationships between the Member States , in the way in which our multicultural societies live together and in the common policy measures taken by the European Union .
However , the decision-making power on matters of language policy lies primarily with the Member States .
It is not the responsibility of the European Parliament to lay down requirements and recommendations for language policy .
The fact that the EU has a Commissioner for Multilingualism makes it clear that reform of the Commission is urgently needed and that there must be fewer Commissioners than there are Member States .
I would like to congratulate my colleague , Mr Graça Moura , for the way in which he has successfully combined in this draft report general , regional and even local interests .
I personally suggested that citizens belonging to an ethnic group speaking a minority language should properly learn the official language of the state they live in .
This would certainly provide an advantage for finding a job and in terms of good social integration .
Unfortunately , the relevant amendment was not approved in the competent committee , but I still strongly believe that this would be very useful .
On the other hand , I suggested that officials who , as part of their work , come into frequent contact with citizens from other Member States should be encouraged to learn a second European language .
I feel that this would be beneficial , taking into account the migration of labour across the whole of Europe , as well as mobility for the purposes of tourism .
This is the only way in which we can encourage communication and intercultural understanding , which are basic values of the European Union .
Agenda for next sitting : see Minutes
Closure of the sitting
( The sitting was closed at 11.05 p.m. )
Opening of the sitting
( The sitting was opened at 9 a.m. )
Documents received : see Minutes
Green Paper on territorial cohesion and debate on the future reform of the cohesion policy - Regional policy best practice and obstacles to use of Structural Funds - Urban dimension of cohesion policy - Complementarities and coordination of cohesion policy with rural development measures - Implementation of the Structural Funds Regulation 2007-2013 : results of negotiations on national cohesion strategies and operational programmes - A European initiative for the development of micro-credit in support of growth and employment ( debate )
The next item is the joint debate on the following reports :
by Mr van Nistelrooij , on behalf of the Committee on Regional Development , on the Green Paper on territorial cohesion and debate on the future reform of the cohesion policy ;
by Mrs Krehl , on behalf of the Committee on Regional Development , on regional policy best practice and obstacles to use of Structural Funds ;
by Mr Vlasák , on behalf of the Committee on Regional Development , on the urban dimension of cohesion policy in the new programming period ;
by Mr Roszkowski , on behalf of the Committee on Regional Development , on complementarities and coordination of cohesion policy with rural development measures ;
by Mr Mikolášik , on behalf of the Committee on Regional Development , on the implementation of the Structural Funds Regulation 2007-2013 : results of negotiations on national cohesion strategies and operational programmes ; and
by Mr Becsey , on behalf of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs , on a European initiative for the development of micro-credit in support of growth and employment .
Madam President , it is the express wish of Parliament 's Committee on Regional Development that there should be a single joint debate at the end of this term on the future of the cohesion policy , but today and tomorrow no less than five important reports by Members of this House are to be debated and also , so close to the European elections , voted on .
We are talking about the European Community 's biggest budget and the most visible part as far as the citizens are concerned .
The cohesion policy has given Europe a face that shows its interconnectedness and solidarity .
No other part of the world has generated so much mutual cohesion .
Cohesion is once again also a central objective of the new Treaty of Lisbon .
It also adds a third component , namely that of territorial cohesion .
Unusual times call for new answers .
The financial crisis , tougher competition as a result of globalisation , the climate crisis and the failure , as yet , to achieve the Lisbon objectives demand a more integrated approach , together with a strengthening of , and an improvement drive in , regional policy .
We deal with these matters in this Green Paper .
This Green Paper is in no way business as usual , but a call for better governance and territorial cohesion that also criticises developments where some regions fly high and there is progress in big-city areas , while other regions are left behind .
That is not the Europe that this Parliament expects .
In this joint debate today we are therefore also setting the course for the post-2013 period , after the review of the legislation with which we will be beginning the next parliamentary term , after the elections .
I will briefly go over the most important points in this debate and in territorial cohesion .
Back in 2005 , Mr Guellec set out Parliament 's wishes in his report .
The new territorial dimension is now set as a permanent objective under Articles 13 and 174 of the new Treaty of Lisbon .
As I say , it is an express opposition to an asymmetric Europe made up of some regions expanding at full throttle while more rural areas get left behind .
It is the simultaneous unity and diversity of centres of excellence or pôles d 'excellence and the specific position of other regions and places with their own qualities and multiformity .
Territorial cohesion also complements the existing policy of economic and social cohesion .
It is an integrated concept .
It provides an insight into the effects of sector-based Community and decentralised activity such as research and development , the common agricultural policy , traffic and transport , the job situation and countering climate change .
The concept of territorial cohesion , the consultation of the past six months would seem to suggest , has been broadly subscribed to , and that is to be welcomed .
The concept incorporates concentration and at the same time connectivity and cooperation , and it is a concept that we would like to elaborate on over the upcoming period .
rapporteur . - ( DE ) Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , cohesion policy is important for Europe .
It is an expression of solidarity .
However , cohesion policy is not only needed by those in our society who are supposedly weaker .
All our citizens need a policy of solidarity and European integration .
This makes things all the more difficult when no use is made of Structural Funds in the regions , of which we have more than 260 in the European Union .
This is not because no help is needed , but because the obstacles to obtaining the funds are too hard to overcome .
Some of these obstacles are home-made .
Of course , it is an important basic requirement that the rules are observed and that controls are put in place to ensure that the money provided by European taxpayers is used correctly .
However , this must not result in the application forms and the explanations of how the funding can be obtained being so lengthy and incomprehensible that you need a PhD to understand them .
Therefore , I call in my report for specific measures to reduce the amount of bureaucracy at European level , because we are responsible for this .
For example , the system of controls should be simplified , the administrative burden on the projects should be reduced and the size of the projects should be modified .
In addition , the project practices should be simplified , clarified and accelerated and made more result-oriented .
However , I am convinced that something could also be done in this respect at national and regional level .
The second part of my report concerns best practices in cohesion policy .
We must not reinvent the wheel , because this would be neither efficient nor clever .
Therefore , we need to find a system for making good examples of projects available for use by others .
As there are tens of thousands of cohesion policy projects every year , the trick is to identify , select and provide information about exemplary projects in the regions .
In my opinion , the Commission has already made a good start in this area , for example with the RegioStars initiative , but this needs further development .
In some of what I believe are key areas , the report proposes criteria for selecting these projects .
The key areas include research and innovation , creating high-quality jobs , support for SMEs , climate projects , integrated urban development and the development of private-public partnership projects , to name but a few .
For example , the criteria for selecting best-practice projects could be the quality and sustainability of the projects , the driving force for the regions and for the European Union , the effective use of resources and , of course , transferability to other regions .
There are good examples to be found everywhere .
In the appendix to the report I have listed some projects which I have been informed about as a result of the groundwork done in the regions .
They come from all the Member States .
I would like to mention a few of them here : a centre of excellence for environmental technologies in Slovenia , the Burgenland Mobility Centre in Austria , the ' brain hunt ' competition in Estonia , the new building for the Fraunhofer Institute for Cell Therapy and Immunology in Germany , the science park in Granada in Spain and the development of the problem district of East Leipzig in Germany .
Finally , as rapporteur and coordinator of my group , I would like to extend my very warm thanks to my colleagues for their cooperation , not only on this report but also over the last five years .
I would also like to thank the Commission , the Committee on Regional Development and all the relevant employees for their cooperation .
I hope that we can continue to work together in this way in future .
( Applause )
Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to present briefly the report on the urban dimension of cohesion policy .
It is a report which examines options and the involvement of cities in the management and use of European money in the current programming period .
It is a report which at the same time provides guidance and offers inspiration on how to adapt the Structural Funds rules so that they better suit the needs of European cities and metropolises .
In drafting the report I have relied not only on scientific studies and expert opinions from interest groups such as the European Council of Municipalities and Regions and EUROCITIES , but above all on the direct experience and opinions of mayors , councillors , town hall officials , project managers and everyone else concerned with European funds .
One of the inspiring meetings providing us with an opportunity for joint discussions on the urban dimension was an event entitled European Urban Day , which I organised together with partners at the beginning of February in Prague within the framework of the Czech Presidency of the EU .

I would like at this point once again to thank Commissioner Hübner , Mr Svoboda and my colleagues Mr Olbrycht , Mr Beaupuy and Mrs Kallenbach for their participation and their active approach .
It is logical that our attention is focused on cities .
Cities are home to 80 % of the 500 million or so inhabitants of the EU .
It is in cities that the great majority of jobs , companies and centres of education are located .
Cities generate more than 70 % of Europe 's VAT .
Cities therefore constitute a definite driving force for the economic growth of the whole of Europe , which makes them all the more important in a time of crisis .
However , many cities are facing a range of serious problems .
Cities and urban areas therefore need special attention within the framework of the cohesion policy .
I would like to emphasise two main ideas from the text of the report .
The first is the question of sub-delegation , which means transferring control of European resources to cities .
Although European legislation already permits the sub-delegation of resources to cities so that they can allocate them when creating integrated development plans , Member States have made only marginal use of this option .
One of the main aims of this report is to support the role of cities in the cohesion process .
We must stop regarding cities merely as final recipients and instead view them as entities that administer territories .
Just as regions and national civil service bodies hold their own budgets , cities must gain greater responsibility in the area of structural assistance for programming and distributing Structural Funds .
The urban dimension must become mandatory .
The second fundamental idea is to really exploit the potential of the financial instrument JESSICA .
Cohesion policy has hitherto been based exclusively on a system of subsidies , or in other words , non-returnable grants .
The organisations and individuals submitting projects are therefore used to a situation where they receive European money and national budget resources earmarked for cofinancing ' free of charge ' .
The priority is often drawdown itself rather than an effective investment or an evaluation of available resources .
Therefore the subsidy principle sometimes leads to a situation where some of the structural assistance is not used efficiently .
In the current programming period we have seen JESSICA implemented to create space for a systematic amendment of the cohesion policy .
However , the fact is that not much use has been made of the space .
This must change in the next programming period .
European policy should make more use of options relating to the use of financial engineering funds such as revolving funds .
That is all for now .
I would like to thank everyone who assisted me in drafting this report .
rapporteur . - ( PL ) Madam President , the reform of the European Union 's structural policy for the period 2007-2013 has brought with it changes to the structure of the Funds and the basis for the allocation of assistance .
One important change was the creation of a new European Agricultural Fund for Rural Development linked to the common agricultural policy .
Whereas the 2000-2006 Financial Perspective tied rural development funding in with the Structural Funds and cohesion policy , separating it from CAP funding , under the new 2007-2013 Financial Framework they became part of the allocations linked to the CAP .
As a consequence of these changes , however , the question arises as to whether this separation has actually led to more effective use of the available funding .
Linking the CAP and rural development funding represents a simplification of the budgetary arrangements in appearance only .
In reality , it means the separation of non-agricultural funding from the scope of the cohesion policy and as a result , either the duplication of some objectives , or their omission in both areas .
There is a risk that the funding available under the regional policy will be used to a large extent to boost economic competitiveness in larger urban centres or the most dynamic regions , while the rural development fund will be focused on non-agricultural improvement , on improving agricultural competitiveness .
In this situation , spending on support for non-agricultural activities and the development of SMEs in rural areas would be at the interface between the two funds and not be covered by either of them .
There could also be a shortage of funding to ensure basic public services and investment in infrastructure in rural areas , to which the Cohesion Fund is also meant to contribute .
In this context it is becoming particularly important to come up with a transparent , long-term development strategy for rural areas at Member State and at regional level , in order to identify clearly rural development priorities and objectives and adapt to them the various sources of funding available .
Linking the second pillar to cohesion policy measures would , however , require the close coordination of activities at national level .
What constitutes a rural area has yet to be defined with any precision .
Traditionally , rural areas could be differentiated from urban areas through their lower population density , different employment structure , lower level of income and poorer access to public roads .
From the point of view of territorial cohesion , which , I repeat , has also not been adequately defined , lower population density should not be the decisive characteristic .
One of the European Union 's development aims is to modernise social structures , including employment structures .
It is possible to increase territorial cohesion , therefore , by aligning rural and urban employment structures .
Level of income and access to public goods , however , remain the biggest challenge to territorial cohesion , and these objectives can be most effectively met by supporting non-agricultural activities in rural areas .
Rural development should not , however , drain resources intended for direct payments to farmers .
The difficulty in implementing rural development policy stems from the fact that sectoral policies and territorial cohesion policies overlap , as do the economic and social dimensions , and therefore previous activities have focused on a separation of powers , rather than creating synergies .
The aim of coordination should , however , be to create synergies in the use of funds .
In the individual Member States , several models exist for the coordination of these activities , and it is currently difficult to claim that a particular country 's solution should serve as a model for others .
It does appear , though , that political will could be more decisive in terms of ensuring success than this or that organisational arrangement .
A suitable solution could therefore be to apply the open method of coordination to this aspect of cooperation at Union level .
However , it should be made clear that rural development policy has a huge impact on territorial cohesion .
For this reason , it does not seem justifiable to separate measures under this policy from cohesion and regional development policy .
This policy is better able than the CAP to assist with non-agricultural aspects of rural development , such as retraining people for work in other areas of the economy .
Nevertheless , including rural development policy within cohesion policy is only possible on the condition that rural development receives adequate funding .
rapporteur . - Madam President , before we open the debate on the report on the implementation of the Structural Funds Regulation 2007-2013 , allow me to seize this opportunity to thank the Commission for the concrete communication paper and the country fiches as a solid base on which to work .
I would especially like to thank those who worked with me on the report , especially our EPP-ED adviser , Ms Stoian , and our committee administrator , Mr Chopin , who both devoted long hours to this report .
Let me briefly recapitulate on the making of this report , which obtained , with just a few compromises , the full support of the Committee on Regional Development just last month .
As you may already know , the aim of this report is to show the way in which the Member States understood and follow the 2006 Community strategic guidelines on cohesion when drawing up their 27 national strategic reference frameworks and 429 operational programmes adapted to meet their specific constraints and requirements .
I have therefore decided to base this report on three main documents : firstly , the communication from the Commission ; secondly , the 27 country fiches provided by the Commission and , thirdly , the Council decision of 2006 on Community strategic guidelines on cohesion , which represents an indicative framework for the Member States for the preparation of the national strategic reference frameworks and the operational programmes for the period 2007-2013 .
The three leading priorities that were clearly set by the aforementioned Council decision are : firstly , making Europe and its regions more attractive places in which to invest and work ; the second priority is to improve knowledge and innovation for growth ; and the third priority is to attract more people into employment or entrepreneurial activity in order to create more and better jobs .
Before I share what I have observed while working on this report , it is important to underline that its scope is partly limited by the fact that the operational programmes were only approved in June 2008 and it will take at least a year before any real advances in their implementation can be assessed .
Nevertheless , I can already assess that the general priorities have been adhered to by all Member States , with specific particularities imposed by their level of economic and territorial development .
It is also important to note that they might suffer certain changes in the sense of the increasing focus on investments in areas with immediate growth potential and urgency in the context of the European economic recovery plan , the Community response to the global financial crisis , and the current economic slowdown .
In other words , it is important to remember that each Member State , and even more so the regions , have diverse needs arising from their geographical location and economic and institutional development .
Therefore , the resulting tailor-made national cohesion strategies in the operational programme undoubtedly vary significantly according to these needs .
It is known that Member States were required by the general regulations of the European Regional Development Fund , the European Social Fund and the Cohesion Fund to earmark 60 % of the total expenditure for the cohesion objective and 75 % for the regional competitiveness and employment objective .
However , I am pleased to see that the efforts made by the national authorities have ensured that the average allocation of expenditure for achievement of the Lisbon Agenda constitutes 65 % - more than the available funds in the convergence regions - and 82 % in the regional competitiveness and employment regions , which is also more than initially requested .
I see my time is up .
I had much more prepared .
I will finish at the end of this debate .
rapporteur . - ( HU ) After several postponements , we have finally reached a big day .
I wish to express my gratitude that the Commission addressed the topic of micro-credit in a separate report back in November 2007 , although it is also true that Parliament had already requested that summer that we work on this subject .
I also approve of the fact that this debate is being coordinated by the member of the Commission responsible for cohesion , for as we know , previously it was mooted that the Commissioner for financial affairs should coordinate it ; but the goal is that Community tools should truly reflect the perspectives of cohesion .
I regret , however , that the Commission 's materials did not extend to legislative tasks or include legislative proposals ; therefore , the report of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs invoked the strongest possible measure , namely Article 39 , and asked that concrete legal measures or organisational and financial steps be taken by the Commission in five different areas .
I would like to take this opportunity to express my gratitude to my shadow rapporteur , Mrs De Vits , to my colleague , Mrs Baeva , and to Mrs Ambruster of the Secretariat , for their enthusiastic work .
Why is micro-credit important ?
On the one hand , we would like to include in the national Lisbon action programmes the obligation of Member States to report regularly on their progress in this area .
Only that which is obligatory yields results .
On the other hand , and this is the greatest merit of the Commissioner 's approach , we wish to include new social segments in the sphere of economic activities .
To this end , we need to launch a form of credit that helps persons with modest skills , who lack the collateral or real estate coverage required for traditional small business credit , to enter the labour market .
Involving these new segments in the labour market will be indispensable for sustainable development and for attaining the 70 % legal employment rate .
But how should we approach these layers of society ?
On the one hand , as my report also mentions , we need to move beyond the tendency to look at those in difficulty as a single group .
We need to define disadvantaged groups more precisely : these include migrants in western countries , Roma in eastern areas , people living in rural areas or encampments and , generally speaking , women .
Yet these people cannot be reached in the tried and true manner , directly through the traditional networks of commercial banks , because these target groups are suspicious of the above instruments , and as already mentioned , they are not able to enter the free market .
Therefore , inspired by the Asian example transposed to Europe , loans need to be made in small circles , having gained their confidence , basing the credit more on trust than on collateral .
The intermediary organisation plays an important role in this system , of course , and this organisation must be able to carry on these activities even if it does not have a banking licence .
We have succeeded in achieving this in certain Member States , but it is not yet the case everywhere , and therefore we need to involve non-bank organisations , including financial institutions that are close to the population and outside the securitisation market .
The question of an interest-rate cap has come up , and it is our opinion that although credit is expensive , the most important consideration is nonetheless a steady stream of liquidity for those using the system .
For this reason I do not support introducing an interest-rate cap .
Here we need to distinguish between consumer credit and micro-credit , for the two should not be confused .
It is important , moreover , to create incentives at national level , so that people should want to become micro-entrepreneurs with the help of micro-credit rather than collecting unemployment benefit .
We need to show solidarity in the struggle against terrorism and the fight against money-laundering as well , for it is precisely by means of a mentorship system that we can somehow overcome the problems of a lack of permanent address or of a bank account , and the lack of start-up capital .
Member of the Commission . - Madam President , firstly I would like to thank wholeheartedly Lambert van Nistelrooij , Constanze Krehl , Oldřich Vlasák , Wojciech Roszkowski , Miroslav Mikolášik and Zsolt László Becsey for the opportunity generated for us to have this discussion today .
It is a discussion that will certainly contribute to the debate on the future cohesion policy .
We are in the middle of that debate , as you know , and there are many very specific recommendations in your reports , which I will take as important inputs into this debate on the future cohesion policy , while there are also several major messages that cut across all the reports .
The first is that cohesion policy is , and should remain , a central pillar for achieving the European Union 's sustainable development goals .
That commitment will remain even more relevant in the post-crisis period , when generating green-collar jobs will be the European pass to sustainable employment .
There is also another clear message in all the reports , which is that cohesion policy should cover all the European territory , while the focus of cohesion policy should clearly remain on supporting the catch-up process of the poorest .
I share your view on the importance of delivering European public goods in all regions .
The crisis makes that message even more relevant .
Many regions are looking these days at new ways and means of adapting to rapid global changes and avoiding the risk of falling behind .
By mobilising under-utilised resources and exploiting comparative advantages , cohesion policy aims to ensure that all European regions , be they lagging behind or not , contribute to overall economic growth and change and to the creation of sustainable jobs , and that all citizens can benefit from the internal market .
We also share the conviction that geography matters in Europe , and this is one of the main reasons we launched the green paper on territorial cohesion .
I am very pleased to see that you understand territorial cohesion in a way that is close to my heart , which is that territorial cohesion is first of all about mobilising the development potential of all the different territories .
Regional policy is a development policy that helps citizens and enterprises unlock the inherent potentials of the places in which they live and work .
I agree with you on the need to improve synergies and coordination between all European and national policies with a territorial impact .
Here , the challenge is for territorial cohesion to be taken into account upfront when designing policies , and not to be seen as a tool to repair the damage once it has been done .
This means , among other things , that we need to invest more in linking the regions that are lagging behind with the more prosperous ones .
Your message is also clear on the need to strengthen the urban-rural relationship .
Faced with the present fragmentation of funds , it also means that we need to understand better how to streamline the rules and procedures for all the funds with respect to eligible expenditure , management , monitoring , reporting and financial management obligations .
There is a need for greater flexibility when delineating the territories in which cohesion policy programmes are designed and implemented .
In other words , we need to target the policy at functional areas .
We need , for example , to look sometimes inside cities at neighbourhood level , and sometimes beyond the boundaries of the cities , at metropolitan level .
This functional or flexible geography does not stop at national borders , and cooperation across national borders is of clear European added value and importance for citizens .
There are still barriers in the European internal market , and significant untapped potential in cross-border labour markets and transnational clusters .
The Baltic Sea Strategy , which we are preparing now , is a good example of what we mean by a functional area .
I see this as a test case for territorial cohesion , which could then be extended to other macro-regions .
We are working on this .
All the reports underline the need for cohesion policy to respond to new challenges such as demography , energy , climate and globalisation .
All European regions will be affected by those new challenges , but their impact will vary significantly across Europe , often resulting in losses of competitiveness , employment and social cohesion .
This might consolidate existing disparities and create new ones , but these challenges can also be turned into opportunities .
To achieve this we need to continue emphasising cohesion policy investment in research and development , and innovation in developing a knowledge-based economy and in promoting entrepreneurship and business support services .
These are key factors for boosting the sustainable competitiveness of the European economy and for generating sustainable jobs and growth .
They are at the heart of cohesion policy and have a strong territorial dimension , which requires tailor-made solutions and policy support .
To render the management of cohesion policy programmes more efficient - and this is our common concern - there is a need to reinforce inter-regional exchanges of experience and of good practice .
Good governance practice must be disseminated rapidly across Europe .
This may help also to overcome difficulties in implementing cohesion programmes .
I share your view that we must continue to reform policy delivery .
You call for fostering the effort devoted to so-called ' financial engineering ' as a means of tapping the potential of the private sector .
As you well know , in an important cultural shift , we have decided to complement a traditional ground-based approach with new tools .
Your support for our micro-credit initiative is good news , and I thank you very much for this .
I am convinced that developing micro-credit schemes is crucial for the sustainable development and competitiveness of European regions and cities .
It requires action to be taken at all levels .
We will look into ways and means of reinforcing this instrument in the future .
You call also for a strengthening of the fundamental principles of cohesion policy , such as partnership , multi-level governance and transparency , and I fully endorse that call .
By building on local knowledge , by involving all the relevant actors on the ground and by improving the visibility of the European cohesion policy , we will certainly enhance the impact and the quality of European cohesion investment .
Once again , my thanks for your continuous efforts to render cohesion policy more effective and more efficient in the future .
rapporteur for the opinion of the Committee on Budgets . - Madam President , I would just like to focus on the microcredit issue , which the Committee on Budgets completely supports as it will help people without access to normal sources of funds - the very sort of people who need help in the current environment .
We also welcome the Commission 's JASMINE initiative .
However , there are certain considerations that we want to state .
Firstly , funds should only be used where other sources are not appropriate , owing either to high risk or low profitability .
Secondly , they must also be used to bring in private finance .
Thirdly , because of different approaches from different Member States , we would like to look at whether it is feasible to have an EU framework for non-bank microfinance institutions .
We would also like to look at whether interest-rate caps , which are used in some countries , are appropriate in these circumstances .
In the longer term , we would like to get beyond the use of structural funds for this important initiative , because some of the people who need help are not in the areas that have support from the structural funds .
draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on Budgets . - ( FR ) Madam President , Mrs Hübner , today we are looking at five very important documents on cohesion policy , which , I would remind you , has for some months now been the main item in our budget .
In this way we are of course already sending a strong signal to the future renewed institutions : to Parliament , naturally , but also to the Commission .
It goes without saying that cohesion tools , and above all the funds , must represent real European added value for our fellow citizens , but today , in the context of the severe crisis hitting Europe , they must be more responsive and more adapted to urban situations in particular .
I especially welcome the work that has been done on the plan for housing assistance , since housing is the second priority for citizens , after jobs .
In fact , it is not always a question of money , as the funds are there , but of what I might call a ' structural ' slow pace - sometimes in State management , sometimes in administrative inertia and sometimes , unfortunately , in both - which gets in the way of that impact we are always talking about , which is essential for our regions and our citizens .
At its worst , this could even appear counterproductive .
As permanent rapporteur for the Structural Funds within the Committee on Budgets , I would insist now more than ever , in the current crisis , that we should simplify , clarify and give genuine political substance to this European money .

Madam President , as the draftsman representing the Committee on Industry , Research and Energy on the implementation of the Structural Funds Regulation , I would like to thank Mr Мikolášik for reflecting the basic conclusions and suggestions made by the Committee on Industry , Research and Energy in his report .
First of all , this concerns the efforts of Member States to closely link the use of the funds with the Lisbon Strategy .
It is also emphasised at the same time that the resources allocated for energy are extremely inadequate , especially with regard to the resources for renewable sources .
We urge the European Commission once again to increase the amount of resources earmarked for improving the energy efficiency of housing from 3 % to at least 5 % .
At the same time , the report does not reflect our proposal concerning the projects for capturing carbon dioxide , even though Member States agreed last week to support 12 projects in seven countries , with a value of EUR 1.05 billion .
This is not at all sufficient to resolve the problems in all the Member States which are interested in securing resources by 2012 for implementing such projects .
This is why I urge this issue to be taken into account by the Commission in its quest for resources , including the use of funds from the European Investment Bank .
rapporteur for the opinion of the Committee on Legal Affairs . - Madam President , small enterprises play an essential part in creating cohesion in the EU , and the extension of microcredit will underpin SMEs ' economic recovery .
The Committee on Legal Affairs recognises that establishing a firm can be a daunting process .
The EU needs to do more by providing proper legal advice on setting up a business .
One way to do this would be to establish a European network of lawyers prepared to give advice on micro-business start-ups , initially on a pro bono basis .
Urgent efforts are needed to tackle the regulatory burden on micro-businesses and to make micro-finance institutions as accessible as possible .
We need this type of legislation more than ever , but legislation on its own is not enough .
The Commission has to make sure this is transformed into real action that can be felt at the ground level immediately , because this report is not just about entrepreneurship : microcredit also delivers social cohesion , and it encourages people to take ownership of their lives and their potential .
My congratulations to all the rapporteurs .
I would like to begin by thanking my colleague Mr Mikolášik , who has incorporated into points 12 , 16 , 17 , 18 and 23 of his report the points from my opinion , which I drew up on behalf of the Committee on Women 's Rights and Gender Equality .
These points are based on my own experience as a councillor in the town of Chmelnice and on suggestions from voluntary organisations , and I consider them key to the more effective and more transparent drawdown of resources from EU funds .
I firmly believe that the 2007-2013 programming period will not be a success if the Member States do not eliminate the excessive administrative hurdles which put voluntary organisations off requesting funding for projects , especially those that are focused on supporting women in difficult financial circumstances , refugee women , women from ethnic minorities , physically disabled women and women who have been victims of rape or torture .
I would once again like to call on the Member States and especially those that joined the European Union after 1 May 2004 , to avoid excessive delays in the reimbursement of costs for completed projects because the insolvency caused by such behaviour often prevents recipients , especially local authorities and voluntary organisations , from continuing with other activities in their areas of operation .
The economic crisis is having an impact even on drawdowns of money from EU funds .
The current method of financing projects is particularly unsuitable for small local authorities who have no chance of obtaining project funding .
It is therefore essential to discuss and adopt measures for simplifying the financing system .
The representatives of local authorities in my own country , Slovakia , insist that if the current legislation is not amended they will be drawing down far less money from European Structural Funds than previously .
The absence of effective , simple and straightforward support for small local authorities is a very serious matter and I therefore believe that this report will help in the drawdown of Structural Funds .
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - ( EL ) Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , all six reports which we are debating are important in that they reflect the present situation in terms of regional policy and describe the model and priorities for the period after 2013 .
Congratulations to all the rapporteurs on their work .
I should like to comment in particular on the report by Mrs Krehl on best practice in the field of regional policy , for which I was the rapporteur for the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats , and underline the very good work by my fellow Member .
This report presents the basic obstacles to the correct use of the Structural Funds and how they can be overcome , using a series of criteria to classify certain projects and actions as best practice and referring to the lack of a commonly acceptable definition of best practice .
When talking of best practice , I consider it extremely important that amendments were included in the report such as :
the need to strengthen small and medium-sized enterprises and to link regional policy with industry and science ;
measures to retain the population , especially the young generation , in their regions and to provide care for working parents ; and
the smooth integration of immigrants .
At the same time , when we talk of best practice in regional policy , we need to take account of :
firstly , the existence of geographical and demographic peculiarities in regions ;
secondly , the lack of uniformity as regards the regional models of organisation of the Member States ;
thirdly , the need to divide best practice criteria into mandatory and optional criteria ; and
fourthly , the need to take account of successful methods already being applied so that they can be defined as best practice .
Two words on the report by Mr van Nistelrooij on the Green Paper , to highlight the good work he has done and to point out that the rapporteur rightly stresses the need for public consultation , so that we can find a commonly acceptable definition of territorial cohesion , and the need to approach areas with special characteristics in such a way that territorial cohesion also covers these areas in the best possible way .
Madam President , I want to start by thanking the various rapporteurs for their work , particularly Mrs Krehl and Mr van Nistelrooij .
They enabled a broad consensus to be achieved within our committee .
We must also welcome the European Commission 's Green Paper on Territorial Cohesion , which puts some important issues on the table .
Firstly , cohesion policy is important as an instrument for ensuring the balanced development of the European Union , with any attempt to re-nationalise these policies being rejected .
The new concept of territorial cohesion is included , which is why a consultation process was started - which is now about to end - that must be taken into account .
It has been adapted to the new challenges , such as the effects of globalisation , climate change and demographic changes .
The figures from the latest cohesion report show us that , although the differences between regions are diminishing , thus fulfilling the principle of convergence , we must now tackle another issue , which is the persistence of intraregional differences .
As a result , when determining the eligibility criteria for funding , we must consider the possibility of taking certain aspects into account other than purely per capita income .
In addition , with regard to including the ' territorial ' concept , we must be aware of the need to take account of the specific features of certain regions , such as their geographical disadvantages , their outermost position or the depopulation processes in certain regions .
Cohesion is one of the most obvious successes of the European project .
Spain has been a clear example of this , given the economic and social development that it has experienced .
This is the path along which we must continue in order to guarantee equal opportunities for all Europeans , regardless of where they live .
The European Union is made up of a wide range of regions , with differences that enrich them and give meaning to this project .
However , if we have to insist on something with regard to cohesion policy , it must be on the need to give our regions all the tools to ensure that they have equal opportunities to access development and growth .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - ( PL ) Madam President , I would like to comment on two reports in particular : the report on territorial cohesion and that on the exchange of good practice .
My colleagues from the ALDE Group will deal with the other items .
Mr van Nistelrooij 's report responds to the Green Paper on territorial cohesion published by the Commission .
We all agree that the debate started on the future cohesion policy should be supplemented by the territorial dimension .
However , we have a paradox : we are discussing territorial cohesion without defining what it means .
We want the territorial dimension to help achieve a more balanced development than it has done to date , so that all citizens of the European Union have the opportunity of equal access to services in particular .
However , to date we lack a precise set of criteria to which we can refer .
Yet this is of fundamental significance for the future .
The discussion on territorial cohesion in the European Union no longer makes any sense if we do not draft a cohesive definition .
Achieving territorial cohesion means ensuring the best possible development for the entire territory of the Community , and improving the lives of its inhabitants .
As stated in the report , the aim of territorial cohesion should be above all to even out the disparities in the level of development of individual regions and Member States , and in particular to eliminate the growing disparities within regions and countries .
The more the gap between individual states is reduced , the greater the internal differentiation .
Most investments and funding are accumulated in the national and regional capitals at the expense of the other territories , and Member States cannot or do not wish to counteract this .
In this situation , it is necessary to create mechanisms at Community level that will effectively stimulate a more even and sustainable development .
In my view , we should scrutinise the statistical data for NUTS3 , and not just NUTS2 .
The NUTS3 data show up the problem far more clearly .
We should take this into account when allocating funding .
The process of achieving territorial cohesion must be carried out at all levels : European , national and regional , taking into account the principle of subsidiarity .
Exchanging good practice is particularly important .
The effectiveness of cohesion policy depends to a great extent on simplifying procedures , and in particular on becoming familiar with the opportunities provided by the most effective solutions used elsewhere .
on behalf of the UEN Group . - ( PL ) Madam President , our debate concerns regional development and cohesion policy , which are important issues for the entire Community .
That is because at present the disparity in wealth between the regions is huge , even exceeding a disparity of 10 : 1 .
It is therefore in the interests of the European Union 's citizens that all opportunities should be used to show the actual solidarity of Europeans .
That does not in any way mean that everyone should get exactly the same .
It should mean that everyone is given an equal opportunity .
It should apply to the residents of urban agglomerations as well as those living in rural areas , people living in the centre of Europe as well as those on the peripheries , the younger generation as well as elderly people .
We need to show innovation in doing this , with a view both to the present and to the future .
Today we have six very good reports before us .
It is a pity that we are discussing them all in one go .
I congratulate the authors .
I would very much like our activities to serve this true European Community , this unity , and every euro to be spent for a good purpose , not for the wealthy to become even wealthier ...
( The President cut off the speaker )
on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - ( DE ) Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , in your speech today , Commissioner , you mentioned the contribution made by the cohesion policy to climate protection .
I welcome this change of heart , because there is no emphasis on this in the Green Paper on territorial cohesion .
Why not , given the climate crisis that we are currently facing ?
The contribution of the European Structural Funds to environmental transformation is a future issue for territorial cohesion .
The ' Regions 2020 ' document produced by the Commission shows that climate change has had a massive impact on many of Europe 's regions .
As a result , we must change course .
The Structural Funds should be used only to support sustainable projects .
Projects and programmes which cause damage to the climate , and many of these have been approved in the past , should no longer be authorised .
EU funds should not be used to promote programmes and projects which damage the climate .
Why are you not taking this approach already ?
The second question concerns the implementation of the partnership principle .
Commissioner , you mentioned that local knowledge is an important foundation for successful development .
Why have you nevertheless approved operational programmes where the partnership principle is clearly being completely disregarded and where the partners have reported that they were not involved ?
You have not answered this question .
Local , grass-roots knowledge is an asset for us .
If you continue to attempt to ignore the fact that Member States are completely disregarding the partnership principle and to provide them with subsidies despite this , you will be breaching the Structural Funds Regulation .
You completely fail to mention in your report , which forms the basis for the Mikolášik report , that many Member States have not followed the partnership principle .
You have not taken the partners ' reports into account .
Why do you remain silent on this subject ?
It is clear at this point that we need a new dimension for the Structural Funds .
They must be based on environmental and democratic principles , make use of local knowledge and follow the partnership principle .

Let us be clear : the Treaties state that , in order to promote its overall harmonious development , the Community shall develop and pursue its actions leading to the strengthening of its economic and social cohesion , by aiming to reduce disparities between the levels of development of the various regions and the backwardness of the least favoured regions or islands , including rural areas .
As a result , in this debate on the future of cohesion policy , to which the so-called territorial cohesion dimension is to be added , the following essential principles must be underlined .
Firstly , the primary and principal objective of structural policy must be to promote real convergence , by acting as an instrument of redistribution with regard to the costs , inequalities and asymmetries caused by the internal market , by Economic and Monetary Union and by the liberalisation of world trade , for those countries and regions in the European Union which are economically less developed .
Secondly , so-called competitiveness cannot be a substitute for convergence in those Member States and regions which are lagging behind in their socio-economic development .
As a result , cohesion policy and its associated financial resources must not be subordinated to the competition and liberalisation advocated by the Lisbon Strategy .
Thirdly , so-called territorial cohesion must contribute to economic and social cohesion .
In other words , its central objective must be to reduce disparities between the levels of economic development of the various regions and the backwardness of the least favoured regions .
Fourthly , new objectives and priorities must be matched by new Community financial resources .
In other words , so-called territorial cohesion must not be funded to the detriment of the Convergence objective .
Fifthly , the current Community financial resources for cohesion policy are insufficient to meet the needs of real convergence and to respond to the regional disparities , high levels of unemployment , income differences and poverty in the European Union .
Sixthly , boosting the Community budget in order to promote economic and social cohesion is absolutely essential .
Seventhly , land management and planning are the responsibility of each Member State .
Lastly , in addition to other important aspects that we have not highlighted here , we would reaffirm that it is unacceptable for regions to be financially harmed by the so-called statistical effect , which is why measures cancelling out this effect must be adopted .
- ( SK ) The discussion on coordinating cohesion policy and measures for developing rural areas is full of contradictions .
The main cause is a fundamental reduction in the budget for rural development which makes it impossible to achieve the original aims of rural policy .
This happened during the UK Presidency .
The greatest price for this , however , will be paid by rural areas in the most backward regions of the new Member States .
The common agricultural policy has thus become , along with discrimination in direct payments , an instrument for the two-speed development of rural areas and , indirectly , of the regions as well .
Actual development indeed clearly shows how absurd it is to believe that rural areas with declining agriculture can be developed .
We will never achieve the revitalisation of backward regions in the EU if we fail to ensure the development of rural areas within the original budgetary framework .
Rural development cannot be implemented through sudden ad hoc decisions , but must be based on a long-term plan .
However , we are lacking such a plan .
Reinstatement of the rural development budget is thus also becoming a key condition for the entire cohesion policy .
Madam President , first of all I would like to thank the rapporteurs for all these excellent reports and especially the one I shadowed .
I thank the rapporteur for his good cooperation and hard work .
It was not the easiest of reports to draft , but we managed to find good compromises on the key points .
I welcome the fact that we are having this debate now .
Rural development is a very important issue and we must ensure that all available EU funding for rural development is being exploited and used in the most effective and efficient manner .
In my opinion , rural development is about supporting active farming communities , especially young farmers and farmers who wish to diversify their businesses .
Proper business projects in rural areas should be focusing on improving infrastructure and supporting small and medium-sized enterprises .
The central focus of this report is about ensuring that rural development projects , whether funded by the structural funds or the ERDF , do not overlap or , at worst , miss out on opportunities .
What is clear from this report is that better coordination between regional development policy and the ERDF is needed .
I do not feel , however , that I can support a situation where funds are raised via modulation for redistribution back through the regional development authority .
If farmers are being asked to pay into the CAP then they must ensure that their monies come back into the rural communities .
I believe this must be active through the second pillar of the CAP .
However , the rapporteur has successfully opened up a debate on this relevant topical issue .
I agree with him on the main focuses of this report , but this will be a problem for the next Parliament to decide .
( PL ) Madam President , the two most recent accessions to the European Union have resulted in a significant exacerbation of regional disproportions within the Community .
The result is an increasingly distinct phenomenon of ' spatial segregation ' , resulting in isolated regional enclaves , particularly areas remote from the centres of development , which are mainly rural areas .
Environmentally friendly sustainable economic development and reducing regional disparities are the overriding aim of European regional policy .
In October 2006 , the Council adopted strategic guidelines on cohesion to act as reference points for the Member States in drafting their national strategic reference frameworks and operational programmes for 2007-2013 .
The priorities set out in these documents make Europe and the regions more attractive in terms of investment and jobs , increase the level of knowledge and innovation for growth and create more jobs of better quality .
Implementing these priorities in operational programmes should allow the regions to tackle the challenges of globalisation , structural , demographic and climate change , and boost the harmonious , long-term sustainable development of the regions .
We should acknowledge the fact that all Member States have already made efforts to include priorities conforming with the aims of the Lisbon Strategy in their operational programmes .
However , the excessively slow absorption of funds from the new programming period which we have observed in many Member States may threaten their effective utilisation .
It is therefore extremely important , particularly for the new Member States , to consolidate actions to assist the capacity for the real take-up of available funds , both in the way these funds are utilised , and by exchanging best practice , information campaigns , exchange of new technology and the development of various types of partnership , in such a way as to allow the programme requirements to be transformed into actual , quality programmes for the effective elimination of delays in development , which are a particular problem in the poorest regions of the EU .

Madam President , I speak on the van Nistelrooij report and to emphasise three points .
First , that territorial cohesion involves promoting polycentric development across the European Union .
This means eliminating disparities within , as well as between , regions .
There is consequently a need for improved spatial analysis and the development of indicators against which policies can be designed and their impact assessed .
Second , there must be an integrated approach , with measurement in advance of the effect that sectoral policies would have at regional levels and the achievement of greater synergy between them .
Certainly , such impact assessment could pre-empt certain problems , such as those posed by the electronic identification of sheep in Scotland .
Third , an integrated approach demands proper multilevel governance , involving all stakeholders in the design and implementation of strategies .
What the Commissioner has said in these respects has been very welcome , and I hope for great support for this excellent report .
- ( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the Roszkowski report highlights the disparities between the various rural areas and between these and urban areas in terms of management of the Structural Funds .
The rapporteur rightly points to the need to re-establish some consistency between the ERDF and the EAFRD , even though he should perhaps have been clearer about the meaning of the term ' open coordination ' , which conflicts with the obvious disparities that exist and the areas of national competences .
A higher degree of consistency requires transparency in relation to data and payments .
Knowing how resources are distributed is an essential tool for highlighting and correcting distortions .
However , we are lacking such transparency .
In practice we are witnessing the most varied of activities being performed for the purposes of hiding data , denying access and concealing information , and all this is on the part of public bodies and our very own national governments .
The Commission is saying that it does not have competence , and everything is becoming vague and unclear .
We are saying that we are facing a wall of silence .
If we do not resolve this problem , then we will be even more detached from the real problems that the Structural Funds should be resolving .
( DE ) Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I very much welcome the fact that we are having a timely political debate on the basis of initiative reports which will allow us to use our instrument of solidarity in a more targeted and efficient way by 2014 at the latest .
It is also very important to me to inform the citizens of Europe about the European added value that this will offer .
Therefore , it is logical for us to reject all attempts to renationalise the structural policy .
More than ever we need a standard Community policy which is able to meet the challenges we are currently facing , such as globalisation , climate change and demographic change .
Whether we have been successful or whether we are deluding ourselves with the budgetary commitment for the Lisbon Strategy will hopefully become clear at the latest when the required analysis has been carried out .
We have come to a fork in the road where we must decide whether or not territorial cohesion and true sustainable development are the symbols of European policy .
In order to make this decision we need a large number of partners , in particular cities .
For this reason , we also want to see global grants going directly to these partners , not only on paper , but also in practice .
However much we value subsidiarity , European funds must be allocated on the basis of binding criteria .
Alongside the importance of the urban dimension , these must include an integrated approach and the implementation of our climate objectives .
We have already come to a consensus on this .
Unfortunately , this was not the case in the vote of the Committee on Regional Development .
One other thought : according to the Commission 's Economic Recovery Plan , the allocation of Structural Funds should be simplified and accelerated .
It is not yet clear to me why we needed a crisis in order for this to happen , but it is a hopeful sign .
If the comprehensive analysis of the best practice projects really forms part of the political discussion , there should be no further obstacles to Europe playing a pioneering role in the development of a truly sustainable policy .
I would like to thank all the rapporteurs for their hard work .
( EL ) Madam President , the myth of convergence and cohesion between the countries and regions of the European Union is being demolished by reality itself :
economic and social inequalities are constantly increasing ;
artificial statistical convergences caused by the accession of the new Member States cannot deceive the workers , farmers , young people and women , who see their standard of living constantly deteriorating ;
regional development within capitalist frameworks cannot remove class conflicts in the system ;
unequal development is inherent in the capitalist method of production , because the incentive for any development process is the maximisation of capital ;
national cohesion tactics and the operational programmes of the NSRF 2007-2013 , like previous programmes , have a specific class orientation : they obey the anti-grassroots approach of the Lisbon Strategy and are adapted to national reform programmes ; in other words , they promote capitalist restructurings and more flexible contracts of employment .

Thus the European Union and the bourgeois governments are serving the needs of capital , both for the period of the capitalist crisis , by shifting the entire burden onto the working class , onto the workers , and with the obvious objective of making these anti-labour measures permanent , in order to safeguard and increase the profits of the monopolies in the future as well .
The new relevant factor which has been added to the scope of cohesion policy is the concept of territorial cohesion and , more importantly , the Green Paper on it .
The reactionary character of the guidelines in the Commission proposal goes beyond the framework of the positions and competences of the European Union included in the Treaty of Lisbon , as the Euro-Constitution is now called , and this is an insult to the peoples in the Member States .
The Green Paper on territorial cohesion sets as immediate sectors the charge by the monopolies into health , education , energy and other services , the fundamental element being that of access to the transport networks above all .
The Greek Communist Party is categorically opposed to and rejects in its entirety the reactionary framework of the Commission 's proposal on territorial cohesion .
Madam President , cohesion policy in all its forms is meant to be the engine of equality , and it has had many successes .
However , cohesion policy should be considered in the light of a long-term assessment of its overall effect .
In such an assessment , the question is simple : are communities and the people who live in them better off because of EU cohesion policies and the structural funds that support them ?
With an honest look at the record , one would probably find that the immediate answer is ' yes ' , but that in the long term it is too often ' no ' .
We are told that farmers in Ireland did well - and that is true .
But why then , in the long term , are there so few farmers left and so many unemployed and under-employed in Irish rural areas ?
Was it that the structural funds and cohesion policy were no match for the CAP ?
Or that they could not mitigate the common fisheries policy , which , over three and a half decades , decimated Irish coastal communities and fish stocks in Irish waters ?
And why , with better roads and infrastructure - courtesy of EU funds - is Limerick in the south-west of Ireland becoming an employment black spot ?
Is it because cohesion policy has nothing to say in response to competition policy , which allows a new Member State to entice away Dell , a keystone industry in the area , with EUR 54 million in state aid ?
Cohesion policy strives for equality , yet privatising directives , such as the Postal Directive , have had the effect of further eliminating services to poorly serviced areas .
The problem may be that our cohesion policy has no cohesion with other EU policies , like competition , market liberalisation etc .
The secret is that cohesion does not come from policies : it comes from basic unifying principles that should run through every policy - principles of respect for the human person , real subsidiarity , priority of the vulnerable , respect for life , stewardship of creation , the importance of family , the dignity of work , solidarity and a central focus on the common good .
Until all EU policies are guided by these principles , programmes will continue to conflict .
( The President cut off the speaker )

( FR ) Madam President , between 2007 and 2013 , cohesion policy will be the main item of expenditure for the Europe of Brussels , but far from benefiting the French regions , this development actually penalises them .
The increase in regional expenditure is in fact made at the expense of the common agricultural policy , and therefore at the expense of France .
We can see that the share allocated to the French regions is continually shrinking .
The vast majority of the EUR 347 billion in Structural Funds is to be given to Eastern Europe , destroyed by more than 40 years of communism .
Already in the year 2000 , Brussels withdrew the Structural Funds granted under the former Objective I from the cantons of France 's Hainaut region .
Today France , which contributes 16 % of European budget revenue , is giving more and more but receiving less and less .
What is more , this regional aid has not protected those affected by the world economic crisis because it forms part of the ultra-liberal philosophy of the Lisbon Strategy .
Now more than ever , we need to build a new Europe that will at last provide economic protection for our regions and our nations through an active policy of reassuming control of our internal market .
( DE ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I am happy to take this opportunity to consider the Roszkowski report in more detail .
Both policy areas covered by the report - the Structural Funds and the support for rural areas - seem to be working well .
However , I have the impression that in some cases both of these policies have identical objectives .
In the areas of demographics , energy and telecommunications , we find projects funded both by the Structural Funds and by the rural development policy , which are working towards the same goals , but are the responsibility of different ministries .
We have a large number of European projects , but do we also have projects which provide European added value ?
My impression is that there is sometimes a failure to see the big picture .
If we were to link together projects across the different departments , we would be able to achieve much more for the rural areas , such as decentralised energy infrastructures , broadband cabling over a much larger area and cross-border water infrastructures .
We need more projects which are supported by several ministries at once .
If this happens , we will no longer be working on a small scale , but instead we will be able to introduce permanent improvements in the regions using European funding .
We must make the European requirements for cross-departmental cooperation binding .
Perhaps we should even seriously consider setting a minimum project amount .
One more comment on financing : in my opinion , modulation is not a nice word .
It takes away the compensation payments which have been promised to farmers , without providing the rural development programmes with reliable funding .
For this reason , agricultural policy must in future be a policy for farmers with clear financial commitments and no transfer of funds elsewhere .
In the same way , regional policy must be a policy for the regions , with a particular focus on rural regions and their requirements .
This will result in true European initiatives which will improve our regions in the long term .
( BG ) Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , during today 's debate it appears to be the general consensus again that the cohesion policy is a necessary and useful policy .
Those of us who support it want it to continue to evolve and yield positive results .
This is why I believe that it is important for us to abide by one fundamental requirement : the cohesion policy must be accessible to those whom it is intended for and who need it , specifically , the regions and territories which are lagging behind and encountering difficulties in their socio-economic development .
Mrs Krehl 's report lists a number of obstacles facing potential users of the aid from the Structural Funds .
These obstacles , which are due to bureaucratic difficulties and complex , vague procedures , lead to mistakes . This discourages the beneficiaries and fuels criticism from the inspection bodies .
To be able to tackle this two-pronged challenge , we need , on the one hand , to collaborate with all institutions and Member States and , on the other hand , I want to call for us to make use of the acquired experience and focus more attention on the positive results when we are looking for ideas on how to overcome the obstacles .
In this respect , the proposals which we are making in Mrs Krehl 's report on best practices provide a solid basis for the subsequent measures and actions aimed at simplifying the rules and improving the exchange of information and communication when using the Structural Funds .
The European Commission and the governing bodies are again called on to play a key role , but they obviously need to know that they have the European Parliament 's support .
Mr van Nistelrooij stressed that the cohesion policy is an expression of solidarity .
It remains for us to work hard to ensure that our citizens can tangibly feel that they are benefiting from the results of this solidarity .
The ultimate aim of the cohesion policy must be to provide equal opportunities to all European citizens , no matter where they live .
( FR ) Madam President , Mrs Hübner , over the last 30 years we have witnessed the benefits of the different cohesion policies we have pursued .
We must emphasise these benefits during the upcoming elections , since they are of clear interest to citizens who have seen their quality of life triple in some cases , and for regions that , after having been in debt , are now making real headway .
So then , the benefits cannot be denied .
Today , moreover , cohesion policy has taken first place as the biggest item in our European budget .
The issue posed by these six reports before us this morning , what we want to achieve as MEPs , is to improve the effectiveness of these funds and regulations that we are making available to our fellow citizens .
Mrs Hübner , the Commission holds the key to the effectiveness of these provisions and budgets .
How so ?
Firstly , if I may , Commissioner , because we have a relationship and we know that you will listen to us and ensure that the Commission takes due account of the requests made in these six reports , and I would take this opportunity to congratulate the six Members who drafted them .
Mrs Hübner , these reports provide extremely detailed solutions , whether in terms of the urban environment , rural areas , best practices or future cohesion policy ; as you know , they contain very specific examples that will facilitate the Commission 's work .
We therefore await the Commission 's proposals for specific , European-level solutions , but that is only half the work needed to achieve effectiveness .
That is why , Commissioner , we are also asking you to use as much influence as you can at governmental , regional and local-authority level , since these bodies will put into practice our provisions , budgets and regulations , and we will not be effective unless they are .
We are counting on you , Mrs Hübner , both at European and national level , to make a success of the six reports we are presenting .
( PL ) Madam President , an important counterbalance to the growing trend towards national protectionism in Europe today is a rational cohesion and rural development policy .
The present system of support from a variety of rural development funds has only served to entrench , rather than even out , development levels in various parts of the European Union .
The result is a huge disparity in agricultural subsidies between the new and the old Member States , and these disparities will persist after 2013 .
All farmers have similar production costs , and agricultural services in the new Member States are increasing , and are rapidly approaching the price levels of the old Member States .
What chances , then , do rural areas have of equalising their level of development in the coming decades ?
Only stable and long-term support for local communities in the poorer regions accompanied by maximum streamlining of procedures will make it possible to even out the disparities and allow us to speak of real competition within the European Union over the next decade or so .
Madam President , I wish to speak about urban and city funding .
Commissioner , you have visited Belfast a number of times .
You will have seen , I hope , as I have , the distinct benefit of the Urban Programme , particularly in North Belfast .
Hence I regret the passing of that programme , particularly since nothing comparable has taken its place .
The switch of focus to private-public partnerships is a poor substitute with access to JESSICA doing little to soften the blow , at least so far .
In truth we moved away from Urban without a practical substitute in place .
In the present economic climate , the prospect of JESSICA producing the anticipated leverage effect is diminishing , leaving an unfilled gap in many cities where urban redevelopment and investment are still needed .
The gap between lip-service in government strategies and delivery on the ground is widening with every tightening of the fiscal belt .
Thus the absence of specific funding for urban spend in the 2007-2015 programme is increasingly being felt .
( The President cut off the speaker )
( PL ) Madam President , it needs to be pointed out that the reason this debate has turned out the way it has , and the fact that we are discussing several reports at once , is no accident .
It is because neither the topics nor individual issues can be separated if we want a serious discussion about European policy over the coming years .
Furthermore , if we take into consideration the current debate on the subject of the recovery package , the decisions we now have to make will of course significantly influence the shape of cohesion policy after 2013 .
Therefore , if we are going to talk about all the reports , rather than get bogged down in detail , it is important that cohesion policy becomes both an opportunity and a basis for real progress towards integrating different types of European policy , towards the complementarity of these policies , towards launching an integrated approach .
It is no coincidence that the European Commission is tabling contemporary solutions that are capable of changing European policy as a whole .
The discussion on territorial cohesion is fundamentally a debate on integrated action .
It is a debate about retreating from any kind of sector-by-sector treatment of European policy .
This is also a direction which suggests that the entire territory of the European Union should be treated as one whole , instead of divided into richer and poorer parts , which means that we face important decisions regarding cohesion policy .
I would like to thank you for making this debate a truly joint debate .

( NL ) Madam President , first of all , I would like to wholeheartedly congratulate Mr Becsey and also to thank him for the sound collaboration that we enjoyed in relation to the report on micro-credit .
There is no need for us to stress the importance of this report , especially not in the current circumstances .
I would also like to make the link between this report and the crisis that we are currently going through .
We note that the Member States are trying to drag themselves out of the hole that is the economic crisis using a broad array of measures , and that they are often preoccupied with themselves and with restarting their own markets .
The solution , however , is not ' everyone for themselves ' but a more European approach to the problems .
President Obama 's United States has gone in for government investment on a massive scale , and I think that that is the right way to go .
Here in Europe we have 27 recovery plans , albeit coordinated with each other , but in each case funded by the Member State itself .
These recovery plans are a necessity , but they are very much a limited step in the right direction .
In this connection , reports on micro-credit and also another report that is due on the agenda in the upcoming weeks , namely on the globalisation adjustment fund , represent very tangible steps for the people , right now in particular , when we have rising unemployment and banks are a lot slower to give credit .
I therefore have very little to say in respect of Mr Becsey 's report .
Above all , I would like to emphasise once again what we found to be our most important points .
We see that these points are back in this report , as a result of which the Commission 's text has been improved upon in various areas .
The first of these areas is long-lasting public EU funding .
This is important as we currently have too many initiatives running alongside one another .
The EU budget must include a budget for these micro-credits .
The second point is the need for clarification that these micro-credits are definitely intended for the long-term unemployed , people from disadvantaged groups and everyone who is unable to get credit in the ordinary way .
These micro-credits are primarily granted at the local level .
For that reason it is very important that an activation policy be implemented at the local level .
We therefore insist that people who receive social benefits do not lose their entitlements by receiving micro-credits .
( PL ) Madam President , setting up a European Agricultural Fund for the Development of Rural Areas is very important in terms of structural policy .
However , in order to make proper use of the existing opportunities , we need to draw up a transparent , long-term development strategy for rural areas and the regions , and establish a system enabling activities to be coordinated permanently at national level .
We all know very well that the debate on cohesion policy conceals a variety of views on how funds for agricultural subsidies and rural development should be utilised .
There is also the apprehension that after re-allocation , some of these funds will be used to develop urban areas and the most dynamic areas at the cost of the historically more backward and less actively managed areas .
We cannot agree with solutions and results of this kind .
( FR ) Madam President , I join all my fellow Members in expressing my satisfaction at today 's debate and I would like to focus my speech on territorial cohesion .
I would say that it is never too late to do the right thing , but nonetheless , a great deal of time has been lost in making territorial cohesion a key political objective for the European Union .
There have of course been institutional problems , soon to be removed , I hope , as well as , if you will excuse me Mrs Hübner , the Commission 's extreme caution in this area .
We should note , however , that throughout this whole parliamentary term , since 2004-2005 , Parliament has constantly tried to get up steam , because we consider the principle of equality in the treatment of all EU citizens , wherever they live , to be extremely important , and believe it is vital that we move forward together .
The Green Paper has arrived at last , and we are pleased .
It suffers slightly from a lack of ambition , I feel : we would have liked the Commission to set out a definition and clear objectives rather than making very open remarks on the subject .
We are nonetheless making progress even if , I believe , we will again be somewhat hampered by the disproportionate link made with the Lisbon Strategy , during implementation of the previous generation of Structural Funds .
Consultation is now under way , and I hope it will come to the conclusion that we must increase resources , perfect our tools - these plans are for 2013 onwards : we have time , but it will soon fly by - strengthen financial means , develop cooperation at the different levels , have an integrated vision of development , in particular with regard to this issue of sectoral policies we are debating , and coordinate the common agricultural policy and regional development , and so on .
We need the White Paper as soon as possible , Commissioner .
To conclude , I would like to emphasise the urgency of promoting territorial cohesion in all the regions of Europe , because spatial equality is essential to ending the crisis and achieving economic recovery , and above all to encouraging our fellow citizens to participate in European projects .
( FR ) Madam President , ' when words and actions go together , they create a beautiful harmony ' .
In saying this , Montaigne was undoubtedly thinking of the words and actions of politicians .
Here , in cohesion policy , we must strive for this harmony .
Inspired by our desire as Europeans to look on the European town as a key focus for the development of our societies , we have been given points to think about and promises to keep concerning general population decline , lack of jobs , urban pollution , reduced mobility within towns and housing that is unsuitable for sustainable development .
These are all crucial challenges we must take up to make our European towns attractive , competitive and pleasant places to live .
To mitigate the problems , our words must therefore be in harmony with our actions .
That is the essence of the urban dimension of cohesion policy : coordinating performance and credit , harmonising them and making them effective for the new programming period .
In conclusion , we have two commitments : the need to provide substantial and clearly identified financial resources to meet the Leipzig goals and , lastly , the need to see our towns cooperate with one another in order to face world competition using the wealth and diversity of solutions within our European area .
( DE ) Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the report by Mr van Nistelrooij on the Green Paper and the future form of cohesion policy is certainly one of the most important reports produced by the Committee on Regional Development in recent years .
We agree with the fundamental concept of the Green Paper , which states that the purpose of territorial cohesion is to ensure the polycentric development of the EU as a whole , the sustainable development of the territories with their different features and characteristics and , at the same time , the preservation of their diversity .
A more comprehensive system offering gradual help for transition regions which exceed the threshold of 75 % of gross domestic product must be established in the next programming period , so that these regions have a clear status and can develop in greater security .
Mrs Krehl 's report on the obstacles to the use of Structural Funds rightly lists the major problems faced by applicants in claiming Structural Funds , such as excessive bureaucracy , too many complex regulations or the slow and cumbersome centrally managed administration in the Member States .
Many recommendations are made to the Commission about the effective measures which need to be taken to remove these obstacles .
I would like to single out two of these measures and reinforce them .
Firstly , project leaders must currently keep project documents for a period of 10 years in order to be able to produce them for inspection by the Commission .
This regulation imposes an excessive bureaucratic burden on small projects in particular .
It is right that this period should now be reduced to three years .
Secondly , the evaluation criteria used by the Commission for innovative projects are causing significant problems .
The same criteria should not be applied to innovative projects as to other projects .
It is essential that a different process is used in this case .
- ( SK ) Regional development policy makes a clear contribution to the general wellbeing of EU citizens .
It is already a social policy in principle and as such we in the Socialist Group in the European Parliament fully support it and are consistently developing it .
I was recently asked by some people attending a public meeting why they should take the trouble to elect representatives to the European Parliament .
After discussing how much and in what areas the EU contributes to the various European regions , along with concrete examples that affected millions of people , cohesion policy became for me one major argument as to why we should vote .
In addition to this I also mentioned what an important role the European Parliament plays in the process for approving both cohesion policy and budgetary resources and that this will increase enormously if the Lisbon Treaty comes into force .
I emphasised that , based on this Treaty , regional policy will also have a far greater direct effect on citizens and that there will be a greater role for local authorities and for all potential recipients in terms of managing regional policies , supporting their synergies and strengthening the development of territorial cohesion , including rural areas .
Furthermore , I mentioned that regional development policy is one of the simplest and most flexible Community instruments for resolving crises such as the one we are currently experiencing .
For example , regional policy is helping to solve unemployment , investment and also social problems .
Provided it is implemented in a professional and transparent manner , regional policy easily proves itself to be a strong pillar of the EU .
We will have to build much on this pillar in the future and increase its effectiveness , since it forms an important link between European citizens and European institutions .
( BG ) What are the basic objectives of the micro-credit initiative ?
To stimulate the development of this instrument and the creation of a positive institutional and business environment , to help non-bank , financial institutions to increase their capacity , to achieve growth and sustainable development , as well as ensure the confidence of the private capital market .
Mr Becsey 's report focuses on the opportunities offered by micro-credit to integrate deprived groups into the labour market .
By coordinating various measures and initiatives in this context , the European Commission should put forward a general European framework with specific parameters , including for non-bank , financial micro-credit institutions as well .
Encouraging entrepreneurship results in greater competitiveness and a higher quality knowledge-based economy , in keeping with the revamped Lisbon Strategy .
( FR ) Madam President , Mrs Hübner , I regret that the Council and Commission have not yet undertaken to clearly define territorial cohesion .
The French Presidency made an attempt to do so , which I welcome .
Our Parliament continues to insist that this objective should apply from the entry into force of the Treaty of Lisbon and that it should be spelt out as soon as possible .
I hope , on the basis of Mr van Nistelrooij 's excellent report , that territorial cohesion will become the legal basis underpinning harmonious development in all regions of the Union , allowing the best characteristics to be drawn from each European region .
It is essential to improve coordination of Community policies in order to maximise their impact at local level .
Territorial cohesion is not meant to focus exclusively on regions suffering permanent handicaps .
It must however follow the polycentric development of the European Union as a whole , taking account of the characteristics of each region while preserving their diversity .
This new concept is , I believe , relevant to consideration of the outermost regions in order to guarantee them sustainable and balanced growth .
In this regard , I thank the rapporteur for including in the compromise amendments requests relating to the particular challenges facing the outermost regions in terms of accessibility and competitiveness , which are vital aspects of territorial cohesion .
On reading the Commission 's recent communication entitled ' The outermost regions : an asset for Europe ' , I saw that the Commission wants to apply all the recommendations on improving governance in cohesion policy to the outermost regions , thus making them a pioneer example of the implementation of territorial cohesion .
I hope that the overseas consultation , or États généraux de l 'Outre-Mer , that is soon to be launched in France , will do the same thing and largely integrate the major territorial impact of European policies for the outermost regions , whose added value is undeniable and undisputed .
To finish , I would of course like to thank all our rapporteurs .
( HU ) If we are to respond to the challenges facing the European Union , we must do everything possible to put a definitive end to the differences in the economies and standards of living within certain regions .
In this regard , our cohesion policy must in the future focus on its original objective , namely , to bring about structural change in regions that are confronted by economic and social problems .
In order to be more effective in the future , we need to concentrate on territorial units that are appropriate to the challenges in question .
We need to restructure forms of economic collaboration , a process in which macro-regions can play a significant role .
At the same time , we also need to face the poverty that is concentrated in certain areas .
If we want to promote true change , we need to concentrate on the level at which the problem presents itself ; in other words , what is needed is targeted , complex measures at the level below that of the regions as well .
It is not enough to finance projects ; we need an integrated approach that involves all the funds , offering true assistance to the most vulnerable citizens of the European Union .
( BG ) Ladies and gentlemen , the cohesion policy is one of the fundamental components of the European Union .
It has reflected for decades the general desire of European citizens for a better future with a higher quality of living and working .
The results of the cohesion policy show that it is one of the EU 's most successful policies .
Nowadays , Member States which have been much less developed in the past in relation to the EU average are now among the most developed in the world .
These principles help show the cohesion policy 's effectiveness and motivate new states which have joined the EU , like my country , for example : Bulgaria .
We Bulgarians waited a long time for full membership of the European Union and rightly pin our hopes on the opportunities provided by the Structural and Cohesion Funds .
I think that I am speaking on behalf of all of us when I thank Commissioner Hübner for her huge efforts in the area of regional development and her decisive support for the cohesion policy .
The five reports from the Committee on Regional Development underscore the European Parliament 's long-term commitment as well to a strong , effective cohesion policy .
Ladies and gentlemen , apart from facing the financial crisis , we also need nowadays to deal with the problems resulting from climate change , demographic changes , energy efficiency , excessive urbanisation , migration and other issues .
All these issues require a strong , consolidated response from the European Union .
This is why the cohesion policy must be used as a driving force for the changes we need to make .
Such a challenge facing the EU is , for example , the reduction in external dependency on oil and gas .
Ladies and gentlemen , the cohesion policy and Structural Funds have always been something more than a simple gesture of European solidarity .
They are actually part of a mutually beneficial system which can be used to create new markets and new commercial relations .
I will conclude by saying that every citizen has the right to benefit from the cohesion policy .
This obviously applies to citizens in my country too , who deserve a higher quality of working and living conditions .
( PT ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I should firstly like to thank everyone for their work .
The three key concepts defined in the Green Paper - concentration , connection and cooperation - may offer solutions to certain obstacles to the harmonious development of the Community , particularly the negative effects associated with the concentration of economic activity , the inequalities in terms of access to markets and services that result from distance , and the divisions that are imposed not only by boundaries between Member States - particularly the least favoured - but also between regions .
We must therefore try to improve the synergies between these policies , using methods for effectively measuring their territorial impact .
That is exactly why I have always argued for the elaboration of additional qualitative indicators with the purpose of better designing and implementing the corresponding policies on the ground , taking into account the different territorial specificities .
For the time being , GDP remains the only criterion for determining eligibility to receive support through the Structural Funds .
However , the elaboration of additional indicators and the conduct of territorial assessments should not lead to more bureaucracy or further delays , but rather to the simplified application of new policies and actions to support territorial cohesion .
The Fifth Progress Report - I am about to finish , Madam President - makes specific reference to transition regions , which are situated between convergence regions and competitiveness and employment regions .
It must be borne in mind that these regions need a clearer status , with more security and stability in their development .
( RO ) I would like to thank all the rapporteurs for producing the regional development package .
I would particularly like to congratulate Mr van Nistelrooij for his extraordinary efforts .
He has very successfully included as part of the motion for a resolution the need for Member States to implement measures aimed at achieving territorial cohesion .
In addition , the Green Paper helps highlight that , apart from social and economic cohesion , the territorial cohesion policy is one of the European Union 's main objectives .
Europe 's regions will develop in different ways unless they are coordinated via a single EU policy .
Territorial cohesion is a key element in the process of European integration and achieving convergence between regions .
I believe that particular attention must be focused on the EU 's convergence regions both now and in the future , so that the great differences between them can be significantly reduced as soon as possible .
In the case of my own country , Romania , significant progress has been made with regard to the development of its regions , but we are faced with disparities both between and within them , as well as between rural and urban environments .
Balanced , sustainable regional development must take place in conditions where the specific resources are used effectively for each area separately .
For example , one of the main features of western Romania is the presence of numerous geothermal water springs .
Allocating sufficient funds in this region to generate an alternative source of electrical energy and use the geothermal water will create new jobs and result in numerous economic benefits .
I consider the package discussed today to be of particular importance to Romania as well .
( PL ) Madam President , cohesion policy is the main pillar of the integration process .
Having a properly functioning cohesion policy is a necessary condition for achieving social , economic and territorial cohesion in the European Union .
Today our greatest challenge is to carry out a speedy reform of the basis on which our policy operates , and to simplify and make more flexible complex project implementation procedures and funding regulations .
The development of an interregional concept and the exchange of best practice are being included in the cohesion policy reform plans , and complement it excellently .
For this reason the European Commission should , as soon as possible , put forward a concrete proposal regarding the possibility of exchanging experience between the bodies implementing the projects .
In my opinion there is no need to convince any of the States represented here that in the face of an economic and financial crisis , Structural Funds are a key tool for stimulating the economy at a regional level .
It is therefore important to simplify the procedures and speed up the flow of funding to the economies of the Member States .
European projects are a way of creating new and sustainable jobs and an opportunity for those in the greatest need , for the poorest regions of the European Union .
Cohesion policy should also be an instrument for facing new challenges , such as a common energy policy and climate change .
( PL ) Madam President , cohesion policy has often been regarded as the best example of solidarity within the European Union .
Levelling out the differences in development between individual countries and regions of the Community is in the interests of the entire EU .
In my opinion , the Green Paper is a Commission document that has accurately diagnosed the present challenges facing EU cohesion policy .
The Commission also addresses the particular need to support regions of a specific geographical nature such as mountain areas and unfavourable agricultural areas , which deserve decisive support .
It is particularly important that we coordinate and properly plan support for rural areas .
These areas are characterised by a lower level of economic development , lower population densities , inadequate access to all kinds of public services and limited job opportunities outside agriculture .
There is also a significant disparity among these areas in individual Member States .
If we compare rural and urban areas , these disproportions are even greater .
The planned increases in funding for the development of rural areas have been subject to much criticism in the present Financial Perspective .
I would like to remind everyone that rural development policy and funding for this policy help to keep these areas alive and make the lives of their inhabitants easier .
In summary , the Commission document , the reports and today 's debate are all a step in the right direction .
( PT ) Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I must start by congratulating Mrs Krehl and Mr van Nistelrooij on their reports and on their readiness to accept contributions from their colleagues .
Their reports recognise the importance of best practices , which are a synergy factor , particularly in the areas of the environment , energy and employment , and link the debate on territorial cohesion to the debate on the future of cohesion policy in the European Union .
I agree with the assessment of the Green Paper and with the analysis of the concept of territorial cohesion , and I endorse the recommendations for the future of territorial cohesion that are contained in these reports , particularly the following : definition of territorial cohesion ; publication of a White Paper on territorial cohesion ; reinforcement of the European Territorial Cooperation Objective ; integration of territorial cohesion in the future development of all Community policies ; elaboration of additional qualitative indicators ; measurement of the territorial impact of Community policies and proposal of ways to create synergies between territorial and sectoral policies ; development of a comprehensive strategy for regions with specific geographical features , particularly the outermost regions ; establishment of a more comprehensive system of gradual transitional assistance to the so-called transition regions ; and development of multi-level ( European , national , regional and local ) territorial governance .
For this reason I urge my fellow Members to support these reports and the Member States - and the Commission as well - to duly follow them up .
( RO ) I would first of all like to welcome the idea of a substantial debate on the subject of cohesion .
I would like to congratulate each of our fellow Members for their efforts and for the proposals which they have made .
I am going to make a few comments about some of the topics , starting with territorial cohesion .
The basic problem is how to guarantee the harmonious development of all the territories in the European Union and the partnership between urban and rural areas in order to stop losing territory and respond to the depopulation of rural areas .
Without a definition of territorial cohesion , which Parliament is waiting for , the integrated concept of economic , social and territorial cohesion provides the future basis for EU regional policy and for the Structural Funds ' format after 2009 .
As regards the Krehl report , I support all the proposals in this report which support Europe 's regions and mention removing obstacles and simplifying procedures , as well as their stability over time , along with the proposal to devise rigorous methods for exchanging good practice between regions .
As far as the cohesion policy 's urban dimension is concerned , we know that we do not have a common definition for ' urban ' .
We also know that we have roughly 5 000 towns in Europe with fewer than 50 000 inhabitants .
Romania has a considerable number of such populated settlements .
I believe that we need a development model and sufficient resources for urban settlements of this kind because these are precisely areas which are lacking or missing out on the beneficial impact of the polycentric approach .
As part of territorial cohesion , integrated , sustainable urban development will be , according to the new Treaty , managed jointly by Member States and the EU .
Local and regional authorities must be prepared for this approach , already established as multi-level governance .
I support the idea of a mandatory minimum allocation of funds per inhabitant of EUR 1 000 , as opposed to the previous figure of EUR 500 .
( ES ) Madam President , with regard to the report on micro-credits , I want to congratulate all the rapporteurs , because they have done some great work .
They have undoubtedly improved the Commission 's initiative .
I believe that the recommendations made in this report will enable us to establish the basis for developing a proper framework in the European Union for the micro-credit sector .
This sector has been successful in many developing countries , including in some European countries , both as a means of generating economic activity and as a tool for increasing social inclusion and promoting job creation .
However , this success has not to date been transferred to the Community context .
I believe that we now have the opportunity to do so , particularly given the economic and financial crisis that we are facing .
In this respect , strengthening the initiatives put forward in this report must be a priority , but we must also take other steps .
We must increase the funds available for these micro-credit support structures .
We must ensure easier access for those individuals and businesses that cannot access loans .
In this respect , Madam President , I want to highlight the example of the European guarantee for micro-loans , as this is a tool that could improve this access and that has been included in the report .
I will end by saying that this report will undoubtedly lay the foundations so that we can create a harmonious framework in the European context in order to encourage the micro-credit sector .
( RO ) In 2010 the Commission and Member States are going to revise the method for using and the degree of absorption of the Structural Funds .
I call on the Member States to redefine with great care the priorities which they have and for which they intend to use the Structural Funds .
I feel that urban mobility , rural development , energy efficiency in buildings and the development of transport infrastructure must feature among Member States ' priorities for using the Structural Funds during the 2011-2013 period .
As rapporteur for energy efficiency in buildings , I called for an increase in the ERDF rate which Member States can use to build social housing and boost energy efficiency in buildings from 3 % to 15 % .
This would provide greater flexibility for Member States , as well as the opportunity to speed up the absorption of European funds for improving European citizens ' quality of life .
Especially during the current crisis , public funds , and in particular Structural Funds , must be used by Member States to ensure economic development and increase the number of jobs .
Madam President , first of all I would like to congratulate the rapporteurs who are involved in this very important report .
I think the economic crisis has forced us to take a long , hard look at our past economic behaviour .
That , in turn , offers us an opportunity to learn from our past mistakes .
I suppose that , when our economies were powering ahead , we unfortunately left certain groupings behind .
Addressing and improving access to microcredit offers us the opportunity to address these past mistakes .
Reshaping the microcredit framework can help us reinforce and rebuild our economies from the community upwards .
In Ireland some commendable work has been done in this regard .
In my own constituency of Dublin there are four enterprise boards that have been set up since 1993 and they have been supplying local-level support to microenterprises all over Dublin City and County .
The Association of County and City Boards in Ireland announced its own financial stimulus package earlier this year , aimed at supporting 3 000 enterprises around Ireland and creating 15 000 new jobs .
The project also includes training for nearly 50 000 people .
On a European level these are small figures , but our microcredit enterprise in Dublin and Ireland is hugely significant .
I sincerely hope that , following on from this excellent report , we see significant and coordinated action at Community level to support the invaluable work that is being done by and for microenterprise at local and national level around the European Union , as it is a very important part of our economy today and a very important part of our economy into the future .
- Thank you , Mr Ryan .
I have not been particularly strict , because we actually have a little more time than is stated in the rules .
However , I should like to say something before we move on to the ' catch-the-eye ' procedure .
This morning , a very important event was launched in this House .
It was launched by Mr Pöttering and it concerns a European organisation called FLARE , in which more than 30 countries are involved and in which young people - and not only young people - are extremely committed to combating organised crime and to ensuring that the goods confiscated from organised crime are used for social works .
A commitment has also been made in this House by the President of the European Parliament and the Committee on Civil Liberties , Justice and Home Affairs , and here among us in this Chamber there are some of these young people who , I believe , are a credit to Europe since , together with ourselves , they are trying to ensure that Europe is a Europe free from racism , but also free from organised crime .
I should therefore also like to welcome those who are here and who are in this Chamber .
( FR ) Madam President , I should like to congratulate all the rapporteurs .
These reports are a goldmine for new policies .
I only regret that none of them refer to cultural policy .
Cultural policy is perhaps cohesion policy by definition .
It is culture that gives cohesion to a region and it could have been mentioned , since trans-regional cultural policies have not yet been put in place .
We always have great difficulty in funding trans-cultural projects because there is no trans-cultural society , no social security that could give artists the mobility needed to work outside the borders of their region .
I earnestly call on all those who are working to implement this policy not to lose sight of this aspect ; it is important in every European policy .
( PL ) Mr President , territorial and social cohesion prevents conflicts by eliminating their causes .
This is what makes measures to equalise the standard of living in urban and rural areas and to balance the infrastructure in the regions so important .
Widespread use of micro-credits is a good instrument for cohesion policy .
Today , at a time of financial and economic crisis , when we are all trying to find ways of protecting jobs , we must be aware of the threats to cohesion policy such as protectionism and discrimination against the poorer regions .
Mr President , the Committee on Regional Development and the funds put into the whole of Europe are the most important programme in the whole of the European Community .
I can speak for North-West England and say how very much these funds have benefited the city of Liverpool , in particular , over the last 10 years .
Looking onward to the future , I can see that city continuing to expand on the basis of these well-allocated , well-controlled funds .
I would call for more involvement of the private sector in the way that the funds are allocated , managed and controlled , because the private sector can always do a more efficient job than the public sector .
I would also like to emphasise how very invaluable these monies have been to the rural areas of the North West , where there are a lot of agricultural areas , which are vital to the whole economy .
Finally , let me say that I back Mr Becsey on his microcredit .
This is a very interesting development and essential at this time in the economic situation .
- ( SK ) Ladies and gentlemen , I consider today 's coordinated debate on regional policy to be the most important debate not only in this plenary session , but also one of the most important debates in our election period .
It is a chance to speak to European citizens about a topic they can easily relate to , especially with the June elections to the European Parliament looming .
The absence of effective , simple and straightforward support for smaller authorities , particularly in the area of accessing investment resources , is alarming .
Therefore I believe that , based on these reports , we will see a re-evaluation of cohesion policy and particularly some of the operational programmes which should be reopened and revised .
I would like to end by stating my conviction that the recommendations of the European Parliament in these five reports will bring added value and will fulfil the expectations of citizens both in Europe 's cities and rural areas , who believe that cohesion policy will ensure the development of their regions , the gradual levelling out of regional differences , new employment opportunities , energy security , improved energy efficiency in their homes , better transport and technical infrastructure and a higher standard of living .
( PT ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , in this important debate on territorial cohesion and the future of economic and social cohesion policy , I have to mention the very specific problem faced by the outermost regions .
Due to the constant combination of a series of geographical factors , these regions are extremely vulnerable in economic and social terms , particularly during a serious international crisis such as the one that we are experiencing today .
I should therefore like to call on the European Commission , and especially Commissioner Hübner , to pay very close attention to the effects of the current crisis on the outermost regions .
An assessment of these effects in each of the outermost regions , particularly on tourism , construction and the rise in unemployment , would be very helpful to ensure a specific European response for these regions .
I therefore challenge the European Commission to prepare a European response to the crisis for the outermost regions , which goes beyond the measures already announced under the economic and social cohesion policy for the European regions in general .
A specific European response to the crisis for the outermost regions ...
( The President cut off the speaker )
You have run out of time .
The Rules laid down by the Bureau state that up to five Members can take the floor in this type of debate , and for strictly one minute per person .
There are a further six Members who have asked to speak , in addition to the five who have already taken their turns in accordance with the Rules .
As we have some spare time - according to the sessional services - I am going to make an exception and give the floor to those Members who have asked to speak .
However , I would urge them to keep strictly to the subject and to the minute allowed under this ' catch-the-eye ' procedure .
- ( CS ) Mr President , I am delighted to confirm that the Czech Presidency is promoting a clear definition of cohesion policy in a way that involves assistance for less developed regions .
I would also like to call on the Commission to submit binding legislation harmonising the conditions for an effective micro-credit market .
This is important not only in a time of crisis .
We must facilitate access to funding for private individuals and for entrepreneurs who are unable to obtain loans from the traditional banking sector .
The past history of consumer credit shows that the EU must act in a unified and effective way , particularly with regard to control instruments .
Additionally , I think that micro-credit should be targeted mainly at projects in the less-developed European regions in the same way as cohesion policy , and also towards disadvantaged groups of citizens or highly innovative projects , in accordance with Lisbon strategy objectives .
I would also like to alert the Commission to the risk of micro-credit being abused for money-laundering purposes .
It is a pity that we still do not have a concrete legislative proposal on the table .
( DE ) Mr President , as we are speaking about EU cohesion policy and regional development , perhaps we should take a look at the EU accession candidate countries .
Last weekend I was in Turkey , more specifically in eastern Anatolia , and I saw the problems in Diyarbakir in the Kurdish area .
I realised that there was a need to advise the accession candidates about the benefits and the necessity of regional development .
The problem in the Kurdish area is not only an ethnic problem and not only a question of the right of self-determination and similar issues .
It is also not a problem of terrorism , but has much more to do with regional development and with balancing regional development across the towns and the countryside .
I believe that we should explain to Turkey that it should apply European cohesion policy in this case , otherwise it will not be ready for accession to the European Union in this respect either .
( RO ) Structural and Cohesion Funds are a hotly debated topic for us , as well as being a very praiseworthy but , unfortunately , inadequately exploited opportunity .
There are numerous reasons for this , ranging from red tape , cumbersome regulations or regulations valid for too little time to information which is difficult to access and a lack of transparency .
I can tell you that many Romanian applicants complain about problems related to eligibility for expenses , regulations valid for too little time , impenetrable documentation and , of course , long project evaluation periods .
I am pleased that the European Commission too has started to realise these obstacles .
The proposals to amend regulations include , particularly during the current economic crisis , such provisions for simplifying the regulations for using these funds .
This is a first step and I would like to think that many of our proposals will be adopted by the Commission as well .
One solution to these problems is provided by the twinning and technical assistance programmes , but as I also supported through my amendments to Mrs Krehl 's report , a programme is required at EU level ...
( The President cut off the speaker )
( SL ) Quality of life has indeed been greatly improved by the monies from the Structural Funds which the European Union has used to strengthen social , economic and territorial cohesion and to develop a total of 268 regions .
From this financial perspective , I am pleased to note that Parliament , in its present composition , has also played a role in helping to allocate more monies for the purposes discussed than initially proposed .
At the same time , I regret the fact that , as my colleague has already pointed out , there are far too many bureaucratic hurdles and I sometimes wonder whether it is Europe or the national governments who is to blame for that .
At any rate , I think that we need to simplify such hurdles , in order to address the pressing needs of both local authorities and regions .
However , if we want to keep young people and women in the rural areas , we have to invest far more resources in supporting rural development .
Mr President , much of what we have discussed here this morning will go to the next Parliament to implement .
There is no doubt about that . Rural development is central to the development of the rural economy , but when the second pillar was designed and brought about to support rural society some years ago , they did not provide sufficient funds to support that second pillar .
We now have modulation , which is taking the extra funds from the farmers ' single farm payment to develop rural society and the rural economy .
I know there is going to be a battle here .
There are those who want to take regional policy , or support for rural society , away from DG Agriculture and give it to DG Regio , which is unacceptable to those who live in the rural economy .
We had that debate way back in the early 1990s under Ray MacSharry and we are not returning to it .
I say ' no way ' . Extra funding must be spent under agriculture and in the rural economy to support small farmers and people active in rural areas .
- ( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I should like to thank the rapporteur for his report .
The subject-matter addressed is very sensitive in terms of the implications it may have for the economic systems of the various Member States .
Linking the new Agricultural Fund for Rural Development to the CAP may have positive or negative aspects , depending on how such a fund is used .
From a certain point of view , linking funds will mean that they can be used more effectively , and this is certainly a good thing .
However , I agree with the rapporteur that there is a very fine dividing line and , among other things , there is the risk that the funds will be used only to make agriculture more competitive , to the detriment of other sectors in rural areas .
Rural areas do in fact need strong investment - structural and agri-food investment - to revive the economy , to train young farmers , who are the driving force behind the rural economy , and to train women who live in these areas .
They also need investment in the information technology sector , to make young people more familiar with new technologies .
The risk we run is that the funds will be misused .
That is why I remain convinced that common sense must prevail if we are to prevent the misappropriation of funds , because the rural economy could have a very heavy impact in Europe .
( PL ) Mr President , the cohesion policy is all the more important from the perspective of the current economic crisis , as the Structural Funds it offers it can serve as effective instruments stimulating the economy at regional level .
Concentrating on growth-stimulating activities , such as spending on research and development , innovation or active job-creating instruments , should give the European economy a stimulus and ensure a return to growth .
I also approve of the allocation of additional funding for improved Internet access in rural areas .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , I saved two minutes from my introductory remarks in order to have more time to respond now to the questions .
Whilst I regret that I cannot respond to all the questions , I very much appreciate all the bilateral exchanges we have had over the last years in Brussels or during my visits on the ground in your constituencies .
You are welcome to continue this dialogue with us in the Commission .
I should like to thank you for this really good and genuine debate today .
We need to fully and wisely exploit the potential of all European and national policies to ensure that the European Union as an economy and a society comes out of the crisis stronger economically , socially and politically , with solid foundations for long-term sustainable development .
I feel that today 's debate confirms that European cohesion policy must play its role in this process both today and tomorrow .
It is our common task today to ensure that the potential of cohesion policy - its capacity to deliver sustainable development and jobs - will be used fully and wisely in this new global context .
I am not only thinking of the crisis , but also of all those well-known challenges that we identified years ago as important challenges for European development .
Supporting sustainable competitiveness is the most effective way to achieve cohesion in the European Union .
In this context , we must use the cohesion policy to target factors such as access by small and medium-sized enterprises to finance .
We must also address issues such as better access to public services that aim to improve employability and productivity and thus contribute to more equal opportunities .
As some of you have stressed , over the last years it has become common sense that addressing the new challenges clearly requires an integrated and place-based approach - an approach that optimises the use of resources and also mobilises all partners at regional and local level , as well as national and European level , so that we are active at all levels of European governance .
Concerning the partnership principle , I would like to stress that this has been a very important objective from day one of my term in office , and the Commission has invested a lot in making the partnership principle and the cohesion policy a real one - one which is really used on the ground .
Soon after the negotiations , we conducted a full assessment of how the partnership principle and the process of designing policy programmes were implemented by the Member States and the regions .
We did not want just the formal presence of partnership principles , so we also worked with partners , helping them to build their capacity to be real partners in the policy management system , and we react quite efficiently to any signals we get from the ground that this principle is not being respected in the individual Member States .
I have just had a meeting on this very issue with NGOs from one of the central European Member States .
I also fully agree with all of you who say that cohesion policy does not , and must not , work in isolation ; that we need to reinforce the synergies and coordination between the cohesion policy and all other sectoral , national or European policies .
This is not just to avoid overlap or duplication , but is also about using the synergy that comes from good coordination between the policies .
Certainly , the rural development and regional policies are an extreme example of the need to have very good coordination and the use of synergies between policies .
Another example could be competitiveness and the need to take into account the constraints coming from a low-carbon economy and climate change regarding infrastructure investment .
I would like to underline very strongly that we have invested a lot in greening the European cohesion policy .
We established the objectives relating to climate change , energy efficiency and renewable energy before the major debate exploded on climate change in the European Union .
Today we have one third of cohesion policy funding going directly into green investment in all areas of our life .
Recently added to the policy is the additional 4 % to be used in the area of housing for energy efficiency and the use of renewable energy that allows us to put more emphasis on this challenge .
What also clearly emerges from the debate is that we need both continuity and reform in policy delivery .
On the continuity side , I would very strongly stress that this multiannual programming , financial additionality , shared management and partnership principles represent a great European value that we should continue to care about .
But there is also this need for change to strike a better balance between the demands of financial management and control and the tasks of achieving good results and good implementation of the policy .
There is no doubt that we need to put in place a simpler , more efficient and more effective implementing mechanism and reduce administrative complexity and the administrative burden .
We have been working with your great support over the last months on this challenge .
We already had the first amendment of Article 55 back in December and we will be voting on the main chunk of simplification proposals a week from now .
The task force that we set up with Member States for the simplification of the policies is continuing its work , and at the end of May we will have another proposal , hopefully still related to this period .
I agree with you that for the policy to be more effective we also need a stronger focus on results , stronger monitoring and an evaluation culture .
We are continuing to work on this .
I very much appreciate your support for financial engineering .
We are on track , but much more can certainly be done .
Please also take note with respect to financial engineering , which is today one of the major instruments helping small and medium-sized companies access credit through JEREMIE and now also through JASMINE for micro-credit , that we started this process long before the crisis hit , so the policy has also been relatively well prepared for these difficult times .
Some of you mentioned the question of transparency .
I would just like to remind all of us here that we have new rules for this new period 2007-2013 .
We have the obligation to inform the public on all the beneficiaries , so we hope that with these transparency obligations we will also see major change with regard to public awareness and the integrity of the whole process .
Very briefly , on culture , because it was raised as an important element , we are fully aware - and I also see it during my travels - that both regions and cities are major actors in the cultural field in Europe .
Culture also plays an important economic role in the development of regional development .
We have recognised this in the framework of the European cohesion policy .
We have many regional and local urban strategies that have successfully integrated culture into our policy .
Let me also inform you that the Commission will soon launch an independent study on the contribution of culture to local and regional development , hopefully to be finalised by the beginning of next year .
Through this we will have a better-informed basis for the further inclusion of culture in European policies .
Finally , I very much appreciate all your comments not just on the report , but also what you have presented here as your concerns and ideas for the future .
I shall include most of those messages in my orientation paper which I will present to Council at the end of May .
We are also completing the independent study by a group of researchers and experts chaired by Professor Fabrizio Barca .
This will be presented publicly at the end of April .
The final official assessment of the consultation on the green paper on territorial cohesion will be presented in our sixth interim cohesion report which will be adopted by the Commission towards the end of June .
rapporteur . - ( DE ) Mr President , I would like to make two comments as this debate comes to a close .
The public has a very ambivalent view of European structural policy .
Some people take it for granted that they will receive support , but simply find that the bureaucratic obstacles are too great .
For other people , including some in this House , it seems merely to be a gateway to fraud .
Neither of these views is correct .
Solidarity is genuinely important for my group , but it must be well-founded and it must not be a one-way street .
On the other hand , it is not the case that project promoters , communities and associations which apply for projects want to defraud the European Union .
Complex processes often result in errors being made , but they do not give rise to fraud .
This is why we must change how things are done .
The second point which I would like to consider is that cohesion policy is indisputably an important part of European policy .
Faced with challenges such as climate change , the economic crisis and globalisation , together with demographic changes and developments on the labour market , we need this policy urgently .
The European Parliament must redefine the cohesion policy for the future to meet the needs of the European regions .
The reports which we have just discussed form a good foundation for this process .
This will allow European added value to be created for the European Union .
However , when we redesign the structural policy , we must not behave as if it could solve all the problems of the European Union .
We really must concentrate on the tasks in hand .
Thank you .
Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , at this point I would like to summarise the challenges and polite requests that the European Parliament will address to its partners , the European Commission and the Member States , if this report is adopted .
It is clear that the greatest need is to assess the usefulness of incorporating the URBAN initiative into the mainstream of cohesion policy .
We must assess the options and verify levels of satisfaction among mayors , councillors and elected representatives in relation to the drawdown of European funds in urban areas .
Integrated planning and the transfer of responsibility or so-called sub-delegation of resources or financial engineering instruments are clearly areas where a more active approach is needed from the Commission , at least through the presentation of recommendations or examples of proven approaches .
At the same time , we must continue to simplify cohesion policy in its entirety and not just the urban aspect .
Long-term options might include , for example , a merger of the European Regional Development Fund and the European Social Fund .
Last but not least it is vitally important for the Commission to measure and regularly assess the impact of all policies on urban life and at the same time to discuss the effectiveness of these policies directly with urban authorities .
This report therefore recommends that the Commission and the Member States establish an EU High Level Group on Urban Development and apply the open method of coordination to urban development policy at EU level in the same way that it is applied in other areas such as social integration for example .
At the same time the report also calls for the position of urban areas in the Regions for Economic Change initiative to be strengthened and for the Urban Audit project to be further developed and regularly updated .
In the absence of reliable comparative statistics we cannot base our decisions on relevant data .
European funds are in fact one of the most visible and effective manifestations of European integration .
We must therefore ensure , both in the current pre-election period and afterwards , that the actual recipients of structural assistance are more involved in the debate over what form cohesion policy should take .
These people are our fellow citizens and our constituents .
rapporteur . - ( PL ) Mr President , Commissioner , the issue covered by my report was quite specific , but very important for optimising the utilisation of EU funds from the viewpoint of cohesion , whether it is understood in its traditional meaning , or in terms of territorial cohesion .
Sustainable growth is an extremely complex issue .
We must therefore welcome all attempts to simplify the achievement of this objective .
However , the concept of territorial cohesion has not yet been defined with any precision .
The Green Paper is therefore the beginning , rather than the end of the debate on this matter .
I am pleased that the Commissioner pointed out the need to reduce the disparities in development levels and the importance of synergies in implementing EU policies .
Different regions have quite different problems in terms of income levels , geographical location , migration , etc .
However , we need to remember what my Polish fellow Members , Mrs Staniszewska , Mr Podkański and Mr Zapałowski said , about funds tending to accumulate in the centres of the regions .
We should also remember that the aims of rural development policy are not necessarily a contradiction of the Lisbon goals if use is made of the relative competitiveness mechanism , or low-cost increases in productivity .
The Committee on Agriculture has not commented on my report , so I take their silence to mean agreement .
In my view , Mr Baco 's vote is more of a misunderstanding .
In my report , I expressly stated that rural development resources cannot drain direct payments .
On the other hand , it is a fact that rural development funds can help rural areas out of economic trouble by supporting non-agricultural activities .
I am pleased by Mr Nicholson 's support on this issue .
Finally , I would like to express my thanks to the advisers from the Committee on Regional Development and my own political group for their help in drafting this report , and to all who participated in today 's debate .
rapporteur . - ( HU ) During the introduction I was unable to address one or two questions relating specifically to micro-credit , but the most important thing here is the principle of additionality .
I would like to reiterate that this , too , is an important fundamental principle of cohesion , in addition to those of partnership and an integrated approach .
Thus , in order to be able to provide something extra , we need to ensure that people without a permanent address are able to take part in the micro-credit programme by means of the mentorship programme .
We can achieve that something extra by making sure that in the newly launched JASMINE programme , we are able to train and involve new micro-financing institutions that are close to the people .
We need , in addition , to provide that something extra by taking a more flexible approach to competitiveness , both with regard to the de minimis programmes and in relation to public procurement , by placing the self-employed in a position of positive discrimination .
Another point I would like to address is the matter of financing .
On the one hand , launching the experimental programme which Parliament has been encouraging for two years now with EUR 2 million per year .
I hope that this will begin in the second half of the year .
We concentrate all programmes explicitly dealing with micro-credit in one place , making them transparent - as several of my fellow Members have also noted .
The principle of additionality is also important in order to persuade Member States to encourage people to begin micro-enterprises and not sit at home collecting social benefits , something to which Mrs De Vits has also referred .
I consider it important that we continue to encourage people in this regard .
It is a very important point that additionality should mean that the micro-financing intermediaries should not lead people into usury .
For instance , in the case of Roma , they should not be subjugated by their own aristocracy , but we should be able to foster an activity that is based on true partnership and a willingness to help .

Mr President , this morning I was the first speaker in this joint debate and , looking back , I think that we have given our citizens , those who are engaged in implementing integrated policy in a decentralised way , a very strong signal that the European Parliament is choosing to go through with the cohesion policy and values the work that they perform on all the numerous projects , whether they relate to research and development trends , research infrastructure or projects relating to energy modernisation .
That is of considerable importance .
When we go to the voters over the coming months , there are thousands of projects in which Europe is close to the citizens .
I think this , too , is of great importance .
I also wish Commissioner Hübner every success in that campaign , as I see that you , too , are going to the voters in the coming months .
That is a really good thing , including for everyone here .
I would also like to thank you , in particular , for the changes in policy that you have brought about , namely greater consideration of the Lisbon objectives , the greening of our activities , and an emphasis on R & D , and today I have once again observed that you also specifically referred to cultural heritage as something with an economic and cultural value .
I have a couple more comments to make , the first of which is about the emphasis that is being placed on cross-border cooperation , that third objective , which we need to strengthen in the forthcoming period , including financially .
The second point is that there must be no frittering away of our funds .
We have excellent funds through which we are able to offer our partners the means , via the partnership framework , to push ahead with developments .
We must not fritter that away in the subsequent period .
Finally , there must be a White Paper on territorial cohesion .
You have given a lot of indications , but the White Paper is the basis for future legislation and I would consider it highly regrettable if the European Commission were to fail to produce a White Paper .
I would also like to thank the shadow rapporteurs for my report for their cooperation , as well , in particular , as the staff , who were terrific .
Before suspending the sitting for a short while , I am going to give myself leave to very warmly welcome a group of visitors made up of pensioners from the province of Toledo , in my region of Castilla-La Mancha , because they are here to fulfil their duty as Europeans .
The joint debate is closed .
We shall now proceed to the vote .
Written statements ( Rule 142 )
People from rural communities are in a particularly disadvantaged position when competing in the labour market .
In the European Union , and especially in Poland , there are significant differences in the standard of living between urban and rural areas .
This is especially true of access to services .
Access to modern technologies like broadband Internet in rural areas in Poland is half that of urban areas .
The objective of cohesion policy should be to undertake specific initiatives to equalise standards of living in particular regions .
Aid for small and medium-sized businesses in obtaining funding from the European Agricultural Fund for Rural Development is extremely important here .
Governments of particular countries should support small and medium-sized enterprises by eliminating administrative and legal barriers and by providing suitable infrastructure .
These are fundamental conditions for the development of areas which are distant from large urban areas .
Micro-credits and even credits granted to entrepreneurs from Community funds provide an institutional lever which can and must plug the gap left by commercial banks as a result of the financial crisis which is already hitting the real economy .
A commercial bank is only beneficial to the economy for as long as it is granting credit , which is not happening at the moment , in spite of the massive injection of public money into various banks .
In these circumstances , I am proposing that Member States should no longer finance commercial banks with problems directly so that they can cover with money they have received the huge losses and / or improve their financial coefficients using public money , satisfy their shareholders and provide a reason for even awarding themselves generous bonuses .
On the other hand , they must not ( all ) be left to go bankrupt , either .
My proposal involves the use of commercial banks as simple intermediaries , agents for granting credit and micro-credits from public funds to economic agents and entrepreneurs who , without funding , are also vulnerable to the risk of bankruptcy .
In conclusion , credit and micro-credits should be given to those who need it via the banks , but without passing through the balance sheet of the latter , only using their expertise and network to facilitate the borrowing of such finances .
in writing . - ( RO ) Improving access to micro-credit enabling small entrepreneurs , the unemployed and the disadvantaged who are keen to start up their own business and do not have access to traditional banking credit instruments to develop a business , combined with the recent decision to reduce VAT for certain services , are solutions which the European Union is providing to Member States to help them overcome the crisis .
The latest analyses maintain that the services sector , agriculture and tourism may be areas which can absorb a significant proportion of the workforce available on the labour market , including the unemployed .
This is the reason why Romania and the other EU countries must develop the instruments required to implement this idea , especially as part of the ' non-banking ' market segment .
I think that these micro-credits can be used successfully to develop services for companies , individuals or households , ranging from IT specialists to window-cleaners , from gardeners to people who provide care services for the elderly and children .
They can also contribute to the use of personal qualifications and qualities in a successful business .
A micro-credit can be accessed by companies with fewer than 10 employees .
This is beneficial for people who want to work and for unemployed people who want to start a business .
Micro-enterprises account for 91 % of Europe 's commercial companies .
The Green Paper on territorial cohesion entitled ' Turning territorial diversity into strength ' launches a broad consultation with regional and local authorities , associations , NGOs and civil society with the aim of promoting a common understanding of this new concept , along with its implications for the EU 's future regional policy , without however offering a definition of ' territorial cohesion ' .
The objective of territorial cohesion is to ensure the harmonious development of all the EU 's territories and to offer all citizens the opportunity to gain the most out of the inherent characteristics of these territories .
The Green Paper proposes that diversity should be converted specifically into an asset and competitive advantage , which contributes to the sustainable development of the whole EU .
It also refers specifically to the need for effective control over the cohesion policy to make it become more flexible .
The main challenge involves helping territories to use this asset and exchange good practices .
Mr van Nistelrooij 's report covers this vast area of territorial cohesion and expresses effective views on the Commission 's communications in this area .
As a result , the Green Paper on territorial cohesion remains open to new challenges , but is being transformed into an effective instrument for partnerships and exchanges of good practice .
in writing . - The Cohesion Policy and rural development measures come under the same principle of solidarity promoted by the European project and contribute to achieving the objectives of the Lisbon Strategy .
Our analyses and the decisions which we are going to make must take into account the different levels of agricultural development across the European Union , this sector 's weighting in Member States ' economies , as well as different situations in terms of regional cohesion and development .
I welcome that the final version of this report will also include my proposal to facilitate greater flexibility in the use of Structural Funds , so that they supplement rural development measures .
In order to ensure the proper coordination and complementarity of the Cohesion Policy with rural development measures , Member States will have to introduce mechanisms to encourage the consistent and fair use of European funds .
At the same time , the European Union must use the instruments at its disposal to monitor better the use of European funds at regional level to ensure that there is no prejudice against rural areas .
This report is a first analysis of this subject , and it must be continued so that the future financial outlook ensures greater harmonisation between the EU 's measures offering financial support .
I would like to thank Mr Becsey for his report , which is so important to myself and my compatriots .
Many people do not seem to realise how greatly the institution of micro-credits can influence a country 's socio-economic development .
Small , unsecured loans are not the preserve of the poorest in the developing countries .
The idea can just as well be applied to the unemployed , business start-ups or existing micro-enterprises .
Offering people without access to credit the opportunity to fund their initiatives is a major step towards implementing the principle ' think small first ' .
In proposing such loans , we are promoting entrepreneurship and increasing work activity , thereby averting and reducing social exclusion .
Micro-credits have a very positive effect - which is particularly important in my country - on the level of unemployment .
When introducing loans of this kind , however , a few important issues need to be borne in mind .
Firstly , the institutional and legal frameworks of micro-credits need to be adapted to the level of development of the loan funds market .
Secondly , the procedures relating to this service must be examined .
Unfortunately , due to their complex nature , micro-entrepreneurs and persons starting out in business are more inclined to apply for consumer loans .
Thirdly , in order to popularise micro-credits , entrepreneurs need to be made aware of the fact that there are alternatives to bank loans for raising funding .
Despite these reservations , I welcome the micro-credit service in Poland with open arms .
I would like to congratulate my fellow Member , Mr Becsey , on his report advocating the development of the micro-credit system in support of economic growth and employment .
The document rightly points out that disadvantaged groups , including the long-term unemployed , welfare dependants , and ethnic minorities such as the Roma , in particular , should be the focus of European initiatives regarding micro-credit .
Micro-financing has proven highly successful in numerous countries in promoting social and economic integration by supporting self-employment .
At a time of financial crisis , simple financial instruments that are able to fund business , especially in underdeveloped regions or the above-mentioned social groups , are of particular value .
Those wishing to run small family businesses can face significant difficulties in tenders administered within the framework of cohesion policy , especially in the case of cofinancing .
The creation , or restoration , of social cohesion must take precedence over profit-making , since support for self-employment is far less costly than unemployment benefits , and thus from the perspective of the national economy it is worth providing micro-credit even if from a strictly financial point of view it might not be profitable .
The micro-credit system must be made accessible to those who are not ' bankable ' , that is , to people who cannot obtain credit from the traditional banking sector because of their high risk , low margins and danger of non-performance , and it should make possible the targeted involvement of disadvantaged groups .
In the cohesion policy debate , I should like to draw your attention to some issues raised by Mr Roszkowski 's report on the matter .
1 .
In the Financial Perspective 2007-2013 , the European Agriculture Fund for Rural Development was made the second pillar of the CAP and was thereby separated from cohesion policy .
As a result of this development , particularly in view of the slender budget funds available , cohesion policy , particularly that of the European Regional Development Fund , has focused on economic competitiveness concentrated in the larger urban centres or the most active regions , while the EAFRD is concentrating its resources on improving agricultural competitiveness .
This approach may result either in the duplication of some objectives , for example environmental protection , education and culture , or their omission in both areas .
2 .
Therefore , we need to assess whether the funding designated for rural development in 2007-2013 should be used more to support farmers , or whether it will be assigned more to non-farming rural beneficiaries , or even beneficiaries who remain in rural areas but will move from the farming sector to other areas of professional activity .
If it turns out that support for farmers is the preferred objective of the second pillar , it appears that in the next perspective it would be favourable to tie these funds in to cohesion policy .
3 .
It is also necessary to increase the funding pot for the second pillar of the CAP , albeit , as called for by the European Parliament , through a reduction in direct payments to large farmers , and a gradual increase in modulation rates .
Regional policy , which has materialised in the form of Structural and Cohesion Funds , is rightly regarded as the most visible and tangible Community policy for the citizens of Europe .
No other policy provides as much visibility for the European Union or illustrates the benefits of integration better .
That is why we attach such importance to the debate on the future of cohesion .
Cohesion has never been needed as much as it is now , when the two halves of Europe , separated after the war by the iron curtain , have come together .
This is extremely important to the countries that were relegated to the background under the Yalta Agreement .
The crisis , and the potential value of the Structural Funds as anti-crisis packages , is a special aspect .
We cannot repeat the 2008 situation , when EUR 4.5 billion of unused funds were reimbursed .
That was a joint failure by all of us .
This alone makes it paramount that we let this part of the EU budget through today .
In the short term , other matters can be postponed ; in the longer term , we must defend cohesion policy as a Community policy that gives all regions a chance .
As such , cohesion policy needs to defer to regional and local knowledge regarding the best way of managing funding .
Additional criteria for evaluating projects will increase the level of discretion in their evaluation , and thereby complicate the process of using the funds .
This makes sense neither today , in the face of the crisis , nor in the longer term .
I would first of all like to congratulate the rapporteur for all his efforts .
As is well known , the implementation of the strategies and operational programmes for the 2007-2013 period is still in its initial stages , which is why the scope of application of the report being debated is still restricted .
However , I would like to mention the efforts made by all Member States to integrate , as part of the process of drafting and negotiating the operational programmes , the general priorities of the cohesion policy .
The successful implementation of the operational programmes depends to a huge extent on how quickly we manage to simplify the procedures and promote the measures intended to consolidate institutional capacity and , not least , on how we identify the specific professional training requirements for the staff working with European funds .
In order to ensure better financial management of Community expenditure , along with the relevant transparency with regard to the management of the funds , I believe that it is particularly important for Member States to have efficient monitoring systems .
I also strongly believe that it is absolutely necessary to raise public awareness further in order to achieve a maximum absorption rate for the funds and the development of viable projects .
At European level , in the EU 's future regional and cohesion policy , disparities are considered to be due to structural deficiencies in the regions in terms of key factors for competitiveness and especially due to a lack of innovative ability and enterprising spirit .
This situation could be remedied by adopting a strategic approach , namely , by boosting regional competitiveness throughout the entire EU , which is regarded as being vital to strengthening the economy as a whole and to limiting the risks entailed by congestion caused by the concentration of economic activities .
We must reiterate that eliminating these disparities would be possible only by launching a large-scale information campaign and establishing dialogue between citizens and civil society , or else the projects will continue not to be accessed .
Similarly , trouble-free implementation of programmes and projects with EU support requires high-quality management and control systems .
Compliance with EU legislation , such as regulations governing the environment and equal opportunities , is a pre-condition for project funding .
Before other payments are made , apart from fund advances , the Commission must ensure that the management and control systems fully comply with regulations .
in writing . - ( ET ) Territorial cohesion strengthens economic and social cohesion and is one of the essential components for the achievement of the objectives of the EU cohesion policy , as it helps effectively balance development differences both between and within Member States and regions .
Territorial cohesion also plays an important role in future developments in EU regional policy , as demonstrated by the addition of the principle of territorial cohesion to economic and social cohesion in the Lisbon Treaty .
In the context of the present economic crisis , the revival of the EU economy has become a very important topic , and this will be achieved through sensible investments , which are vital to economic success , scientific discoveries , technological innovation and jobs .
I wholeheartedly support the rapporteur 's idea that the EU should , under the banner of territorial cohesion , stimulate greater interoperability and the transfer of knowledge between research and innovation centres and their surrounding regions , in order to achieve the maximum impact for European citizens from the investments made .
In order to cope more effectively with the problems and difficulties experienced by Member States during this time of crisis , we need a common EU cohesion strategy , in which the territorial dimension of the cohesion policy should be emphasised , and the specific special needs of each Member State must be taken into consideration in the application of policy measures .
We must launch today a broader discussion of the possible future of the regional and cohesion policy in the EU after 2013 , and the possible form of Structural Funds in the coming programming period , in order thereby to help consciously improve the competitive advantages of the EU economy in the world .
in writing . - ( DE ) In line with the European Union 's motto of ' united in diversity ' , we must do more to make our continent a ' Europe of the regions ' .
Territorial cohesion plays an important role in this respect .
For this reason , we should put the emphasis on making it into a separate objective , alongside economic and social cohesion .
During the process of strengthening the regions , we must pay particular attention to sensitive areas , as has been mentioned in the current cohesion debate .
The increased costs must be taken into account , in particular in mountain regions , which are very time-consuming and costly to manage .
Providing compensation for these difficult conditions represents an important step towards creating a Europe where all areas are worth living in .
In this context , we should highlight the agricultural industry .
Milk production in the mountains makes an important contribution to the preservation of rural areas and should therefore be given sufficient support .
Small and medium-sized enterprises which create jobs outside the major European commercial centres should also be helped .
Overall the current debate on cohesion is setting the direction for modern regional policy and will take the traditional structure of Europe into the future .
In the years 2007-2013 Poland will receive over EUR 67 billion from the European Union budget .
As part of these financial transfers , in 2008 alone the European Commission sent a total of PLN 19.3 billion to Poland .
Specific features of the implementation of these programmes mean , however , that most of the payments will be made in the final years of the programmes , that is 2013-2015 .
Unfortunately , fundamental restrictions have arisen which prevent effective realisation of Structural Funds in Poland .
From the beginning of the programmes for 2007-2013 to the beginning of March 2009 , nearly 8 400 agreements on financial support were signed , concerning total expenditure of PLN 15.4 billion .
This includes a contribution from the EU of PLN 11.4 billion .
Unfortunately , applications to receive payments from these funds amount to a total of PLN 1.75 billion .
The excessively long procedures for awarding public procurement contracts can delay realisation of Structural Funds , and so contribute to the low level of absorption .
Structural Funds are public funds which are subject to national public procurement legislation .
This legislation must create a simple and effective procedure for selecting contactors .
Excessively long tender procedures can delay realisation of Structural Funds .
EU funds should be a means to mitigate one of the most serious effects of the financial crisis .
Acceleration of expenditure will allow strengthening of the economy in 2009 by making investments in infrastructure , human capital and businesses to a value equivalent to at least around 1.3 % of GDP .
For this to happen the Government must facilitate access to EU funds and simplify procedures .
( The sitting was suspended at 11.50 a.m. pending voting time and resumed at 12.05 p.m. )

- The next item is the vote .
( For details of the outcome of the vote : see Minutes )
1 .
Agreement between the EC and Nepal on certain aspects of air services (
2 .
Wheeled agricultural or forestry tractors (
3 .
Community system of reliefs from customs duty (
4 .
ECB statistics (
5 .
The EU priorities for the 64th Session of the UN General Assembly (
6 .
One year after Lisbon : the EU-Africa partnership at work (
7 .
The MDG contracts (
8 .
Artistic studies in the European Union (
9 .
Active dialogue with citizens on Europe (
- Before the vote
rapporteur . - Mr President , I will be very brief .
On my advice , the Socialist members of the Committee on Culture abstained during the final vote on this report .
As rapporteur , I was rather unsatisfied with the outcome of the votes on the amendments .
Many of our fresh and pioneering ideas were voted out by other political groups .
In my opinion , an own-initiative should be a brave - sometimes even provocative - document , free of the old dogmas .
I planned to abstain , and to call on my comrades to abstain , in the plenary vote as well , but my wise and tolerant female colleagues convinced me that this would not be a good idea and that a watered-down report is better than nothing .
So I would ask the House to support the report in its present form , in the hope there will be a chance to improve it in the future .
10 .
The work of the ACP-EU Joint Parliamentary Assembly in 2008 (
11 .
Regional policy best practice and obstacles to use of Structural Funds (
12 .
Complementarities and coordination of cohesion policy with rural development measures (
13 .
Cosmetic products ( recast version ) (
14 .
The placing of biocidal products on the market (
15 .
Structure and rates of excise duty applied on manufactured tobacco (
- Before the vote
rapporteur . - ( HU ) In order to make today 's vote less boring , I asked for the floor because this is a question that we were unable to debate at the plenary .
I wish briefly to tell my fellow Members that we are at the end of a very long negotiation .
This is a very sensitive topic , and I would like to avoid the same thing happening as with the subject of alcohol , on which Parliament did not give an opinion .
In this case we are considering a price increase from a health perspective among others , but we cannot be so fanatical as to introduce a price increase that certain Member States simply cannot sustain , or that would increase smuggling , especially in Member States on the periphery .
Therefore , I ask everyone to vote responsibly , and to consider a moderate , but definite price increase above the minimum level .
Consequently , I would ask that you follow the voting suggestion I made regarding this matter , and which , after a certain compromise , was adopted by the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs .
Accordingly , I ask all my fellow Members to act responsibly and in such a way that we may , with a large majority , be able to give an opinion to the Council on this much-disputed question .
16 .
Combating female genital mutilation in the EU (
- Before the vote
Mr President , the Socialist Group in the European Parliament would like to vote in favour of this alternative resolution .
However , we would like to state that in recital G ' sexual and reproductive health ' should not be seen as a step backwards in relation to decisions that have already been made .
It is important to us that the sexual and reproductive rights of women are recognised .
17 .
Multilingualism : an asset for Europe and a shared commitment (
- Before the vote
Mr President , my report is in line with all the previous documents on multilingualism , whether they came from this House , the Council or the Commission .
The alternative tabled is an attempt to bring into the European Parliament certain nationalist disputes that are ongoing in Spain .
Just yesterday the Spanish newspaper El País reported that the Spanish Supreme Court decided three months ago that a box should be included on pre-enrolment forms asking parents in which language they want their children to receive their education , and also that the Catalan authorities are not complying with this decision .
The signatories of the alternative do not want this right to be recognised for parents in countries with more than one official or regional language .
They do not want to recognise the vital need for education in the mother tongue , not only for educational success in general but also in particular for the learning of other languages .
They do not want to ensure full mutual intelligibility between the languages spoken in a country in this situation , especially in relation to senior citizens and to the legal system , health , administration and employment .
They do not accept that , in these countries , one language should not be promoted at the expense of the rights of speakers of another language or other languages .
This contradicts everything that this Parliament and the other European institutions have upheld .
As a result , paragraphs 11 , 12 , 14 and 17 of my report are omitted from the alternative .
Looking at these paragraphs , such negative positions clearly clash with our fundamental rights and freedoms and patently infringe the principle of subsidiarity .
My report does not attack or harm so-called minority languages .
It respects these and recognises their value , but it also tries to lay down general and basic principles .
This House cannot be an instrument of extremist nationalism nor of regional or local hatred or aversion .
It is our responsibility as MEPs that is at stake .
I therefore urge you to vote against the alternative and in favour of the report that I have authored .
- Ladies and gentlemen , please may I have your attention for a moment .
There is a request to speak and there may be others .
Knowing their contents as I do , I take it for granted that the statements made just now by the rapporteur will not have the support of some Members , but , as you know , provision has only been made for the rapporteur to take the floor for two minutes ; there is no provision for opening the debate .
I am therefore unable to give the floor and re-open the debate ; I can only do this if there is a request to speak on a point of order in accordance with the Rules of Procedure .
If we are talking about a point of order , then Mr Guardans Cambó has the floor .
Do not think me rude if I take it away from him as soon as I realise that it is not a point of order on problems relating to the Rules of Procedure .
Mr President , this is indeed a point of order .
I will not enter into a debate , but the rapporteur has just said something that does not correspond to what is going to be put to the vote .
He said that the alternative motion deletes four paragraphs of his original resolution , and that is not true : there are just changes in their numbering .
Of the four cases he quoted , only one is not in both resolutions .
That is a statement of fact .
The other three are in both resolutions .
( Heckling )
So this is a point of order concerning clarification .
Members are voting on what he asked them to vote .
There is just one case , which has nothing to do with the Spanish Supreme Court , that is different in both resolutions .
As the rapporteur 's statement was not correct , I think this constitutes a point of order .
Thank you , Mr Guardans Cambó .
We shall now proceed to the vote .
Amendment 1 is put to the vote .
Voting will take place by roll call .
The vote is open .
- ( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I just wanted to ask whether it was not considered ridiculous that a person 's report can be stolen and an identical one presented in its place , when , under the old system , amendments were tabled .
For this reason , I invite you to review our Rules of Procedure , as they are causing an incredible amount of confusion and officially allowing an injustice to be done .
- I shall take responsibility for raising this matter again in the Bureau , even though you know that some regulatory powers are taken away from the Bureau and exercised via coordination of the group chairmen , but whoever 's job it is to decide , if it is ridiculous , it will remain ridiculous , it will certainly not change .
18 .
Green Paper on territorial cohesion and debate on the future reform of the cohesion policy (
19 .
Urban dimension of cohesion policy (
20 .
Implementation of the Structural Funds Regulation 2007-2013 : results of negotiations on national cohesion strategies and operational programmes (
21 .
A European initiative for the development of micro-credit in support of growth and employment (
Voting time
Explanations of vote
Oral explanations of vote

Mr President , I rise in respect of the Martens report , because its title , ' One year after Lisbon ' , gives me the opportunity to reflect on where we are , one year after Lisbon , in the European Union .
Where we are is in absolute chaos : we cannot respond to the economic crisis ; there is a return to protectionism , particularly by the Government of France , and there now has to be a recognition that the Lisbon Treaty is not merely wrong but is ineffective .
We have listened - or we should have listened - to the people of Ireland , who made it perfectly clear in their referendum that they did not want this Treaty .
But , if we did not listen before , we should listen now .
This is a Treaty that is unloved , unwanted and , most importantly , ineffective , and this Parliament should recognise the fact .
Mr President , I am very conscious that the Treaty of Lisbon is , as my colleague David Sumberg has just said , a train wreck as regards the European Union .
However , I want to focus on the excellent report that Maria Martens has produced .
It talks about something very fundamental in the way we disburse our aid .
Maria Martens has identified that , if national parliaments in the ACP countries are not empowered to look at the country strategy papers and discuss them in a transparent fashion , then the funds that the EU provides ACP countries could be used in the wrong way .
It gives power to the national parliaments in ACP countries to scrutinise the development assistance that is being provided , in the same way that the Lisbon Treaty should have given more power to national parliaments within the EU to scrutinise what we are doing here .
Ms Martens ' report takes into account accountability and transparency , so I support it .

Mr President , I agree with my colleague who spoke previously , Mr Sumberg , when he reflects on the Lisbon Treaty and where we are one year after Lisbon itself .
However , I really want to focus on the EU-Africa Partnership aspect of that .
In any partnership , I think it is important that we recognise who our dialogue is with ; often it is government-to-government .
But , if you speak to the entrepreneurs - the wealth creators - in many of the African countries , they are the ones who are saying to us : ' help us to help our governments open up markets so that we can have access to the goods and services that you take for granted in the West ' .
Only by helping the entrepreneurs can we really help to create wealth and pull the continent out of poverty .
Let us not forget : it is the wealth creators who are the key to development and not necessarily the aid organisations only .
( NL ) Mr President , I voted against Mrs Martens 's report , but not because I believe that this report is entirely unbalanced ; on the contrary , there are a number of points in the report that are absolutely and definitely correct .
The problem comes when a report of this nature fails to make even so much as a murmur about the problem of illegal immigration , despite the fact that it is a very important problem when we are discussing problems relating to cooperation with Africa on development .
I also find it strange that the report calls for the European blue card scheme to discourage the attraction of any Africans from sectors where they are needed in Africa .
That , you see , is a fundamental part of the whole blue card system .
The problem with the blue card is that it organises the brain drain of precisely those people who are absolutely necessary for the development of developing countries .
We attract these people to us , which means the problems in Africa get worse and there is then even greater immigration to Europe .
This is fundamental and we should therefore be having a debate about that instead of just one passage being devoted to it in a report .
( PL ) - ( microphone initially disconnected ) ... is a comprehensive set of tools to help the countries of Africa in their development .
It is a comprehensive package as only comprehensive solutions can have any result in the multiplicity of problems that have accumulated in Africa .
What have we got so far ?
Over the past few years we have witnessed China showing a great interest in Africa and carrying out an expansive policy of investment there .
Such initiatives will contribute to the development of the continent , but only if it is Africans , particularly the local populations , who will largely be involved in building up prosperity , rather than the employees of foreign businesses investing there .
The European Union owes its success to the gradual raising of economic barriers .
It needs to support the economic development of individual states , to develop a network of mutual ties , and to increase the availability of African products on the world market .
Mr President , I abstained - along with the British Conservative delegation - on the Lambsdorff report on the priorities for the UN General Assembly 64th session .
My party strongly supports the work of the UN , although accepting it is an imperfect organisation in need of reform .
However , there were a number of issues mentioned in this report where British Conservatives disagree strongly , such as the role of the ICC and the abolition of the Security Council permanent seats of the UK and France , to be replaced by a single permanent seat for the European Union .
We also believe the application of the death penalty on adults is an issue for an individual Member 's conscience and we do not have a party political line on this .
So we abstained overall .
Mr President , I want to make a point on Ms Martens ' report .
Firstly , let me say that the Lisbon Treaty is not a train wreck and it is nonsense to be saying that .
Twenty-six of the twenty-seven Member States of the European Union will ratify or have ratified it , and that includes the British Parliament .
It is a pity that British Members do not respect their own parliament in some of the comments they are making here .
The Irish people expressed certain concerns about some issues , and the Irish Government and Parliament are seeking clarification on those .
If we get those clarifications and the people vote ' yes ' in a second referendum later this year , will they come in here with their leprechaun hats and perform in the same outrageous manner that they did at the previous one ?
Leave Irish business to Ireland .
We do not need any assistance in this from people it took us 700 years to get out of our country !
Concerning the Lisbon Treaty , let me say that the population of the European Union will be 6 % of the world 's population within the next generation .
China and all of those countries will be very powerful .
- ( CS ) Mr President , I would like to explain why I refrained from voting on the Hutchinson report .
As a member of the ACP-EU Assembly I agree that development aid is not always effective .
It is not well coordinated and it has high administrative costs .
The rapporteur says that partner countries do not always identify with development strategy but that state aid is the only effective instrument - and here I agree - although it should of course be more predictable .
I firmly believe that we must first and foremost harmonise priorities with other providers of financial assistance such as the US and countries which support their former colonies .
The rapporteur has also underestimated the impact of China 's investment policy on developing countries .
This policy does not respect either millennium development goals or other goals , but respects solely and exclusively Chinese commercial interests .

Mr President , I want to congratulate my colleague Mr Hutchinson on the excellent report he has written on a very important subject .
The Commission and the European Union give a vast quantity of money to developing countries , the majority of which to Africa .
About 50 % of Africans still live on less than USD 1 a day and 75 % of aid victims all over the world come from Africa .
Given these appalling statistics it is right that we should give support to Africa , to provide clean drinking water and allow the African population to develop sustainably .
However , when we give money to African governments , as the Commission now does under something called ' budgetary support ' , we should also insist that budgetary support given to African countries be scrutinised by their own parliaments in a very rigorous way and that the financial agreements signed between the Commission and the African nations are open to public scrutiny and transparency in the national parliaments of African countries and the ACP countries .
This is a very important point to make in order to safeguard European taxpayers ' money .
Mr President , all of us in this Chamber are in favour of the arts and of promoting the arts and education in our respective countries .
I hope that nobody would argue against that .
However , the problem with this report is that , once again , it is calling for an EU perspective , and that is not appropriate .
The diversity of the European Union is that all the different nation states have different cultures , different histories and different backgrounds , and it therefore seems to me important that arts and education should be a matter for determination at national level .
This is not an area for interference by the European Union or the European Parliament .
' Let a thousand flowers bloom ' was , I think , the great phrase .
Well , let 27 flowers - at least - bloom in the European Union , but let them bloom separately .
I believe that , if we do that , they will flourish far better and live far longer .
( FI ) Mr President , I wish to thank Mrs Badia i Cutchet for her report .
Following on from Mr Sumberg 's poetic speech , I would like to say that it is very important that the flower of culture is able to bloom to its full extent , and that includes Europe .
It is vital that education does not merely focus on knowledge and examinations , but that we also bear in mind the importance of human growth .
Culture , art and sport are of major importance if we want to build the whole personality .
In this respect it is only right to remind state school systems , through a process of open coordination , of the need to keep higher arts education in the timetable , and that should include Europe , because Europe is well known for its diversity , its pluralism , its great art tradition and its culture .
It is also appropriate for us to get to know the culture of other countries and the great European cultural figures in the various cultural fields .
( PL ) Mr President , the universal nature of European art shows the need to give schools back their roles as the main centres for spreading culture .
This is an opportunity to democratise access to culture .
Art education develops sensitivity and opens up creative potential .
It should be an obligatory element of the school curriculum at all levels of development .
The European Year of Art and Innovation is an excellent occasion to restore art to its rightful place - in education as well - so that its integrational role can be appreciated .
Protecting the traditional cultural identity of individual regions and the ability to find out about them thanks to mobility , including in the field of cultural education , is a further chance for creative development .
That is why setting up a community mobility framework for Europeans engaged in artistic and creative activity is so important .
That is the reason for my vote in favour of the report , although I would also protest against the fast-track procedure of the debate on this document , and its adoption with practically no debate .
Mr President , I have always considered all good sport to be art .
As an example of art in the European Union , could I refer to the all-Ireland rugby team 's win at the Millennium Stadium , Cardiff , last Saturday , where we beat the Welsh in a study of sporting and artistic excellence second to none ?
We have also beaten the English , the French , the Italians and the Scottish .
This all-Ireland team won the Six Nations - the Grand Slam .
Sport is art , art is sport .
We must recognise this wonderful achievement .
- Mrs Doyle , had I known that you would bring up the Wooden Spoon award for the Italians , I would not have given you the floor on this point .
( BG ) I am taking the floor to explain why the Attack party delegation is voting against this report .
This is certainly not due to the many positive points raised in it from the perspective of the transparency of the institutions ' work .
We are obviously in favour of transparency in the European Union institutions ' work , but we are against the fact that this transparency can only be achieved solely through adopting the Lisbon Treaty and by putting this Treaty , which is already ' dead ' for us , on the agenda again , with many such new reports which otherwise adopt a different position or deal with a different issue .
Apart from this , from the perspective of the Lisbon Treaty , we are against the adoption of this Treaty because it will open the gates to membership for Turkey .
Turkey 's membership of the European Union means economic and demographic death for Bulgaria .
This is why we voted against this report .
Mr President , when I saw the title of this report - ' Active dialogue with citizens on Europe ' - I thought it was a bit of a joke , because the fact of the matter is if only we had active dialogue with the citizens of Europe .
The point about dialogue is that it is not a monologue : you have to listen to what the citizens of Europe say .
The citizens of Europe in the Netherlands , in France and in the Republic of Ireland have said very clearly , in relation to the Lisbon Treaty , that they do not want that Treaty .
If , therefore , this Parliament and all the European institutions want to have dialogue with their citizens , which is a good idea , let them proclaim without any equivocation that it is dialogue which they will respond to , and that they will listen to what the citizens say .
It is an utter waste of time this Parliament even debating or reporting or voting on the idea of dialogue if collectively - and that is the truth about this Parliament - it refuses to acknowledge what is said to it and refuses to respond to it .
That is its failure .
Mr President , this is a very important report - I agree with the rapporteur that perhaps we could have been braver and pushed out the boat a bit more .
As a Member from a country that votes on every single treaty , I am acutely aware of the need for a continuing active dialogue with citizens .
It is my experience that more and more people are losing faith and trust in institutions .
The EU represents a huge institution and we have a massive responsibility to ensure that active dialogue is core to what we do .
I am particularly supportive of paragraph 32 , and I thank the rapporteur for supporting my amendment on the fact that the European Year on Volunteering in 2011 will be an ideal opportunity for EU institutions to connect with citizens .
We have called on the Commission to submit appropriate legislation on preparing for 2011 , and this they have started .
We must now ensure that we have a meaningful dialogue with the 100 million volunteers across the EU and ensure that their views and opinions will form the core of any new plans , policies and programmes and that active dialogue with citizens will guarantee a strong , solid EU .
( FI ) Mr President , Mr Hegyi 's report is excellent and necessary .
We need active dialogue between European nations and citizens .
We need understanding on both sides .
We also need tolerance so that we are prepared to listen to what different people have to say .
We also need that in this House , in the European Parliament .
I thought it was very sad that some Members walked out of this House when President Klaus was speaking , and that that should happen during the current Czech Presidency .
Are they not prepared to listen to the views of different citizens , presidents , institutions and individuals on European matters generally ?
We should be prepared to listen to different points of view .
We need interaction and dialogue , and these we also need at grassroots level , so that the public can feel they can have a say in matters and so that they might not have an image of the European Union as just a debating club for a small elite .
I support the proposal that there should be an increase in active and tolerant , European-wide dialogue at all levels .
That is what we really need .
Mr President , during this economic crisis something very odd happened on the way to the forum , as they used to say .
The people of Europe did not look to the European Union to save them from the economic crisis .
They looked to their Member States and their national governments to save them from the economic crisis .
The man who claims to have saved the world is about to come here in a couple of hours ' time but , leaving that aside , it is to the national governments - in Paris or London or Washington or Rome - that the citizens of those countries ( who also happen to be told that they are citizens of Europe ) look to save them , not this larger entity called the EU .
May I ask why that happened ?
May I ask those who bang on about the EU being this magnificent machine to ask themselves that question ?
I can give you the answer .
The answer is that there is no demos , there is no connection between the EU institutions and the people .
The people still look to their national governments to save them .
( PL ) Mr President , I protest against the way this report is being dealt with .
Building the confidence of the citizens of the EU Member States in the European institutions means not just being aware of their strategies and actions , which is often lacking .
It is above all the feeling that there is codecision , that there is an opportunity to have one 's say in the EU , that the rights given by the Treaties have not been infringed .
A European citizens ' debate organised in all of the EU Member States is the best way of reassuring people that things in the European Union really do depend on the citizens of the countries that make it up .
It is the best way of preventing the 100 or so persons involved in drafting the most important tasks the EU institutions have to implement on behalf of all Poles from feeling cheated .
The list of demands should be given serious consideration .
This also applies to the documents drafted by participants in the debate from other countries .
This also makes the blocking of any real discussion on the issue of dialogue with citizens in the forum of the European Parliament all the more surprising .
Mr President , this report is about active dialogue with citizens , and the best kind of active dialogue with European citizens is one based on listening to what they say in democratic votes .
There is a great irony in this Parliament adopting this report whilst , at the same time , completely ignoring some of the democratic decisions that have been taken in Member States .
No wonder the European Union is so unpopular in my constituency of North-East England and elsewhere in Europe .
Its idea of democratic dialogue is only one way : the EU does not listen to what people have to say and only tells them what they can think and how they can vote .
Looking back over the past 10 years , France , the Netherlands and now Ireland - twice - have all voted to put the brakes on greater European integration , and yet the EU has completely ignored their opinions .
By seeking to listen only to those EU-funded NGOs , how can that be reflective of popular voter opinion ?
The best kind of dialogue with citizens is to listen to what they say in free democratic votes and referendums .
Mr President , I do think there is a misconception when we talk about active dialogue with citizens on Europe , because we often confuse dialogue with citizens with dialogue with civil society .
We often confuse dialogue with citizens with dialogue with organisations either wholly or partly funded by the Commission .
In effect , we have EU institutions talking to organisations funded by the Commission , which , in the end , means by taxpayers ' money .
So , when we actually give citizens the right to have their say - as we did on the Constitution in France and the Netherlands and on the Lisbon Treaty in Ireland - and they say ' no ' , what do we do ?
We completely ignore the result of the vote !
When the people have said ' no ' , dialogue does not mean making them vote again and again and again until you get the result you want .
That is not dialogue .
That is an abdication of democracy .
It is time that we genuinely engaged in active dialogue with citizens .
Mr President , after five years in this House , there is little in reports that can surprise one .
But I do have to say that I was staggered by the sheer arrogance of aspects of this report and the calculated insult to those who dare not to roll over in sycophantic endorsement of the European project .
To say in this report -as it does - that the less educated are more likely to oppose further European integration is an audacious insult and arrogance of unbelievable proportions .
The truth is that those who bothered to read the EU Constitution or the Lisbon Treaty and educate themselves about it are exactly the people more likely to vote against .
Those more likely to vote for it are those - like Commissioners - who never even bothered to read the documents and simply accept the propaganda .
So I do reject the insult of this report .
Could I also say , in response to Mr Mitchell 's first outburst - his Republican outburst about getting rid of all the British out of the island of Ireland over 700 years - that he should be glad they did not entirely succeed because he did need the help of some British subjects from Northern Ireland to attain the rugby victory in the Six Nations .

Mr President , I voted for this reluctantly , not because of the nonsense that has just come from the other side of the House , but because I share the concerns of the rapporteur , Mr Hegyi .
This report has been really watered down by those in this House who do not want to have active dialogue with the citizens of Europe .
For me , active dialogue does not mean glossy brochures , and I do believe that the Commission has failed in this area .
It has failed to actively engage and connect with the citizens .
It has failed to get across a greater understanding of how the work that is being done at EU level is addressing many of the real issues that affect citizens ' everyday lives .
I hope that , as a result of this report , it will revisit it and come up with some more imaginative ways of addressing this issue .
Mr President , I welcome this report because it raises issues that need discussion .
I particularly endorse the sentiments of the rapporteur that rural development measures should not drain resources intended for direct payments to farmers .
Hence I join in questioning whether rural development funding should be linked to the common agricultural policy at all , as this inevitably leads to depriving farmers of previous methods of funding .
Whereas , if it were instead an inherent part of cohesion funding , there would not be that opportunity to poach farming funds .
Thus I welcome the declaration in the report that the population employed in agriculture should be the main focus of support measures under rural development policy .
That balance has been distorted in many rural development programmes , including those affecting my region of Northern Ireland .
Mr President , I voted for this report and I welcome it .
For a long time we thought that the only thing that affected us was what we swallowed .
I think the work done in this report really highlights the fact that anything we put on our skin goes into our system just as effectively as if we ate it .
Many of the diseases that particularly affect women , like breast cancer , fibromyalgia , ME etc . , are on the increase .
I think we should now go beyond this , not just to make sure that cosmetics are safer , but we should also begin to do real research on the relationship between some cosmetic ingredients and these kinds of diseases that affect women and also try to come up with safer cosmetics , because of course we all want to continue to use cosmetics .
Mr President , I welcome this particular report because the testing of cosmetics is an issue that concerns many of the constituents in my region , West Midlands , and I have received a lot of correspondence on this issue .
I welcome this report and supported it because it establishes pan-European standards on the use of potentially harmful materials and sets standards for testing claims that cosmetics manufacturers make , but we need similar standards set for claims about animal testing .
Last time we looked at this report we dealt with the testing on animals for scientific purposes .
We now have an important tool in increasing customer awareness of what goes into cosmetics , which would only be enhanced by a focus on animal testing .
Mr President , I voted for this report and for a stronger control of biocidal products , but I wanted to take this opportunity to point out that , in Ireland , we legally put a toxic pollutant into our water - a biocidal product called fluoride .
I want to congratulate the Commission on opening a consultation process in which they are welcoming scientific papers , opinion from the public etc. on the issue of the pollution of drinking water with a toxic ingredient called fluoride .
Mr President , I voted against this report because I feel it has weakened the Commission 's proposal to apply higher rates of excise duty on manufactured tobacco products .
Studies have consistently shown that the most effective and permanent way of influencing people 's behaviour away from tobacco consumption is through taxation .
Studies in Ireland by University College Cork have shown that , after a complete smoking ban in workplaces was introduced in 2004 , admissions for heart attacks in the area fell by 11 % the following year .
Ireland also has the highest excise duty on tobacco in the Union , which amounts to EUR 4.99 per pack of 20 cigarettes , bringing the price to over EUR 8 per pack .
The benefits of a combined approach of deterrent pricing and taxation policy , smoking bans , public education campaigns and increased access to nicotine-replacement therapies , for people who wish to stop smoking , has innumerable health benefits and consequent health improvements for the general population .
The Czech Republic is the only Member State of the EU yet to ratify the UN Framework Convention on Tobacco Control , and yet tobacco is responsible for over one million deaths in the EU .
Could you , as President of our Parliament , demand the Czech Council Presidency , on all our behalves , to make good this serious omission before its Presidency is up ?
Mr President , it seems that many on the other side are using the explanation-of-vote procedure on various reports to talk instead about the ratification of the Lisbon Treaty .
In that , they are making unfounded claims that the people have spoken against the Lisbon Treaty and that we do not want to listen to them .
Quite apart from the fact that it is up to Member States - not us - to ratify the Lisbon Treaty , this is of course totally wrong .
One Member State has said ' no ' , we are listening and indeed we have to listen .
The other Member States have indicated they are willing to listen to the reasons for that ' no ' , to take account of it and to move forward on that basis .
But when Mr Dover does not even appreciate the difference between the Constitutional Treaty and the Lisbon Treaty and says that France and the Netherlands rejected this Treaty , he conveniently forgets to point out those countries that had referendums to support the Treaty .
We do not just want to listen to one side of the argument .
We want to listen to both sides and bridge the gap , find a solution acceptable to every Member State .
They only want to listen to those people who vote ' no ' .
It is they who are guilty of not listening to the peoples of Europe .
It is they who do not accept democratic results , only the result that is convenient to them and not the overall situation of all Member States .
Mr President , I fully support recital 5 to this report .
I am involved in such a case in Ireland at the moment , where a mother has fled her home country of Nigeria with her two daughters after her eldest daughter died as a result of female genital mutilation ( FGM ) .
At the moment her case is before the European Court of Human Rights and the Court has written to the Irish Government either to defend the case or reach what they call a friendly settlement .
Recital 5 states that female genital mutilation constitutes a violation of human rights and that an increasing number of asylum requests by parents are justified by the threat to which they may be subject in their own country for having refused to consent to their child undergoing FGM .
I hope the Court of Human Rights takes our statement into consideration when delivering its verdict in this case .
Finally , I agree with Mr Corbett that there has been a lot of talk about democracy here today but - for those who take the time and trouble - if one adds up the number of people who have voted on the Constitution and the Lisbon Treaty in all the referenda in Europe , there are in excess of 27 million Europeans who have said ' yes ' and 24 million who have said ' no ' .
That is democracy in action .
- ( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , thank you for giving me the floor .
I wish to express my full support for the attention paid today by this Parliament to such important issues as the right to health , the right to sexual identity , the right to protection of mental health and the physical and mental integrity of women , which is very often violated by these gynophobic practices .
Europe stands out for this commitment to human rights , as we heard just now from the Member who spoke before me .
Children are dying and women are dying precisely because of these practices , which are completely unacceptable .
Europe is doing well to commit itself in this way and to demonstrate the major responsibility that is being assumed in a bid to ensure that the laws are harmonised along these lines .
Mr President , I would have loved to have voted for the Muscardini report on female genital mutilation because I have supported a ban on this barbaric practice for many years and I am also supporting a family 's case because they are threatened with this practice if they go back to their home country .
However , as habitually happens , colleagues use the plight of mutilated girls and women to promote once again the abortion agenda by slipping in the mantra of ' sexual and reproductive rights ' in this report .

- ( SK ) Mr President , I would like to thank my colleague from the Committee on Culture and Education , Mr Graça Moura , for his work on drafting the report , which I supported in the vote .
It relates to documents we have already dealt with before in the European Parliament .
Enlargement has contributed to the linguistic diversity of the EU .
Today we speak 23 languages and a further 60 plus dialects in regions or in groups .
Globalisation and emigration are contributing to the broad palette of languages used by Europeans every day .
Linguistic diversity is therefore undoubtedly one of the most characteristic features of the European Union , affecting the social , cultural , and professional lives of its citizens , as well as the economic and political activities of the Member States .
I consider the Commission Notification in this area to be exceptionally important .
I agree with the rapporteur that the linguistic and cultural heterogeneity of the EU represents an enormous competitive advantage and that we clearly have to support programmes for language teaching and school cultural exchanges .
- ( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , with regard to the Graça Moura report , I must say that our colleague has done an excellent job .
I just wanted to raise a point of order concerning this system - Mrs Muscardini has already raised this issue today - I hope that you pass on our requests to the effect that it should not be possible to put to the vote what are in fact two virtually identical reports and thus penalise the rapporteur .
This has happened to me in this case and it is something that I did not wish for .
It is precisely for this reason that I should like to emphasise once again the very positive work done by our colleague , Mr Graça Moura , even though the other resolution , for which I also voted , was subsequently accepted .
My vote was not a negation of the Graça Moura report ; quite the contrary .
( FI ) Mr President , firstly I wish to thank Mr Graça Moura for his excellent work .
He has dedicated himself wholeheartedly to these issues of language , and it is absolutely true that language is a fundamental right .
Language lies at the heart of one 's identity , and that is why we in the European Union should nurture multilingualism .
We voted for an alternative resolution , however , in preference to the original report .
I myself took part in drawing up the alternative resolution , and it is perhaps apposite to mention why we set about drafting an alternative to Mr Graça Moura 's highly commendable work .
The reason was that we would like in particular to guarantee the status of minority languages .
As they say , we in Europe are only as strong as our weakest link - which the worst-off people in our society are .
That is why we have to ensure that minority groups , for example the Sami in my country , Finland , retain the right to use their mother tongue and receive basic services in their own language .
We need to take responsibility for them , just as we do all other indigenous peoples .
For that reason it is very important that the European Union discharges its cultural duty and ensures the viability of all languages , including minority ones .
( NL ) Mr President , although the alternative resolution on multilingualism in Europe ultimately adopted was much better than the original text that was before us , I still voted against it after deliberation ; after all , both resolutions , the one adopted and the original , call for the promotion of a European Agency on linguistic diversity .
While that may indeed sound good and I would be behind it in principle , I then read on and see that , for example , non-European immigrants are to be encouraged to continue to use their mother tongue over here , that the European Parliament is even calling for the mother tongues of foreign minorities , or of minorities originating abroad , to be included in school programmes and for Member States not only to encourage the use of the original languages but , in particular , to encourage the use of the immigrants ' main language .
I am sorry , but this is madness .
It will lead to the opposite of adaptation and assimilation .
That is the opposite of what is actually required in all European countries .
( NL ) Mr President , I too voted against the report on multilingualism .
Although I remain a convinced supporter of promoting multilingualism , both the original report and the amendment that was eventually adopted put forward a number of ideas that are problematic if they are to be implemented in practice .
The report seeks , for example , to encourage immigrants to continue to use their original languages , something which is itself a problem in many Member States because they fail to learn the language of their host country satisfactorily , with all the attendant consequences .
Another potential problem is the way in which the report deals with Member States where there is more than one official language .
There is , of course , a need to take account of specific situations , such as in Belgium , where each region , with the exception of Brussels , is officially monolingual .
In Flanders we face the problem of a large number of French-speaking immigrants who refuse to adapt to the Dutch-speaking character of Flanders , and it is not Europe 's job to interfere there and to promise all kinds of non-existent rights .
- ( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I share many of the reservations expressed in this report concerning the encouragement given by the European Union to the continuation and development of languages of origin - even though the general philosophy of the reports is worthy of attention and support - and this is because , today , in the face of these legitimately raised problems , we run an even greater risk , which is that of seeing European languages die out as a result of our being forced , in this House as elsewhere , to use standardised spoken and written English .
This is a very serious risk that must be addressed .
We must not forget the rights of local languages .
National languages are dying out : they have difficulty in expressing themselves , but local languages are disappearing in a truly shameful fashion , when they should be protected , as is the case in Italy with the federalist reform that we are trying to propose and implement .
Is the European Union doing everything that needs to be done to protect local languages ?
We heard Mrs Lo Curto speak a moment ago .
It would certainly be very nice to hear her speak at times in the beautiful Sardinian language , since I am sure she knows it .
I should like to speak occasionally in the Piedmont language , but in our Parliament 's library there are no cultural documents , magazines and so on relating to languages of cultural identity or local languages .
Therefore , before Europe worries about protecting itself from the standardisation of third-country languages , it should worry about our minorities and our local languages .

- ( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , Mr Borghezio , I am Sicilian , and Sicily is the cradle and land of a great civilisation and a great history , and we hope that it will be able to forge a future for itself that begins with independence , and therefore I can of course only agree on the need for greater attention to be paid to the mother tongues that we should learn to speak more and more and , above all , should learn to pass on to our children .
Above all , I am picturing the history of emigration that there has been in Italy , but in other countries too , I believe , and that today causes and is in danger of causing the new generations of these Sicilians - like the Venetians , Sardinians and countless others in Europe who have undergone this process in the past - not to remember , no longer to be able to speak Sicilian , Venetian and Sardinian , respectively .
In an effort to see this great institutional theatre of Europe also become the cradle of such diversities and such autonomous identities as those which I hope for in the Europe of the regions that we shall learn to celebrate in the future , I therefore call , Mr President , for more and more people to come to prominence through the use of our languages , too .
Mr President , I abstained on this report for two reasons , even though I fully agree with the title ' Multilingualism : an asset for Europe and a shared commitment ' .
We have been told here today that the report deals with ' certain national quarrels in Spain ' .
I am very sceptical about using a debate on multilingualism and on the promotion of language as a sort of cover , or proxy , or political bargaining tool for the various national issues in all our Member States , and that appears to have happened in relation to some of the debate on this at committee and here .
I do not attack any of the rights of minority language speakers .
In fact , I fully defend them and I really do feel that we must respect the right of our EU citizens whose first language is a minority language .
There has to be a place for these languages in the European Parliament , but not necessarily as official working languages , especially if these citizens happen to be equally fluent in English - as in our case .
Contributing to important debates in plenary and at committees , for example , in a minority language that has then to be translated passively and into over 20 other languages compromises the whole purpose of democratic debate through the lost nuance in translation , and maybe even misunderstanding .
Our democratic mandate here is to persuade as many people as possible to see our point of view , and the difficulty of getting a sufficient number of suitably qualified interpreters is another matter altogether .
I therefore abstained for these two reasons .
- ( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I should like to say that I voted in favour of the van Nistelrooij report , but I would also take this opportunity , for the benefit of the few spectators who remain , to say that , if , instead of continuing to go around the European Union and around their constituencies speaking ill of the Union , those Members of this House who today so roundly criticised the European Union and its procedural method were to provide much more objective information , this would undoubtedly create a completely different atmosphere .
With regard to the van Nistelrooij report , cohesion policy was conceived along these very lines in order to create solidarity and to establish cooperation and , above all , in this time of crisis , I believe that the European regions - not only the nations , but also the regions - should cooperate , should strengthen their positions and should improve the quality of life of their inhabitants .
It is precisely for this reason that the van Nistelrooij report was very deserving of my vote in favour .
( BG ) I voted in support of the report on territorial cohesion because I firmly believe that this concept should be developed and applied as a horizontal principle underpinning all the Community 's policies and actions .
During today 's debate on the cohesion policy , we called for a significant reinforcement during the next programming period of the direct involvement of regional and local authorities in the planning and implementation of the relevant programmes .
The European Union 's policies , and more particularly the cohesion policy , have transformed governance from an often centralised system into an increasingly integrated , multi-level system .
This is why I think that Member States must be encouraged to establish a system of territorial governance based on an integrated ' bottom-up ' approach , which also allows more active civil participation .
I urge Member States to start thinking about how they can consolidate and support better the concept of territorial cohesion in their national programmes and policies .
In this context , I believe that the fundamental principles of coordinated development and urban-rural partnership are especially important and must be strictly observed .
( BG ) I supported the report on territorial cohesion on the understanding that it is a policy which is extremely important to every region in the European Union .
The resources from the Cohesion Funds , along with national resources , can transform even the most backward regions into well-developed regions and bring them up to the level of the developed regions .
This is of paramount importance to my country , Bulgaria .
It is also important during the planning stage for all the resources to be distributed fairly and for the principle of cohesion to be applied in all of the European Union 's priority policies .
Taking into account all the factors which influence balanced regional and social development , we must find the most opportune mechanisms to enable us to give some of the new Member States at a lower level of development the opportunity to catch up with the rest .
We need to have clear criteria during the planning stage to prevent any country from being penalised because it is precisely at the planning stage when inadequate and ineffective allocations are made , which subsequently have an impact on citizens ' quality of life .
Mr President , I would like to congratulate Mr van Nistelrooij on his report .
In particular , I want to support paragraph 42 , which calls for the establishment of real partnerships between all the parties involved in regional and local development at EU , national , regional and local level .
In order to achieve territorial cohesion , this is a prerequisite .
The involvement of local development groups and NGOs in the pursuit of regional development and territorial cohesion has been shown , time and time again , to add real economic and social value .
Given that we are not achieving territorial cohesion between our regions , it is crucial that we establish and promote such partnerships .
Mr President , I want to support paragraph 22 , which - like the van Nistelrooij report - calls for Member States to strengthen the partnership principle in their programmes for the current period and in accordance with Article 11 of the General Regulation of the ERDF , the ESF and the Cohesion Funds .
We in Parliament write these regulations , but it is up to the Member States to implement these regulations , and it is up to the Commission to monitor their implementation .
A recent report about the involvement of NGOs and others in the development , implementation and monitoring of the Structural Funds in the new Member States was entitled ' The illusion of inclusion ' , and I think the title says it all .
Member States and the Commission are not shouldering their responsibilities .
We in this Parliament must continue to insist that they do .
- ( CS ) I have voted for the collection of reports from fellow Members criticising the obstacles to the fulfilment of cohesion policy .
I would particularly like to talk about the Krehl report .
I would like to add to today 's discussion by pointing out that fellow Members forgot to mention that we approved a recovery package two weeks ago . This was the package agreed on by the Czech Presidency and the Commission .
Under pressure from the European Parliament , the Commission has also drafted clear proposals for simplifying administration , and in particular it has introduced a clear degree of flexibility that will now enable everyone drawing down money from the Structural Funds to transfer resources between programmes and even to use these resources to cover loans , which is especially important for new Member States .
The next report in this package , relating to micro-credit , further supports this , of course .
I am only sorry that we do not yet have clear guidelines for harmonising regulations on the use of micro-credit , which would be particularly helpful for small-scale entrepreneurs and local authorities .
Mr President , I am particularly supportive of this report , the mention of credit unions and recognition of their contribution to providing microcredit facilities .
As not-for-profit organisations , credit unions play a unique role in providing microcredit to many who would not be offered credit by many of the other financial institutions .
I know that credit unions are not strong in all European countries , but they are strong in many , with reserves in excess of EUR 40 billion .
Worldwide credit unions have reserves in excess of USD 1.1 trillion , with almost 180 million members worldwide .
At a time when many people are losing faith in banking institutions , not-for-profit financial institutions are a viable alternative and they need our support .
In particular , they need to be included in the JASMINE programme so that , as providers of microfinance , they have access to business support services such as mentoring , training , advice , financing and education , etc .
Finally , a clarification on the Muscardini report : I believe we voted for and passed Amendment 1 , where the term ' sexual and reproductive rights ' was amended to ' sexual and reproductive health ' .
In this context , I am not sure I agree with my Irish colleagues who spoke earlier on this matter .
Mr Kamall , as you can see , you are the only one in the Chamber !
Mr President , let me begin my thanking you and all the interpreters for your patience during this very long set of explanations of vote .
I think there is consensus across Parliament on the merits of microcredit : it is one of those issues that left and right in Parliament can agree on .
At this stage , let me pay tribute to two organisations in particular .
One is Opportunity International , which is headed by a former central bank governor of an African country and brings a professional approach to microcredit where sometimes that has been sadly lacking .
The other is an organisation and its excellent website - www.kiva.org - which allows people to lend as little as USD 25 individually and is aggregated up to larger microloans to entrepreneurs across the world , particularly in developing countries , allowing them to create wealth and jobs in their local communities .
The one point I would like to make is that we must make sure that local , national or EU government does not crowd out the small community-led and private microcredit providers .
I have cases of that in my constituency in London where community-led organisations have been crowded out by local government .
On the whole , however , I think we can agree that microcredit is a great thing to help entrepreneurs in poorer countries .
Written explanations of vote
I voted for adoption of the report on the proposal for a Council decision on the conclusion of the Agreement between the European Community and the Government of Nepal on certain aspects of air services .
I agree with the proposal of the rapporteur to conclude this Agreement .
I think that the amendments concerning the designation clause , taxation of aviation fuel and pricing are justified in comparison with existing bilateral agreements .
I hope that reliance on mutual confidence in the systems of the other party will foster realisation of the Agreement .
I voted in favour of the report by Mr Costa on the EC-Nepal Agreement on certain aspects of air services .
I agree with the rapporteur that tariffs to be charged by the air carriers designated by Nepal for carriage of passengers and goods wholly within the European Union should be subject to European Community law .
I am also in favour of the taxation of aircraft fuel for operations within the territory of the Community .
I voted in favour of the report by Mrs Geringer de Oedenberg on wheeled agricultural or forestry tractors .
In fact , I agree with the Commission 's proposal for the codification of the legislative texts in force , including the technical adaptations .
I voted in favour of the report by Mrs Geringer de Oedenberg on a Community system of reliefs from customs duty .
I agree with the proposal for codification of the legislation in force in order to ensure that Community legislation is properly simplified and clearly drafted .
in writing . - ( LT ) Considering the growing complexity of financial markets and , in particular , the financial crisis , this optimised collection of statistics is needed .
Reliability and timeliness of data should be cornerstones of the amended regulation .
Your rapporteur takes the view that the timely collection of statistical information is of paramount importance .
Therefore , the European System of Central Banks and the European Statistical System should , if necessary , collect data on a monthly basis .
This might increase the quality of statistics and optimise their usefulness , in particular with regard to monitoring the financial services sector .
I agree with the European Central Bank 's proposal to partially amend the Council regulation concerning the collection of statistical information by the European System of Central Banks , which aims to strengthen the effectiveness of the collection of this data .
In addition the regulation in force would thus be adapted to financial market trends .
I wish to abstain on the report by Mrs Pietikäinen on the collection of statistical information by the European Central Bank .
In fact I only partially agree with the report in question , since I find there are certain critical points that do not allow me to express a fully positive opinion of it .
in writing . - ( NL ) I have voted against Mr Lambsdorff 's report as it does not make clear that the Member States of the EU would be best served by steering clear of the UN Human Rights Council if certain unacceptable passages in the outcome document from the Durban Review Conference are retained .
It must be spelled out once and for all that Europe need take no lessons on human rights from Islamic theocracies and other ( semi- ) dictatorships .
in writing . - While I welcome the bulk of Mr Lambsdorff 's report on EU priorities for the 64th Session of the United Nations General Assembly , I have a problem with his call at this stage for a single European Union seat on the UN Security Council .
I am in favour of a reform of the Security Council to recognise the new global political realities - Japan , Germany , India and Brazil can make good cases for membership and it would be invidious to exclude representation from Africa .
But support , or not , for a single EU seat should come at the end of a negotiating process - even if it has a logic - not at the beginning .
On that basis I felt it appropriate to abstain on this report .
in writing . - President , I abstained on this report as I believe the UN is in urgent need of review and reform .
There is little point in considering a Security Council seat for the EU if the whole system of representation is in question .
In particular , where is the Security Council representation for Asia ?
At present , that continent is represented only by China , a non-democratic country with an appalling record on human rights .
Where is the call for a seat for India , whose population is fast approaching that of China 's and whose political , economic and strategic power is regionally and globally significant ?
Before thinking about the EU 's voice at the UN , we need to consider how the current UN might be changed for the better .
Proper Security Council representation for the world 's biggest democracy would represent a big step in the right direction .
in writing . - ( SV ) The principle of ' one state , one vote ' is one of the foundation stones of cooperation within the United Nations , and so it should remain .
We therefore think it very unfortunate that the European Parliament is seeking a single seat for the EU in the UN Security Council in future .
It goes without saying that Swedish foreign policy is different to Polish foreign policy , which is different to Greek foreign policy .
On the other hand , like-minded countries can unite if they so wish .
However , the report contains several positive elements , particularly with regard to calls to respect human rights and international humanitarian law .
We feel that these wordings are so important that we have chosen to support the report despite its shortcomings in other respects .
in writing . - Labour Euro MPs fully support the work of the UN General Assembly and the positive role it has to play in peaceful and positive international cooperation .
In particular , we support within this resolution the focus on increased positive cooperation on human rights , positive UN reform , nuclear non-proliferation and delivering on the Millennium Development Goals .
We voted to abstain on this resolution , as although we support many of the points contained within , we could not support a call within the resolution for there to be a single UN Security Council for the European Union .
There is no provision in the UN Charter for a regional seat on the Security Council .
Europe is not a UN Member State and , according to the UN Charter , only states can be members of the UN .
Mr Lambsdorff 's report makes an important contribution to the European Union 's involvement in the UN 's business and transformation .
I am happy to give my support to it .
The recommendations contained in this report reaffirm the constant concerns of most EU Member States regarding the main issues in global politics , while persuasively reiterating topics of interest to Romania and the PPE-DE Group .
For example , the EU 's fundamental values ask us to attach particular importance to the Responsibility to Protect principle .
In addition , my party and the other members of the PPE-DE Group regard human rights as one of the cornerstones of our foreign policy activities and a key channel for expressing our views at global level .
I am pleased that these recommendations extensively touch on these concerns .
In order to consolidate the progress made in these areas , we must also promote human security , not only from an economic and social perspective , but ' hard ' security too .
Last but not least , the proper operation of this organisation is important to all of us who want to see an assertive , efficient , multilateral mechanism whose actions promote these values .
By touching on these topics and others of interest to Europe 's citizens , the report and recommendations from Mr Lambsdorff mark a step forward , which is why I am voting for it .
in writing . - I voted in favour on Alexander Graf Lambsdorff 's report with a proposal for a European Parliament recommendation to the Council on the EU priorities for the 64th Session of the UN General Assembly .
European Union must act in unison in order to affect the decisions and commitments that will be taken in September 2009 during the UN General Assembly .
As a member of the committee on development , I would like to highlight the importance of progressing towards the Millennium Development Goals .
European Union must take a leading role in the UN to ensure that our promises to the developing countries , which actually suffer the most by the current economic crisis , are kept , as unfortunately at the moment our actions have run short of our promises .
Undoubtedly , the crisis has affected almost all the countries , however , especially on the difficult times as now ; all the developed countries must act together and look further from narrow national interests , as the lives of millions of people are literally depending on our actions and our future behaviour .
The consequences of ignoring the problems now could be catastrophic ; furthermore , we might not be able to solve them anymore in the future .
in writing . - I wanted to vote for this report on UN priorities for the 64th Session of the UN General Assembly because many of the priorities are worthy and should be supported and even promoted .
Unfortunately colleagues included ' sexual and reproductive rights ' in the list of priorities and I cannot and will not ever condone the killing of fellow human persons , in this case babies before birth .
in writing . - While I support efforts towards a co-ordinated position in the UN among the Western democracies , and have long argued the case for institutional reform of UN structures , I do not accept that the EU should act on our behalf .
Under no circumstances should individual members of the UN , still less members of the Security Council , allow EU usurpation of their right to put their own view forward .
I reject the objective of " an EU seat in the Security Council " .
As a matter of principle therefore - and without in any way rejecting UN initiatives such as the Millennium Development Goals , or the ' Right to Protect ' concept - I abstained on the report .
in writing . - One of the most difficult challenges facing the European Union is that of illegal or irregular immigration .
I have always believed that solutions can only be proposed if both sides see each other as partners .
Concentrating on the plight of migrants traversing the Mediterranean , Europe and the North African States ( Maghreb ) have to work in unity .
Malta since the 1970 's has continuously campaigned for this approach , but at the time the majority of European Leaders did not have the necessary foresight .
Now that we are facing an exodus of biblical proportions Europe has suddenly been startled into reality .
in writing . - ( IT ) I voted in favour of Mrs Martens 's report .
In the light of the Joint Strategy adopted in 2007 , which proposed the introduction of a more bilateral approach putting the EU and Africa on a more equal footing , I agree on the importance of such a strategy .
Its aim is to take dialogue and cooperation ' beyond development ' , ' beyond Africa ' and ' beyond institutions ' by means of greater EU-Africa cooperation within international bodies and in multilateral negotiations , on issues such as human rights and climate change .
I agree that the European Union and Africa should work towards making international institutions such as the World Bank , the International Monetary Fund and the World Trade Organization more democratic and representative , thus ensuring that Africa can exert an influence in line with its size .
The report highlights four areas in which effective results are particularly important to the success of the joint strategy : peace and security , governance in the broadest sense , trade issues , regional economic communities and capital flight , and key development issues such as health and education .
I also support the request for a specific financial instrument for implementing the joint strategy , centralising all existing sources of funding in a clear , predictable and programmable way .
in writing . - ( NL ) I voted against Mrs Martens 's report , even though it contains many sound and acceptable elements and is a relatively even-handed report .
It is lamentable , however , that a report on the EU-African partnership should contain no word of mention about the problem of illegal immigration , a problem which is so pressing for both Europe and Africa , that leads to a brain drain from Africa and causes so many social problems in Europe .
In addition , this report shows a degree of naivety when it calls for the European blue card scheme to discourage the attraction of any Africans from sectors where they are needed in Africa .
The report says nothing about how that can be reduced in reality .
I voted in favour of the Martens report on ' One year after Lisbon : The EU-Africa partnership at work ' , as it reiterates the need to strengthen ties between the European Union and Africa , particularly in the current context of global economic instability .
I should like to highlight that the holding of the EU-Africa Summit in Lisbon in 2007 was mainly down to the work carried out by the Portuguese Presidency of the Council of the European Union .
However , we still have a long way to go to develop the Joint Strategy outlined on that occasion , particularly in the areas of peace , security , governance , human rights , regional integration , health and education .
The European Union needs to create a specific financial instrument for implementing the Joint Strategy and to meaningfully involve civil society .
in writing . - ( SV ) The rapporteur paints an essentially accurate picture of Africa 's many challenges .
She is doubtless also correct in her description of the significance that both international efforts and international cooperation may be considered to have in dealing with poverty , the lack of health care and the consequences of the global economic downturn .
However , the rapporteur engages in detailed propaganda in favour of the European Parliament having a greater role in relations between Africa and the EU .
Without any objective arguments , it is proposed , for example , that the President of the European Parliament should be allowed to attend the meetings between representatives of Africa 's governments and the European Commission and / or the Council .
The rapporteur would also like the European Parliament to have a greater responsibility for the structure and function of the European Development Fund .
We believe that such a development would be extremely unfortunate .
We have therefore voted against the report as a whole .
in writing . - I support this report which looks at the effectiveness of the EU-Africa partnership .
The report notes that very little new funding has been made available to implement the Joint Strategy and calls for the creation of a specific financial instrument , centralising all existing sources of funding in a clear , predictable and programmable way .
in writing . - ( IT ) I voted against the report by Mrs Martens on the Africa-EU partnership .
I disagree , in fact , with the approach adopted , which often proves unsuitable for meeting the needs of the African side , including both the institutions and the private sector .
In this respect , moreover , greater efforts are also needed from the African parties to ensure that a broad spectrum of civil society is truly involved in implementing the partnership agreements .
The partnership strategy put into practice so far has only delivered modest results , which have remained well below the expectations and targets set .
Since the first Action Plan ends in 2010 , I do not think it will be possible to achieve those targets .
I repeat that I am opposed to the report on those grounds .
in writing . - Good governance is central to economic progress and well-being in Africa and should be the first priority .
It is a pity that this report gives it such scant attention and deals with it in terms which show excessive sensitivity to African regimes .
There is no mention of the fact that most African governments have been tacitly or openly supportive of the Mugabe regime in Zimbabwe , with all the devastation that that regime has inflicted on the people of Zimbabwe .
And we should not be trying to impose the template of the EU 's institutional structure on another continent without reflection on the appropriateness of such a structure for Europe , let alone Africa .
in writing . - ( NL ) It continues to be a remarkable fact that we in this institution cling onto the Lisbon illusion come what may .
Come to think of it , it is actually not that remarkable as it is a perfect illustration of the way in which European officialdom handles legality , the rights of opposition and respect for the freely-made choices of our electorates .
Lisbon , after all , has been legally dead since the referendum in Ireland .
Why can we not just respect that ?
Fundamentally , I wonder whether we actually now need to invest another EUR 55 million in order to support the institutions of the African Union .
These institutions raise scarcely a murmur of criticism about the bloody dictators that they include .
I also ask myself how the perfectly valid comment about the blue card being a dreaded instrument of a further brain drain to Europe squares with the positions adopted elsewhere .
Furthermore , nowhere does this report even mention the issue of illegal immigration .
Maybe that is an area where we could better invest the EUR 55 million .
in writing . - ( IT ) I voted in favour of Mr Hutchinson 's report and I fully support the request for the Commission to continue to link its budget support in the areas of health and education , in particular basic healthcare and primary education , to the results achieved in those areas , and to improve the predictability of budget support by introducing MDG contracts .
I also agree on the importance of being able to extend the principles underlying these contracts to a larger number of countries , given that the main objective of the MDG contract is to help improve aid effectiveness and speed up the rate of progress towards achieving the MDGs for those countries which need them most .
I believe that it is vitally important for the Commission to make its budget support conditional on results achieved with regard not only to the field of good governance and transparency , but also in terms of defending and upholding human rights , in particular those of the poorest and the excluded , including disabled people , minorities , women and children , and to ensure that budget support is not provided for sectors other than those specified in the MDG contract .
in writing . - I voted in favour of this report which aims to create Millennium Development Goal contracts between the EU and certain countries .
I support the financial transparency which the report recommends and the stability that contractual aid will provide for partner countries to better plan budgets in advance .
I wish to abstain on the report by Mr Hutchinson on MDG contracts .
In fact , I only agree with some of the points considered , and therefore I cannot fully endorse the text in question .
in writing . - The EU must get behind the MDG wholeheartedly , but I voted against the report on the MDG because once again colleagues have advocated ' sexual reproductive rights ' in the report .
Giving children a chance in life is an important MDG .
in writing . - ( SV ) We Social Democrats believe that it is important to promote both art and culture within the EU .
We would therefore like to see a greater exchange of experience and cooperation between Member States in this area .
This is particularly important in order to make it easier for art students to study in another Member State .
However , we do not believe that the content of the Member States ' art courses should be determined at EU level .
Such decisions should be taken by the Member States themselves .
We have therefore chosen to vote against the report .
in writing . - ( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I voted in favour .
' All children are born artists .
The problem is to remain an artist as we grow up . '
With those words Pablo Picasso described the problems associated with artistic training .
Although artistic education is currently a compulsory subject in many educational systems , teaching models still vary considerably from one Member State to the next .
The development of new information and communication technologies has favoured the promotion of a knowledge-based economy , in which intellectual capabilities and creativity occupy a pre-eminent place .
In this context , artistic education has become an important element in preserving identity and promoting intercultural and inter-religious understanding .
Artistic education also offers nations the means to develop the necessary human resources devoted to making good use of the wealth of their cultural heritage .
To this must be added the growing requirement for demonstrable competitiveness in many spheres , which is the reason for the priority given today by many educational systems to promoting the development of creativity through educational programmes developed using appropriate pedagogical methods , which have a great impact on the subsequent integration of students into the workplace .
in writing . - ( LT ) The establishment of the joint motion for the coordination of artistic studies at European level is important .
Artistic activity encompasses the mastery of several areas of competence , knowledge and materials , which have long been closely linked to educational and technological advances .
Throughout history the arts have used the most progressive technologies of the day , and scientific debates have influenced many aesthetic theories .
In turn , practical experience and certain artistic disciplines also influenced technical progress and so contributed to human knowledge and global change .
Despite the fact that artistic creation cannot be restricted by the application of strict scientific and technological knowledge , technology , although it was not created for this purpose , can be useful to art , just as art can encourage research and improvement of technologies , applied not only in artistic activities .
In other words artistic education contributes to closer and more fruitful relations between education , culture , ICT and the arts in the 21st century .
I voted in favour of this report because I agree that there needs to be a balance between theoretical study and practical initiation in every area , including artistic studies .
Mrs Badia i Cutchet 's report insists that the teaching of art history must also involve encounters with artists and visits to places of culture , so as to arouse curiosity and provoke reflection on the part of students .
I hope that European governments and the European Commission will adopt the recommendations made in this report , and that we will see improvements very soon .
The own-initiative report presented to us today , which has my complete support , enshrines the idea that artistic and cultural education , including education in the visual image , is a fundamental element of the education system .
These lessons actually help to emancipate individuals and make access to culture more democratic .
Thus , in line with the principle of subsidiarity , the resolution calls for teacher and student mobility to be promoted , for qualifications to be recognised at European level and for Member States to cooperate in the field of artistic and cultural education .
It also emphasises the need to develop the training of teachers and other players ( artists and professionals ) , in order to introduce an artistic and cultural element into all education and to ensure a high standard of teaching .
Furthermore , the report highlights quite rightly the need to make use of new information and communication technologies in order to provide modern , quality teaching , in line with young people 's aspirations .
In this regard it refers to Europeana , the European digital library , which represents genuine added value in this context .
in writing . - ( NL ) What is this Parliament meddling in now ?
In paragraph 1 of this report , for example , I read that artistic education must form a compulsory element in syllabuses at all school levels in order to promote democratisation of access to culture .
What nonsense , and what meddlesomeness !
Let the Member States determine for themselves how they wish to fill their syllabuses .
They have done so perfectly capably for the last hundred years and they will be able to continue do so through the next century without any need for being patronised by the European Union or the European Parliament .
in writing . - ( SV ) The June List believes that cultural issues should fall within the political competence of the Member States .
This report is not part of the legislative procedure and represents nothing more than the opinion of the European Parliament 's federalist majority that the EU should increase its interference in the cultural sphere still further .
We have therefore voted against the report as a whole .
It is true that artistic subjects are taught in schools throughout Europe .
It is also true that Europe , and I mean society , is changing quickly , as are information and communication technologies .
Europe is also coming together , and cultural education can serve this process no less , for example , than does the common market .
This can be done by artistic training at all stages of education , by deepening theoretical and practical knowledge of the diversity of Europe and its many cultures .
That body of knowledge is very large , and it is constantly growing .
However , the fact that artistic subjects are taught differently in different countries does not allow , for example , the training of an artist whose knowledge and potential will be recognised and used in another Member State .
The question of coordination of policies arises here , and Mrs Badia i Cutchet 's report proposes an interesting solution , the Open Method of Coordination or , talking in practical terms , the mutual learning of countries from each other based on the examples of those who have managed to solve particular problems in the best way .
This method is , therefore , almost completely in the hands of Member States .
This approach is flexible , and allows coordination of complex matters and a rapid reaction to current challenges .
The question of artistic training is complicated : creativity has to be stimulated by a special and individualised teacher-student approach , knowledge of Europe 's continuously evolving culture and of creative tools has to be imparted , and an unrestricted career development path has to be made possible .
Rational and constructive reflection on artistic education is an investment in the future and identity of a Europe united in diversity .
I welcome the report by Mrs Badia i Cutchet on artistic studies in the European Union .
These days , when our societies are increasingly heterogeneous , I think culture is fundamentally important as a means of preserving identity and at the same time improving the way in which different peoples and cultures coexist .
I agree that art is a manifestation of culture and helps develop a country 's cultural wealth , as well as society in general .
In addition , artistic activity can be useful for technological research and development and in turn is influenced by it .
Therefore , given the importance of artistic subjects , I am in favour of Europe-wide coordination of their teaching in educational institutions .
in writing . - ( SV ) It is important , among other things , for artists to have the opportunity to move around freely , to promote the facilities for non-commercial art and to further develop European digital libraries to preserve our artistic heritage .
I interpret paragraph 9 concerning the nature and duration of artistic studies as a desire to also incorporate artistic studies into the Bologna Process and , with that proviso , I am able to vote in favour of the report .
in writing . - ( NL ) I voted against this report due to the terrible hypocrisy contained in the text .
The EU refuses to pay any heed to the referendums in France and the Netherlands on the European Constitution and in Ireland on the Treaty of Lisbon , yet this report does not bemoan that fact .
On the contrary , paragraph 5 of the report states , in a particularly patronising and insulting way , that the ' no ' vote by women was attributable to a lack of involvement by Europe .
The references to the Commission 's so-called ' Plan D ' , too , are totally out of place , since , in the majority of Member States , ' Plan B ' boiled down to a dialogue of the like-minded , who explicitly had no interest in taking account of critical voices .
This report needed to criticise abuses of this nature instead of tacitly approving them .
in writing . - ( NL ) I voted against this federalist and arrogant report with great conviction .
What arrogance to claim , as in recital B , that the populace that voted against the European Constitution is one that has an inadequate understanding of Europe .
That is manifestly untrue .
Precisely those citizens who grasp only too well the fact that the EU seeks to undermine the last vestiges of the sovereignty of the Member States were the ones who voted against the European Constitution .
What arrogance to claim that integration only catches on in the well-educated sections of society .
The rapporteur is clear , however .
Those who think ' the wrong way ' must be criminalised or regarded as idiots .
Then we can talk about an active dialogue with the citizens .
I supported Mr Hegyi 's report on active dialogue with citizens on Europe .
Dialogue of this kind is essential , and this report lays much emphasis on the importance of local action .
Indeed , it is by taking real action closer to citizens , by simply talking to them about Europe , that they can get a clearer picture of what the European Union does for them in their daily lives .
Encouraging this dialogue will be key in the run-up to the June elections , especially in rural areas and among the most Eurosceptic groups , such as young people and women .
The recent interinstitutional political declaration signed by Parliament , the Council and the European Commission : ' Communicating Europe in Partnership ' , is along these same lines .
We can celebrate the importance that the institutions attach to this dialogue and the efforts they intend to make so that citizens feel involved in the European Union .
We voted against this report as we feel that the pressure that is still being applied to conclude the ratification process of the Treaty of Lisbon , despite the result of the Irish referendum , is unacceptable .
First of all , if the rules of the current Treaty were observed and if the sovereign decision of the Irish people were respected , the draft Treaty of Lisbon should have been abandoned .
This report once again advocates an antidemocratic position .
For that matter , it is unacceptable that the European Parliament should speak of further increasing ' the transparency of the EU and the involvement of citizens in decision-making processes ' when a majority rejected the holding of referendums in their own countries on the draft Treaty of Lisbon , precisely because they were afraid of the majority opinion of their people .
It is also regrettable that they are ignoring the opposing opinions of all those who feel deceived by a process of capitalist integration which is worsening inequalities and increasing poverty and unemployment , in contrast to what they promised .
Even the few positive points of the report seem to be framed within a context that aims to deceive public opinion and the citizens , through propaganda campaigns , rather than effectively ensure democratic participation and bring about a change in policy to respond to the reasonable aspirations of individuals and workers .
You truly are incorrigible .
You believe that if European citizens are increasingly sceptical of the European Union , it is because of a lack of education , because of ignorance , or stupidity even .
I think it is quite the opposite .
There are those who profit from the opening of borders to all movements of people , goods , capital , and so on , and then there are the vast majority who suffer the consequences : unemployment , insecure jobs , reduced purchasing power , insecurity , loss of identity , and who know who is to blame for it .
Your Europe is a technocracy governed by a handful of uncontrolled and uncontrollable oligarchies : the 27 Commissioners and the few members of the Executive Board of the European Central Bank .
It is a technocracy attentive to the thousands of lobbies that influence it , but completely deaf to the refusal expressed by citizens when we deign to consult them by referendum .
A system whose policies paved the way for and exacerbated the current financial , economic and social crisis , and which undermine national safeguard or rescue measures .
So , like you , I hope that in June European citizens will turn out en masse to vote and that they will use that vote as a referendum : to say ' No ' to you .
in writing . - ( SV ) This report is not part of the legislative procedure and represents nothing more than the opinion of the European Parliament 's federalist majority .
The proposal argues for the completion of the ratification process of the Treaty of Lisbon .
However , we believe that the Treaty of Lisbon has failed twice , most recently when the people of Ireland voted against it in 2008 , but also before that , when voters in France and the Netherlands voted against what was essentially the same proposal in 2005 .
When will the federalist majority in the European Parliament realise that the desire to create a United States of Europe does not have the support of the voters ?
Citation B of the draft report even states the following : ' people with an inadequate understanding of European Union policies or of the Treaties are more likely to oppose them ' . This demonstrates the nonchalance , arrogance and ignorance of the federalists towards voters with political values that differ from those that prevail in this pro-centralisation European Parliament .
We have therefore voted against this report .
Communicating with citizens and keeping them informed must stop being simply a prescribed , ineffective proposal .
Civil society will have to get involved in areas such as : good governance and democratisation , human rights , development of and combating social exclusion , environmental protection and sustainable development .
In view of the global financial crisis and the ever-growing level of consumer debt , active dialogue with Europe 's citizens means that European institutions and civil society need to make efforts to improve consumers ' level of financial education , particularly with regard to their rights and obligations , as well as the best practices in the areas of savings and loans .
Furthermore , Member States should increase the human and financial resources allocated to the European Consumer Centres Network in order to raise awareness and ensure the application of consumer rights in the European Union .
in writing . - ( DE ) The recent campaign to make energy-saving bulbs mandatory , which the manufacturers in particular will profit from , highlights the gap between the European Union and its citizens .
How can the people of Europe feel any affinity with a European Union which repeats referendums , if they are held at all , until the right result is achieved ?
How can Austrian citizens , for example , identify with an EU which has resulted in them being overcome by an avalanche of transit traffic , punished them with sanctions for holding democratic elections and forced them to give up their neutrality and banking secrecy ?
The EU was created for economic reasons and that remains obvious .
It is not the creation of the citizens ; it is the creation of an EU establishment which is divorced from reality and which adheres to the mantra of liberalisation and free movement of capital .
If we do not revise our way of thinking and if the lack of transparency and democracy continues , we can adopt one declaration of intent after another , but the citizens will remain alienated from the EU and their frustration with it will continue to increase .
For this reason I have abstained from voting on this report .
in writing . - ( PL ) Dialogue with citizens is an important and complex matter , but it is something the ruling governments must master well .
That is the essence of their work : dialogue ending in compromise .
In this context it appears that the background to this report is to some extent contradictory .
It calls for us to complete the process of ratifying the Lisbon Treaty as soon as possible , as it is an important condition for dialogue on Europe .
The report claims that the Treaty will increase transparency and involve citizens in decision making .
It may give the impression that those who do not like the Treaty will be ignored , and therefore their voice will not be heard .
It is therefore hard to speak of dialogue and compromise .
The idea of ' common European knowledge ' through the study of the history of Europe and European integration is also controversial .
This would be brought about by a programme agreed at Community level , adopted on a voluntary basis by the Member States and paid for from the Community budget .
In short , this is an historical compromise , which will serve as a tool for building common European values .
In my view we do not need to go that far - historical compromise is a concept that is vague at the very least , if such a compromise is needed at all .
Furthermore , using history as a means to an end arouses opposition , even if the intention behind it is sincere .
The key to effective dialogue lies in the present day , which has brought us enough problems anyway .
We need to talk !
In other words : ' yes ' to dialogue , and ' no ' to the report .
I wish to abstain on the report by Mr Hegyi on active dialogue with citizens on Europe .
In fact , although I partially agree with the text tabled , I diverge on several points that I consider important .
I cannot therefore fully endorse the report .
in writing . - ( PL ) The debate on the issue of dialogue between the European Union and its citizens is very necessary .
How European citizens view Europe , and their understanding of how the Community functions , is a key question .
People accept what they know , but anything that is beyond their horizon arouses concern .
The examples of the Irish referendum and the preceding referendums in France and Holland show that we cannot be off-hand about our citizens ' views .
Decisions should not be taken behind closed doors , ignoring the opinions of society .
Nihil novi : nothing new without the common consent .
What we need is to reach the poorer and less educated citizens .
What is needed is to transmit , clearly and concisely , to the public , what our actions are based on , what we aim to achieve and in particular the resulting benefits to citizens .
True integration is not possible if our voters do not fully accept the actions of the European Union .
Studies have shown that only just over 50 % of EU citizens are satisfied by their country 's membership of the Community .
This obviously varies from country to country .
It would be a great success if this figure reached 80 % .
The obligation of bringing the EU closer to its citizens rests not only on the EU institutions as a whole , but in my view also on ourselves , the MEPs .
Each year alone I organise hundreds of meetings with young people , farmers and businessmen .
Let us teach our citizens to make use of the benefits offered by the EU .
The June elections will be the first test of how effective we have been .
in writing . - The Hegyi report concerning the promotion of a dialogue with EU citizens is based on the assumption that people 's sceptical attitude towards the EU is due to the fact that they lack adequate knowledge .
Various measures are proposed in the report such as education , Euronews and the creation of a museum of EU history .
Since the actions far more resemble propaganda than dialogue , I oppose them .
In a real dialogue , the opinions of the citizens are seen as valuable .
in writing . - The Hegyi report concerning the promotion of a dialogue with EU citizens is based on the assumption that people 's sceptical attitude towards the EU is due to the fact that they lack adequate knowledge .
Various measures are proposed in the report such as education , Euronews and the creation of a museum of EU history .
Since the actions far more resemble propaganda than dialogue I oppose them .
In a real dialogue , the opinions of the citizens are seen as valuable .
The rapporteur states that active dialogue with citizens on Europe is not well developed .
Unfortunately , he is correct .
Information about the European Union often reaches only its well-educated and affluent residents , which engenders scepticism and antipathy in other citizens of the countries of Europe .
For this reason an essential element in the further development of the European Community is the European education of its residents .
The rapporteur tries to find ways of reaching wider audiences , which will enable broadening the knowledge of residents about the EU .
He bases his approach on the following pragmatic and also very popular methods in order to reach the widest possible audience : introduction to schools of one year 's education on the EU since 1945 , creation of a TV information channel similar to the American CNN , and Internet sites in a form which will make them accessible to young people .
I agree with and support the importance of an information campaign about the EU as a method of increasing the awareness of society , and I also think that the rapporteur 's ideas for implementing this are very good .
The Joint Parliamentary Assembly or JPA has become a key instrument of political dialogue as well as conflict prevention and resolution .
In situations of political crisis , our ' urgent debates ' have enabled in-depth , constructive and taboo-free dialogue on the situation in Kenya , Zimbabwe and Mauritania .
On the great North-South ' horizontal ' challenges , such as food security , effectiveness of state aid , and child labour , in 2008 the JPA adopted constructive , often daring positions .
With regard to implementation of the European Development Fund , the JPA got hold of strategic documents that its economic committee has begun to examine .
The JPA 's agenda has above all , however , been marked by a single political priority , that of Economic Partnership Agreements or EPAs .
Its ' regional meetings ' represent a major asset and undeniable added value for monitoring EPAs .
This added value must now be recognised and honoured .
The JPA must be at the heart of the provision of parliamentary control of negotiations and the implementation of agreements .
Finally , I would like to pay tribute here to the work of Co-President Glenys Kinnock .
She has succeeded in making the JPA a unique tool for North-South dialogue , and an opportunity for fair , sustainable and mutually supportive development .
I am against the report by Mr Cornillet on the work of the ACP-EU Joint Parliamentary Assembly in 2008 .
In fact , I think that the work done during the working sessions held so far has not always been satisfactory , to the extent that no resolutions have been adopted on certain important topics .
In addition , the negotiations undertaken by the Assembly have , in certain cases , led to the conclusion of partnership agreements that have not produced good results either for the European Union or for the other parties .
I am therefore against the tabled report .
in writing . - ( NL ) I have just abstained in the vote on the work of the ACP-EU Joint Parliamentary Assembly , although with hindsight I wish I had actually voted ' no ' .
Over the years that I have been attending this Parliament and working here , I have ever more strongly got the impression that the ACP positions primarily serve as an excuse for nice trips around the world , and in all directions too .
Let us be honest , what difference have they ever made ?
Maybe what we need is just an evaluation of the whole gamut of parliamentary positions .
They look pretty nice indeed .
I am sure it is very pleasant to get to see something of the world at Joe Public 's expense too , but whether all that taxpayers ' money has actually delivered any benefit outside the hotel and airline sectors is something I very much doubt .
I voted in favour of Mrs Krehl 's report on best practices in the field of regional policy because it contains an innovative definition of these best practices and examples of success stories , and lists very specific recommendations for all areas of EU intervention in this field .
In particular , I drew the rapporteur 's attention to better accessibility of urban facilities and transport for persons with reduced mobility , and to the possibility of reconciling private , family and professional life in a better way , especially for women .
We hope that these comprehensive recommendations will help and inspire stakeholders in regional policy .
I voted in favour of the report by Mrs Krehl because it highlights best practices in several areas , including in the area of the environment and sustainable energy .
That is the case with the Socorridos Hydroelectric Power Station , in the Autonomous Region of Madeira , recognised under the RegioStars initiative .
Mrs Krehl 's report also recognises the major obstacles to the preparation of such projects , including :
complex regulations ;
lack of clarity in cofinancing rules ;
few opportunities to exchange experiences ; and
few opportunities for interregional cooperation , and regional structures that are inadequate for this cooperation .
As a result , it is vital to consolidate and improve indicators , thereby increasing Community know-how in this area , particularly as regards :
respect for the principle of equal opportunities and assurance of the principles of partnership and innovative action ;
strict organisation of projects , effective use of resources and clarity about their duration ;
increased transferability of knowledge , so that this can also be used in other regions of the European Union .
All these aspects are recognised in Mrs Krehl 's report .
I voted in favour of the report on the best practices in regional policy as I believe that only provision of sufficient , transparent information in good time can facilitate the distribution of important information about the Structural and Cohesion Funds .
The cohesion policy 's objective cannot be fully achieved as long as there are obstacles , such as bureaucracy and administration , which hamper potential beneficiaries from using the European Union 's structural resources .
The obstacles which posed problems until now include impenetrable documentation , ever-changing eligibility criteria or short deadlines for submitting dossiers .
The best results can be achieved through actively exchanging information , as well as through setting up a database at Community level containing ' success stories ' about the implementation of projects .
Cooperation within and between regions and gathering and exchanging good practices in the area of regional policy will improve the ability to absorb European funds .
A European portal translated into all the European Union 's official languages may make a significant contribution to distributing in an appropriate , transparent manner information about the European funds and to exchanging best practices within cohesion policy in the regions of the Member States which have recently joined .
I voted against the report by Mrs Krehl on best practices in the field of regional policy and obstacles to the use of the Structural Funds .
I am , in fact , convinced that the proposals put forward in this report do not represent a chance to improve the operation of regional policy , which is an extremely important policy for tackling the imbalance in development within the European Union , and one which enjoys substantial financial support .
In particular , I do not think the exchange of good practices can solve the problem of how to use Structural Funds more effectively or can really contribute to the development of innovative projects .
in writing . - ( SV ) We have voted in favour of Mr Roszkowski 's report , as we agree with the overarching objectives with regard to rural development and the diversification of activities to maximise the local development potential .
However , the report does contain some points that we do not agree with , both from a factual point of view and with regard to how certain points have been worded .
For example , we do not agree that funding under the second pillar of the CAP has been significantly reduced .
Even if there are important reasons linked to environmental and regional policy , we do not believe that some agricultural production should be sustained by subsidies ' at all costs ' .
We also think that some wordings pre-empt the rural population 's own choices .
We have , however , chosen to interpret these points as unfortunate wordings with good intentions , such as the prevention of desertification .
I voted in favour of the report on complementarities and coordination of cohesion policy with rural development measures as I believe that these policies provide important pillars for national development , given the particular agricultural potential that Romania has .
I feel that it is important for rural development policy to aim at reducing the economic differences between urban and rural areas by identifying the typical potential of each area and encouraging the development of activities specific to them .
Rural development policies must be aimed at strategies which should not result in slowing down or stopping farming activities carried out by the rural population .
If anything , they should help diversify these activities by providing locally produced organic products and producing traditional foods and drinks .
The European Agricultural Fund for Rural Development has been created as a separate fund from the Structural Funds with the intention of using European funding more effectively in rural areas .
The advantage we have as a beneficiary state is that we share a wider range of finances for rural development .
Consequently , we will be able to achieve our goal of modernising social structures while , at the same time , boosting territorial cohesion between rural and urban areas .
in writing . - ( DE ) In recent years , rural areas have suffered not only from continuous migration to the cities , but also from the infrastructure being dismantled : police stations , food stores , public transport and so on .
As a result , these areas have become increasingly unattractive and their deterioration has accelerated .
If the deregulation of national post services leads to a wave of post office closures , entire regions will be left without any resources .
We should not be surprised that the trend for leaving the land and the high death rate among farmers are likely to increase further over the next few years .
The consequences of the misguided EU subsidy policy , which generally only the big players benefit from , and the years of neglect of rural areas are gradually becoming apparent .
We still have no overall concept .
Without this , individual measures are doomed to failure .
This is why I have voted against the Roszkowski report .
I voted against the report by Mr Roszkowski on complementarities and coordination of cohesion policy with rural development measures .
In particular , I doubt whether support for non-agricultural activities in rural areas is the most effective method of strengthening territorial cohesion .
Instead , I believe that this manoeuvre threatens direct aids for agriculture and will cause serious socio-economic imbalances in rural areas .
Introduction of such rigorous provisions on some of the substances used in cosmetics acts against the interests of many Polish businesses .
The Polish cosmetics industry consists mainly of small and medium-sized enterprises which cannot afford to carry out the complicated tests needed to introduce substitute substances in many cosmetics .
The constituents whose use is banned by this regulation , firstly , concern only 5 % of cosmetics , and moreover , they could be used by the industry in safe concentrations .
Unfortunately the amendments proposed by the Polish side were not accepted .
Therefore , I did not endorse Mrs Roth-Behrendt 's report .
in writing . - ( LT ) The fact that the legal form of a regulation has been chosen for the new edition instead of the directive in force is very welcome .
This will eliminate legal uncertainties and discrepancies and will lay down a definition and the means of implementation .
The other important goal is to increase the safety of cosmetic products .
As there were no clear safety evaluation requirements in the Cosmetics Directive in force , the regulation lays down the most essential standards related to this .
in writing . - ( DA ) We are reluctantly voting in favour of the new regulation on cosmetic products , despite the fact that it opens up the way for derogations from the prohibition on the use of carcinogenic CMR substances .
Fortunately , Parliament has limited this possibility by requiring the global exposure to CMR substances from all routes and sources to be taken into account during the approval process .
The adoption of the regulation means that , in Denmark , we cannot prohibit substances that we already know to be carcinogens , hormone disrupters or allergens , as this would be seen as a barrier to the free movement of goods , which is precisely what the legislation is intended to ensure .
This is counterbalanced , however , by Parliament 's introduction of the regulation of nanoparticles and thus the application of the precautionary principle .
From now on it must be demonstrated that the nanoparticles are not harmful before they are permitted to be used , rather than having to prove that they are harmful before their use can be prevented , which , in practice , is the prevailing principle in EU legislation .
The regulation also introduces more stringent requirements for detailed product descriptions .
I voted in favour of Mrs Roth-Behrendt 's report on the regulation on cosmetic products ( recast ) as I feel it is essential to increase the safety of cosmetic products in order to protect consumer health , through minimum standards that must be met before a product is placed on the market .
However , I regret that the mandatory indication of the minimum durability for all products , including those with a minimum durability of more than 30 months ( Article 15 ) , has not been adopted .
It should be noted that , although using an out-of-date cosmetic product does not pose any risk to consumer health , it also does not bring the suggested benefits .
In this report , the European Parliament generally agrees with the position of the European Commission , which has decided to recast Council Directive 76 / 768 / EEC of 27 July 1976 on the approximation of the laws of the Member States relating to cosmetic products .
The Cosmetics Directive , which has been subject to 55 amendments since its adoption in 1976 , has become cumbersome and outdated , and no longer provides the necessary legal certainty in a rapidly developing field .
With the recast , the Commission aims to remove legal uncertainties and inconsistencies by introducing a set of definitions and implementation measures .
To avoid divergences in national transposition , the Commission has changed the legal form of the act from a directive into a regulation .
Another objective is to increase the safety of cosmetic products .
Since the current Cosmetics Directive does not contain clear requirements for a safety assessment , the Commission is now introducing ' minimum standards ' for this .
The rapporteur has strengthened the safety aspect to ensure the protection and health of consumers , which we believe to be the right approach .
I generally support the Roth-Behrendt report and the compromise reached with the Council .
However , I regret one omission , which I feel could be prejudicial to consumer protection .
The current Cosmetics Directive and the proposal for a regulation lay down that only cosmetic products with a minimum durability of less than 30 months should have a date of minimum durability .
For financial reasons , this date is frequently indicated as being more than 30 months .
In this way , manufacturers can ensure that all their products are exempt from indicating a date of minimum durability .
Although using an out-of-date cosmetic product does not usually pose any risks to consumer health , it also does not bring the expected benefits .
Unfortunately , the legal services of Parliament and the Commission have decided , wrongly in my view , that this provision could not be amended in a recasting procedure .
in writing . - ( FI ) I want to say how satisfied I am with what we have achieved today with regard to the regulation on cosmetic products .
The cosmetics market is full of fanciful promises and quasi-scientific mumbo-jumbo , where the copywriter 's verbal flamboyance is the only yardstick in testing the product 's efficacy .
Now the rules are being tightened up , and that is only right .
Under the new regulation , advertisements can only make claims that are based on the characteristics the products actually have .
There must therefore be proof of their efficacy .
The rapporteur asked the Commission to produce an action plan regarding claims and adopt a list of criteria for evaluating them .
The proposal was intended to simplify existing legislation .
At present there are more than 3 500 pages of national legislation on the subject , and that is to be compressed into one text .
This way it is possible to secure high standards of protection for humans everywhere in the EU and to guarantee the workings of the internal market .
Obsolete legislation , especially in the cosmetics industry , poses a risk to health and the extent to which we can rely on the law .
These principles follow on logically from the work that was started when the REACH Regulation on chemicals was being discussed .
in writing . - ( SK ) As a rapporteur for the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats , I became involved in drafting the package of legislation on placing goods onto the market which was approved by Parliament in February 2008 .
I worked on the report concerning the draft decision on a joint framework for placing goods onto the market and I focused my amendment proposals on increasing the responsibility of importers , reducing the administrative burden on SMEs , retaining the new approach as the basic framework for placing products onto the market and creating and using European standards in a more flexible way .
This commodity package has become the basic precondition for revising other sectoral directives , particularly the directive on toys which has now been approved , the regulation on cosmetic products and the regulation on building products .
The regulation on cosmetic products is based on the fundamental principle of the legislative package on placing goods onto the market .
On the one hand it is the responsibility of producers to ensure that their products conform to the valid European laws , and on the other hand it is the responsibility of the Member States to ensure proper supervision of the EU market .
I voted for the Roth-Behrendt report concerning the proposed regulation on cosmetic products , replacing the current directive which has become unwieldy and outdated .
The cosmetics industry has in recent years gone through unprecedented expansion and the current legislation no longer provides the necessary legal certainty .
I welcome the new legislation , which will contribute to greater consumer protection and ensure protection against cosmetic products that are harmful to health .
I voted in favour of the report by Mrs Roth-Behrendt on the proposal for a regulation of the European Parliament and of the Council on cosmetic products .
I fully agree that to increase the safety of cosmetic products , so as to ensure the protection and health of all consumers , specific control instruments have to be clearly defined .
I also agree with the rapporteur that , in order to strengthen the control mechanism , responsibility for cosmetic product claims should be given to an independent organisation so as to ensure an independent assessment .
in writing . - ( RO ) I voted in favour of the draft European Parliament legislative resolution on the proposal for a regulation of the European Parliament and of the Council on cosmetic products ( recast ) , because I believe that any product placed on the market must meet both quality standards and a minimum safety standard .
Such a regulation , which is aimed at increasing cosmetic products ' safety , will guarantee consumer protection and health .
in writing . - ( FR ) Since the introduction of nanoparticles in cosmetic products , as well as the fact that the cosmetics sector features among the biggest victims of industrial counterfeiting , it is important to have clear means of control , particularly for identifying counterfeit cosmetics , which do not therefore meet legal requirements .
Some products in fact warrant particular attention , especially cosmetics used around the eyes , on the mucous membrane , on damaged skin , for children or those with a weakened immune system .
Clearly a particular focus is needed on local toxicity evaluation , skin and eye irritation , skin sensitisation , and photo-induced toxicity in the case of UV absorption .
In addition , the fight against counterfeiting using these controls is vital for public health and environmental impact , but also for competitiveness .
We therefore support this report , but new tests should not be performed on finished products if known information on the ingredients they contain proves compliant with legislation .
In this report , the European Parliament approves , with a few amendments , the Commission 's request to amend Directive 98 / 8 / EC concerning the placing of biocidal products on the market .
The Commission considers that this amendment has become necessary after an evaluation of the directive 's implementation showed that the 10-year period , until 14 May 2010 , foreseen for the evaluation of active substances used in biocidal products with the aim of including them on the Community positive list , would not be enough .
As a consequence , the transitional period , during which the biocides market will continue to be regulated by national rules , would expire without the Community positive list being established .
In practice this would mean that important products , like for instance disinfectants in hospitals , would have to be taken from the market from 15 May 2010 .
In order to avoid this unwanted effect , the Commission proposes a prolongation of the transitional period for three years until 14 May 2013 .
In case even these three years are not enough , the Commission introduces the possibility of prolonging the period even further by a comitology decision .
However , the rapporteur does not want this possibility to be used to endlessly delay the whole process and therefore also proposes limits .
I support the Sârbu report and the Commission proposal , which make a technical amendment to the existing legislation .
The current directive provides for a transitional period ( 2000-2010 ) , during which the biocides market will continue to be regulated by national rules .
However , it also provides for a 10-year programme for the evaluation of active substances used in biocides , aimed at including them on a positive list to be set up by the Commission .
As the current state of progress in the review programme of this directive will not allow it to be completed by 2010 as planned , it has become necessary to make the appropriate amendments so that the transitional periods for the most delayed cases can be extended .
That is why this proposal for amendment is appropriate .
This proposal from the Commission amending Directive 98 / 8 / EC on the placing of biocidal products on the market has become necessary after an evaluation of its implementation showed that the 10-year-period until 14 May 2010 , foreseen for the evaluation of active substances used in biocidal products with the aim to include them in the Community positive list , will not be enough .
As a consequence , the transitional period , during which the biocides market will continue to be regulated by national rules , would expire without the Community positive list being established .
In practice this would mean that important products , like for instance disinfectants in hospitals , would have to be taken from the market as from 15 May 2010 .
I voted for this report as extending the current transitional period will allow the completion of the evaluation of active substances used in biocidal products and give adequate time to Member States to transpose the provisions and issue the authorisations and registrations for these products , as well as to the industry to prepare and submit complete dossiers .
In addition , this extension will allow the application of the principle preventing the generation of waste products ( substances which are not evaluated become waste products ) and help avoid placing biocidal products on the market illegally .
I voted in favour of the report by Mrs Sârbu on the proposal for a directive of the European Parliament and of the Council amending Directive 98 / 8 / EC concerning the placing of biocidal products on the market as regards the extension of certain time periods .
In view of the sensitive and laborious process of evaluating the active substances used in biocidal products , I agree with the rapporteur about extending the transitional period to four years instead of three in order to give the industry enough time to meet its commitments .
in writing . - ( NL ) Conscious of the need to dissuade people , and above all young people , in our society from smoking , I have abstained from voting on this report .
The EU wants to make cigarettes and fine-cut tobacco intended for the rolling of cigarettes and cigarillos more expensive , but the issue is whether the hypocritical approach of raising taxes is the right way to do this .
The tobacco industry does , after all , employ a large number of people within the Member States and , in times of crisis , the impact of any such measures on the employment situation should be thoroughly assessed before they are implemented .
Would it not be better to reduce smoking by educating people rather than by taxing them ?
in writing . - ( FR ) Mr Becsey 's report proposes closer harmonisation of taxes on tobacco at a higher level and feebly takes cover behind objectives of public health in order to justify it .
In fact , the real objective is a pure and perfect cigarette market on a European scale , a ' decompartmentalised ' market with a single tax where competition can run riot .
A little coherence , please .
Either it is health that takes precedence or it is the market .
For certain products , it cannot be the market .
Some states , like France and Belgium , have been taken to court by the Commission for having introduced threshold or minimum sales prices .
It is not without reason that the tobacco trade is regulated to this extent , at national level ( distribution subject to authorisation ) or international level ( limited cross-border purchases ) and that , for once , border controls actually exist , even if they are hampered by European regulation .
Finally , this report is worrying for the future of French tobacconists , who play such an important role in maintaining local shops and supplying certain public services in rural areas and who were seriously threatened by a previous tax increase .
in writing . - ( DE ) I am voting in favour of Mr Becsey 's report which recommends higher rates of excise duty on tobacco products .
I very much welcome the gradual increase in the tax on cigarettes and other tobacco products from 2014 onwards .
I also believe that updating the definitions of some kinds of tobacco products is essential in order to guarantee an increased level of health protection .
I have been a strong supporter of protection for non-smokers for many years and I think that this report is another step in the right direction .
This is underlined by the Commission 's expectation that tobacco consumption will fall by 10 % over the next five years .
in writing . - ( FR ) I voted for the Becsey report because an extreme increase in excise duty on manufactured tobacco , as proposed by the Commission , especially in these times of serious crisis , would be damaging to employment in this sector in Europe .
Experience has shown that a policy of high prices is not an effective method of combating nicotine addiction .
That is why I am equally satisfied that an alignment of the minimum rate of taxation applied to rolling tobacco to that applied to cigarettes has been avoided .
The buffer function of rolling tobacco is essential in order to prevent an upsurge in smuggling on European territory .
In Germany , a study has shown that , in some Länder , more than one cigarette in two has been smuggled .
In order to contain this phenomenon , fine-cut tobacco must be able to act as a substitute for cigarettes .
I regret that certain very sensible amendments were rejected by a narrow margin .
I trust that our message will nonetheless reach the Council of Ministers , which needs to rule unanimously .
in writing . - Whilst I agree with taxation on tobacco , and a minimum tax across Europe , I abstained because of the damage it could do to the British tax on tobacco .
The Government enjoys freedom to increase taxation on tobacco , which can be an incentive for people to reduce and quit smoking , improving our health and decreasing the stress on the NHS .
This report would have compromised and constrained the Government 's ability to tax tobacco , which is why I abstained .
I voted against the report by Mr Becsey on the proposal for a Council directive amending Directives 92 / 79 / EEC , 92 / 80 / EEC and 95 / 59 / EC on the structure and rates of excise duty applied on manufactured tobacco .
I do not endorse the above-mentioned proposal , because in my view it could weaken the Commission 's proposal .
As a result , it would hinder achievement of the intended goal , which is to help reduce tobacco consumption by 10 % by 2014 .
in writing . - ( SV ) The Commission 's proposal aims to harmonise tobacco taxation within the EU in order to stem the significant cross-border trade in tobacco , which runs the risk of undermining the public health objectives of the Member States .
The proposal presented by the draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs is a significantly weaker one than that contained in the Commission 's original text .
As the representative of the Group of the Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe , I did my utmost to improve the report .
The issue of tobacco duties is a very difficult one to resolve due to the large differences in tax rates and views on the harmful effects of tobacco within the EU .
Divisions within the various groups were large , including my own .
Despite my efforts , I came to the conclusion , in the end , that Parliament 's proposal did not go far enough .
I then chose to abstain in the final vote on the new tobacco duties .
in writing . - The European Parliamentary Labour Party agrees that levels of duty set too low encourage cross-border arbitrage and lead to uncontrolled / unlicensed reselling of manufactured tobacco .
The minimum levels of duty-setting are , therefore , a very useful instrument to effect the changes necessary to begin to change this .
Some European countries may wish to go further than the minimum levels for justified scientific and social reasons , and this is proper too .
in writing . - ( NL ) I appreciate the efforts of the rapporteur in producing a report , but I am unable to support what he has come up with .
I am absolutely convinced of the benefit of increasing excise duties on tobacco in order to help combat tobacco usage .
I would like to stress that , for me , the health considerations are more important than the economic considerations per se .
I also find it lamentable that the rapporteur waters down the Commission 's proposals .
For these reasons I therefore voted against Mr Becsey 's report .
in writing . - ( IT ) I voted in favour .
Through immigration to the old continent in the last 30 years , a barbaric and unlawful practice , carried out for the most part in Africa , has silently entered Europe .
The WHO data are quite clear : female genital mutilation or FGM is a widespread practice in 28 African countries , in the Middle East and in some countries in Asia .
Approximately 100-140 million women and girls worldwide have undergone the practice , while 4 million are potentially at risk .
FGM represents a debasement of the European integration process , as well as being a denigration of gender equality .
The European Parliament , which for years has been committed to upholding the fundamental rights of all citizens , already adopted a resolution on the issue in 2001 .
However , it is now time to take a step forward by also supporting the DAPHNE III Programme , which has financed 14 FGM-related projects to date , and by outlining the priorities for the prevention and elimination of FGM in Europe .
One of the areas in which the efforts to combat FGM will have to be intensified is prevention with reference to girls .
An essential step in that direction is to identify the children at risk and to implement preventive measures in cooperation with their families through psychological support systems .
in writing . - It is hard to think of anything more horrific and primitive than female genital mutilation .
Unfortunately this barbaric practice has manifested itself within the EU due to the steady stream of immigration from countries where it is carried out regularly .
The Muscardini report rightly sets out our abhorrence at this brutality in our midst and suggests ways to ensure that our values of equality and freedom are translated into concrete action against female genital mutilation .
Notwithstanding the European Union 's commitment to multiculturalism , we need to make sure that the relentless tide of political correctness emanating from EU legislation does not impinge upon our determination to stamp out this vile practice .
There are , of course , limits to what we can do to prevent female genital mutilation in third countries .
However , we must be prepared to link trade and aid relationships to improvements in human rights , and in particular to the outlawing of this repellent crime against women .
in writing . - ( SV ) We have today voted in favour of Mrs Muscardini 's own-initiative report , , on combating female genital mutilation in the EU .
The report flags up a very serious problem and clearly illustrates the need for action to be taken against such a practice .
The report also puts forward various proposals for ways of achieving this .
We therefore welcome the fact that the Member States are cooperating to tackle this problem .
However , we would like to emphasise that the issue of regular , preventive health checks for girls and women who have been granted asylum in the EU because of the threat of genital mutilation is one which should be dealt with by the individual Member State , with deference to the rights of the individual concerned .
in writing . - I support this report which takes up the serious problem of female genital mutilation .
FGM has become more common in Europe over the past 30 years through migration .
FGM not only causes very serious and irreparable injuries to the physical and mental health of women and girls , - in some cases has even been fatal - but is a violation of fundamental rights enshrined in international conventions , prohibited under the criminal law of the Member States and in breach of the principles laid down in the Charter of Fundamental Rights of the EU .
It is estimated that in Europe , some 500,000 women have suffered FGM and that approximately 180,000 female immigrants in Europe undergo , or are in danger of undergoing FGM every year .
The report calls for the Commission and Member states to work together to harmonise existing legislation .
The aim is to focus on prevention through better integration of immigrant families and to raise awareness by promoting educational campaigns and initiating dialogue forums on traditional practices .
It strongly supports prosecuting anyone carrying out FGM , as well as providing medical and legal support for victims , and protection for those at risk , including the granting of asylum in certain cases .
in writing . - The practice of Female Genital Mutilation ( FGM ) is one that , according to Amnesty International , touches the lives of 130 million women for whom , for cultural , religious or other non-therapeutic reasons , circumcision is a ' valued ' social practice inflicted upon them .
Research suggests that the practice persists because of a belief that circumcision will moderate female sexuality , and so assure subsequent ' marriageability ' , and that it is religiously sanctioned .
FGM is known to cause a wide range of immediate , long-term complications and even death for women subjected to the practice .
It has come to our attention primarily through globalisation and mobility of people and has become intricately linked to the policies and politics of immigration and asylum .
When people are in fear of persecution , they are entitled to cross a border and seek refuge and protection .
FGM is currently central to a debate in asylum cases , where Michael Aondoakaa , the Nigerian Minister of Justice has recently offered to testify against families claiming asylum on grounds of the threat of FGM in Nigeria , where it is officially outlawed .
Unofficially , however , I accept that it is still widely practiced , even in Nigeria .
In Ireland FGM is viewed as an expression of gender-based violence .
I support Mrs Muscardini 's report .
in writing . - ( SV ) Today we have adopted a position on the own-initiative report on combating female genital mutilation .
We have chosen not to support the alternative resolution tabled by our group , among others , here in Parliament , which ultimately also won the majority vote .
The reason for our decision was that we believe that the original report was better .
The alternative resolution contained text concerning a requirement for regular check-ups by doctors for women who have been granted asylum because of the threat of female genital mutilation .
The purpose of this wording is to prevent female genital mutilation from occurring within the EU .
However , we believe that this measure is an invasion of privacy and goes much too far , and it will burden already vulnerable young women in a way that is unacceptable .
Visiting the doctor should be something that is done voluntarily .
We have therefore chosen not to support the alternative resolution .
I voted in favour of the motion for a European Parliament resolution on combating female genital mutilation in the EU .
Female genital mutilation ( FGM ) not only causes very serious and irreparable injuries to the physical and mental health of women , but it is also a violation of fundamental human rights .
Due to the irreparable damage that it causes , FGM must be regarded by society as a very serious crime and must be vigorously combated .
It is estimated that in Europe some 500 000 women have been victims of this crime , which is why it is vital that the European Commission and the Member States work together to harmonise existing legislation in order to prevent and eliminate FGM in the European Union .
in writing . - ( SV ) Female genital mutilation is a cruel and inhumane custom and has no place in a modern society .
As the June List does not consider the EU merely to be a form of cooperation for the benefit of increased growth and trade , but also as a forum for upholding common fundamental human values , we have chosen to vote in favour of the report .
However , we are utterly opposed to several of the far-reaching wordings relating to the Member States ' criminal law .
Legislation that is aimed at maintaining the functioning of society should be initiated and decided by the national elected parliaments , not by the European Parliament .
in writing . - ( SV ) I have today voted against Mrs Muscardini 's own-initiative report , , on combating female genital mutilation in the EU .
This report deals with a very serious problem and the need for measures to tackle it is made clear .
I welcome cooperation between the Member States in this area .
I have , nevertheless , chosen to vote against it , as I believe that all health care should be voluntary .
I am opposed to regular preventative health check-ups for girls and women who have been granted asylum because of the threat of female genital mutilation , as I believe that it is discriminatory and represents an invasion of privacy .
in writing . - ( DE ) I am voting in favour of Mrs Muscardini 's report concerning a clampdown on female genital mutilation .
More than half a million women are currently affected by this hideous ritual which must be banned once and for all and the perpetrators prosecuted .
The measures and decisions taken in the past must be combined and extended .
We need comprehensive strategies and action plans to allow us to protect women from the archaic tradition of circumcision .
During negotiations with third countries , the Commission must continue to attempt to introduce the abolition of female genital mutilation as a clause and it must be possible for anyone who commits the offence of female circumcision in any EU Member State to be prosecuted .
I voted in favour of the report by Mrs Muscardini on combating female genital mutilation in the EU .
I consider such practices to be atrocious violations of the human right to personal integrity .
I therefore agree with the rapporteur that there needs to be a sound strategy to prevent and stamp out FGM .
in writing . - ( FR ) Of course we shall support this courageous report , which attacks outmoded practices - practices which are spreading across Europe as a result of immigration .
Following the Universal Declaration of Human Rights and the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women , it is no longer acceptable for such practices to be able to persist in Europe and across the world .
According to data collated by the World Health Organization , between 100 and 140 million women and young girls in the world have been subjected to genital mutilation and , every year , 2 to 3 million women face the risk of suffering these seriously incapacitating practices .
We must not forget that such practices originate in social structures based on inequality of the sexes and on unbalanced power relations of domination and control under social and family pressure , and that this amounts to a violation of fundamental rights and causes grave and irreversible damage .
We must wholly condemn and punish these practices .
Immigrant populations must comply with our legislation and our respect for the individual and not bring with them these unacceptable and barbaric practices .
in writing . - Female genital mutilation is a practice that must be condemned by the Member States .
It constitutes a violation of women 's fundamental rights , particularly the right to personal integrity and sexual and reproductive rights .
However , there are aspects of the Muscardini report that I do not fully support , such as the formulations regarding questioning the credibility of parents who request asylum on the grounds that they have refused to consent to their child undergoing female genital mutilation .
I see no reason to throw particular suspicion on people who request asylum on these specific grounds .
Another formulation in the report which I do not support is the one proposing regular medical examinations on women and girls who are granted asylum because of the threat of female genital mutilation in their home country .
I consider the practice to be discriminatory against these women and girls .
If a person is granted asylum in a Member State , she should have the same rights and obligations as other citizens in the country .
in writing . - Female genital mutilation is a practice that must be condemned by the Member States .
It constitutes a violation of women 's fundamental rights , particularly the right to personal integrity , and of sexual and reproductive rights .
However , there are aspects of the Muscardini report that I do not fully support such as the formulations regarding questioning the credibility of parents who request asylum on the grounds that they have refused to consent to their child undergoing female genital mutilation .
I see no reason to throw particular suspicion on people who request asylum on these specific grounds .
Another formulation in the report which I do not support is the one proposing regular medical examinations on women and girls who are granted asylum because of the threat of female genital mutilation in their home country .
I consider the practice to be discriminatory against these women and girls .
If a person is granted with asylum in a Member State she should have the same rights and obligations as other citizens in the country .
in writing . - ( NL ) I gave my support to Mrs Muscardini 's report , or rather to the amended text as a whole , as obviously no sensible person can be anything other than filled with disgust on hearing of the gruesome genital mutilation of women and girls in - and I use this term with a complete lack of respect - backward cultures and religions .
I do find it regrettable that the usual code words about ' reproductive rights ' are being thrown in here again , even though they are not actually appropriate and probably only serve to get the politically correct left on board .
What a right to abortion has to do with combating barbaric genital mutilation will remain a mystery to me .
It would be better to take this opportunity to ask ourselves whether , for example , Islam adequately respects this fundamental value of the equality of men and women , and , if the answer is no , whether there should therefore be a place for Islam in our Europe .
in writing . - ( SV ) The original own-initiative report on combating female genital mutilation was very good , but the revised version , which won the vote , contained a wording in which the authors indicate the desire to introduce regular medical check-ups for women who have been granted asylum because of the threat of female genital mutilation .
The intended purpose of this is to prevent female genital mutilation from occurring in the receiving EU Member State .
I believe that enforced medical check-ups constitute a massive invasion of privacy .
Visiting the doctor must be something that is done voluntarily .
Employing compulsion in this situation is completely unacceptable .
I therefore voted against the revised version .
in writing . - ( SK ) I have been making a special effort to ensure that the committee I chair would be able to complete the work leading to the approval of the resolution .
This topic is undoubtedly important .
Female genital mutilation causes serious and irreversible harm to the physical and mental health of the women and girls affected , it abuses them as human beings and it violates their integrity .
In some cases the consequences are fatal .
In the report , the European Parliament calls on Member States to adopt a preventative strategy of measures aimed at protecting underage girls that would not stigmatise immigrant communities and that would work through public programmes and social care services with the aim of preventing such practices and providing help to victims who have undergone such practices .
It asks the Member States to consider , in accordance with legal regulations on child protection , whether the threat or risk of mutilation of the genital organs of an underage person does not constitute a reason for intervention from the state authorities .
Member States should draw up guidelines for health workers , teachers and social workers , the aim of which should be to inform parents of the risks of female genital mutilation in a tactful way , with the assistance of an interpreter where necessary .
However , the resolution also calls for support for sexual and reproductive health .
This concept has never been defined by the WHO or by instruments of the acquis communautaire .
For this reason it is exploited by some groups in support of abortion .
I am sorry , but I have abstained from voting for this reason .
in writing . - ( IT ) On several occasions I have spoken out in favour on issues relating to multilingualism , so I think my position is quite clear .
The linguistic and cultural diversity of the European Union is a huge competitive advantage .
In my opinion it is vital to promote in practice programmes for language teaching and cultural and student exchanges , both within and outside the EU , as I did when I supported the Erasmus Mundus programme .
Multilingualism is essential for effective communication and represents a means of facilitating comprehension between individuals and , hence , acceptance of diversity and minorities .
Linguistic diversity also has a significant impact on the daily lives of EU citizens due to media penetration , increasing mobility , migration and advancing cultural globalisation .
The acquisition of a diverse range of language skills is of the greatest importance for all EU citizens , since it enables them to derive full economic , social and cultural benefit from freedom of movement within the Union and from the Union 's relations with third countries .
Language is in fact a fundamental factor in social inclusion .
Europe 's linguistic diversity therefore represents a vital cultural asset , and it would be a mistake for the European Union to limit itself to just one main language .
in writing . - ( PL ) Multilingualism in the European Union is a great attribute in contacts with third countries .
It can give us a significant competitive advantage , and so education and language exchange programmes should be supported , but not only in large urban areas , where access to these things is already easier .
When introducing such a policy we must also remember that Europeans , while united , are first and foremost citizens of their own countries .
Care should be taken that they are able to identify with their own language .
This aspect is also mentioned in Mr Moura 's report .
in writing . - The European Union spends colossal sums of taxpayers ' money every year in the name of multilingualism .
For an organization that seeks to erode the differences between nations and peoples , the EU attaches a great deal of importance to linguistic nationalism .
One such example of this is the concession to Irish nationalists of making Gaelic one of the official languages of the EU .
The costs and bureaucracy associated with the misguided policy of multilingualism will only increase as the EU expands further .
My constituents are rightly concerned about what they see as the indiscriminate use of public money to satisfy a policy that has little practical use beyond political window-dressing .
Despite the fact that English has become the common language in the European Parliament , I would hesitate to make it the single working language .
Given the EU 's enthusiasm for harmonization , I believe that a common language is a natural step on the road to a federal superstate .
I therefore believe that we should have a handful of working languages .
If the UN can manage with six languages for 200 or so member states , I 'm sure the EU can cut back too .
in writing . - ( NL ) I voted against this report due to the improper use that could be made of its provisions by certain minorities in Flanders .
It is certainly valuable to promote the linguistic diversity of the youth , in particular , of the EU in every possible way , but a policy of that nature must not be at the expense of legal respect for the local vernacular .
I am thinking , for instance , of the Dutch language in the province of Flemish Brabant in Flanders .
A European Agency on linguistic diversity would quickly become a means for the French-speaking minority to circumvent the compulsory use of Dutch in Flanders .
The past has shown plenty of times how little understanding ' Europe ' has of specific situations in the Member States .
It is up to immigrants and minorities to learn and use the language of the area in which they live .
That is what bears witness to linguistic diversity , not the other way around .
I voted against the alternative motion for a resolution to the Graça Moura report on ' Multilingualism : an asset for Europe and a shared commitment ' because , by removing the possibility for parents to choose the official language in which their children will be educated , in countries or regions with more than one official language or with regional languages , it contradicts certain principles that are upheld by the European Parliament .
Instead , the alternative motion for a resolution simply refers to the need to provide special attention to pupils who cannot be educated in their mother tongue , thereby devaluing the basic principle of the vital need for education in the mother tongue , not only for educational success in general but also for the learning of other foreign languages .
Overall this is a very positive document , which makes assumptions and recommendations that we endorse .
The main question that arises is whether it can be implemented , as much now needs to be done in order to achieve what the document claims is essential , bearing in mind the political direction that the European Union has been taking .
On some of the issues raised , such as the predominance of certain European languages to the detriment of others , we are starting from a clearly negative position .
In this respect we would point out the linguistic and cultural isolation in which certain national policies have put some ethnic groups in Europe , resulting in significant discrimination .
At stake is the specific cultural legacy of the peoples of Europe and its successful transfer to future generations .
We would also stress the value of the role of teachers , translators and interpreters as professionals whose work is vital to the teaching , dissemination and mutual understanding of the languages spoken within the European Union .
We therefore regret that the alternative motion for a resolution has been adopted , as this waters down certain aspects contained in the Graça Moura report , not least the defence of the mother tongue and the parents ' right to choose the official language in which their children will be educated , in countries or regions with more than one official language or with regional languages .
in writing . - ( SV ) The June List believes that cultural issues should fall within the political competence of the Member States .
This report does not form part of the legislative procedures and represents nothing more than the opinion of the European Parliament 's federalist majority that the EU should increase its interference in the cultural sphere still further .
As usual , the European Parliament 's Committee on Culture and Education insists on propounding new costly programmes and agencies at EU level .
We in the June List do not believe that a multiannual programme or a European Agency on linguistic diversity and language learning at EU level will make any difference to Europe 's approximately 500 million inhabitants , except to burden taxpayers even further .
Neither do we believe that the Commission 's plans for information and awareness campaigns regarding the benefits of language learning will have any effect on the real world .
It is the Member States who , in their education policy , should motivate their respective citizens to learn languages .
That is not a matter for the EU .
We have therefore voted against this report .
Nowadays Europe is living in a new world of globalisation , increased mobility and migration , as well as of regional regeneration and with a reinforced role for cross-border regions .
This is why multilingualism must offer new solutions to Europe 's citizens and our society .
I would like to congratulate the rapporteur for this report .
I also hope that the amendments which we have submitted will guarantee mutual respect for languages , including those spoken by national minorities or our migrants , because our living linguistic heritage is a treasure : a resource which must be valued .
Language represents for each one of us the most direct expression of our culture .
Therefore , by learning other languages we discover other cultures , values , principles and attitudes .
We can discover in Europe the values which we have in common .
This receptiveness to dialogue is an essential part of our European citizenship and a reason why languages are a fundamental element in it .
in writing . - ( DE ) On the one hand , the multi-million euro EU language teaching and exchange programmes are promoting multilingualism and highlighting on their website the importance of multilingualism as an essential factor in increasing the transparency , legitimacy and efficiency of the EU ; on the other hand , the EU does not follow these principles itself .
Even the website of the current Presidency takes no account of the fact that German , with an 18 % share , is the language with the most native speakers in the EU , while a further 14 % of EU citizens speak it as a foreign language .
This is a missed opportunity for the EU to come closer to its citizens .
In practice , the consistent use of the three working languages : German , English and French , would make it possible to reach a majority of the population .
As the rapporteur has apparently reached a similar conclusion , I have voted in favour of the report .
in writing . - ( SK ) This report has shown again that Rule 45 ( 2 ) has serious shortcomings .
The new report , based on the amendment and the supplementary proposal , will make it possible to change the rapporteur 's original report as voted through by the sponsoring committee .
The proposers take over the report and insert new paragraphs over which the rapporteur has no say .
And so a report approved in committee in the form of an approved alternative will be replaced with a new text .
I consider this procedure to be very unfair to the rapporteur .
I hope that in the near future Parliament will reassess this procedure and adopt a fairer solution .
I considered Mr Graça Moura 's report to be very balanced and therefore I did not vote for the alternative proposal of the PSE , ALDE and Verts / ALE group .
Since this proposal went through there was no vote on the original report .
I agree with the rapporteur that linguistic and cultural diversity influence the everyday lives of citizens in a significant way .
It represents an enormous bonus for the EU and we must therefore support programmes for language teaching and school and cultural exchanges within a framework that also extends beyond the EU .
Exchange programmes for teachers at all levels of education aimed at practicing teaching various subjects in a foreign language help to prepare teachers who can then pass on their linguistic expertise to pupils and students in their home countries .
I would like to call on Member States to consistently focus on training foreign language teachers and at the same time to ensure that they receive adequate financial rewards .
in writing . - ( PL ) The issue of multilingualism and its preservation is one of the greatest challenges facing the Community .
The effects of the policy of multilingualism are far-reaching and obvious , but if erroneously applied the results can be pitiful .
One of Europe 's virtues is its multicultural nature , which is also expressed in multilingualism .
It is at the same time a common obligation that is based on needs and the difficulty of re-forging multiculturalism into a clear strength which unites the Community , which will also have an impact beyond its borders and give Europe its rightful place in the world .
So the stakes are high .
A bad policy of multilingualism is based on favouring one or more languages and condemning the rest to marginalisation in all spheres of public activity .
Through its legislation and institutions , the European Union has huge opportunities to conduct a good language policy .
That makes its responsibility in this all the greater .
Mr Graça Moura 's report does not solve all the problems associated with the right of individual European languages to co-exist and with the resulting privileges .
Aside from official languages , there are also a huge number of other languages spoken in Europe , and which are threatened with extinction to various degrees .
A feature of a good multilingual policy would be to protect these languages .
However , the report focuses more on learning the official languages than on implementing the idea of multilingualism .
What this issue needs is a sensible policy that is evolutionary in character , and I believe that a report in this direction should be accepted .
The issue of multilingualism is vitally important in the European context .
For that reason I have taken part in various initiatives that seek to promote and ensure full respect for multilingualism .
The Europe in which I believe is also the Europe of linguistic diversity .
For these reasons , I identify with Mr Graça Moura 's original report .
However , like the rapporteur , I cannot accept that a correct idea of respect for linguistic diversity and for individual and family freedom can or must be used as a weapon in an argument for extremist nationalism .
This is not and must not be the nature of our debate .
Multilingualism is and must be promoted in the name of an idea of respect for the linguistic and cultural diversity of Europe , in this case .
However , this is neither the time nor the place for another type of fight , particularly one that rejects subsidiarity and freedom .
I have voted in favour of the report by Mr Graça Moura on multilingualism as an asset for Europe and a shared commitment .
In particular , as a university lecturer , I strongly support the proposal to promote language teaching and exchange programmes in the educational and cultural spheres , such as the well-known youth mobility programmes .
These schemes , which are run by the Commission 's DG for Education and Culture , add substantial value to students ' educational experience and thus contribute to the EU 's progress towards a knowledge-based society .
I voted for the draft European Parliament resolution on ' Multilingualism : an asset for Europe and a shared commitment ' because I believe that cultural and linguistic diversity within the European Union is a treasure which makes an effective contribution to ' unity in diversity ' .
I also think that school and cultural exchanges , as well as programmes for teaching foreign languages in countries both within and outside the EU are beneficial and must be supported .
in writing . - ( PL ) Multilingualism is undoubtedly one of the united Europe 's great virtues .
Acquiring linguistic competence should be instrumental in improving one 's qualifications , finding a better job or acquiring new interpersonal contacts .
According to annual studies carried out by linguists , multilingual people are more capable , show greater imagination and think outside the box more than monolingual people .
They are also more creative and have broader horizons .
I will not mention the obvious advantages of being able to communicate with larger numbers of people , who often have a completely different mindset derived from different cultures or people .
These benefits of multilingualism show that we must all give priority to learning languages .
This is what makes it so important that each citizen of the Community should have equal levels of access to language learning .
That is why I support all of the Commission 's actions to investigate and evaluate the study of foreign languages , and language learning methods and programmes .
I believe that the aim of this is to harmonise foreign language learning throughout the European Union in future , which will result in greater linguistic competence and which will ultimately be reflected in the number of highly qualified citizens of the Community .
in writing . - Multilingualism is a great asset of the European Parliament .
As the only Parliament in the world which has simultaneous translation in 23 different languages , we should do everything we can to retain this unique aspect of our work .
All EU citizens should be able to read about the work of the EU institutions in their own language , and Member States should do all that they can to provide the opportunity for all EU citizens to be able to speak other EU languages .
I definitely support the multilingualism of the European Union .
The multilingualism of Europe emphasises its cultural pluralism , which is evidence of its uniqueness .
The language competences of the citizens of a united Europe should constantly be extended .
Multilingualism is an essential element of European integration , allowing EU citizens to choose freely their place of residence and where to find work .
At the same time it is necessary to emphasise the significance of the mother tongue as a means for gaining a suitable education and professional qualifications .
We should pay special attention to the continual need to raise the competence of foreign-language teachers and to introduce new teaching methods .
The rapporteur emphasises the significance of giving help with learning foreign languages to citizens who want to learn on their own , noting at the same time the importance of the acquisition of foreign languages by elderly people .
Like the rapporteur I think it is essential to give permanent support to citizens for learning foreign languages , and that particular attention should be paid to citizens in disadvantaged situations .
I think that language learning will combat discrimination and support integration of the counties of a united Europe .
I fully support the demands of the European Parliament regarding the multilingualism of Europe .
in writing . - ( SK ) The resolution on multilingualism is an asset for Europe and an important step towards an educated Europe , for it insists that the official languages of the EU are recognised as having equal value in all areas of public life .
I firmly believe that Europe 's linguistic diversity represents a major cultural asset .
It would be wrong for the EU to be limited to just one language .
The resolution mentions the importance of multilingualism , which applies not only to the economic and social spheres but also to cultural and scientific output and the promotion of such output , as well as the importance of literary and technical translations for the long-term development of the EÚ .
Last but not least , languages play an important role in forming and strengthening identity .
Multilingualism is an area with wide ramifications .
It has an enormous impact on the lives of European citizens .
Member States are challenged to incorporate multilingualism not only in education but also in all future policies .
I appreciate the fact that the resolution supports the study of a second EU language for officials coming into contact with citizens from other Member States in the course of their work .
The role of EU institutions is decisive for securing compliance with the principles of linguistic equality , both in relations between Member States and in individual EU institutions , and also in relationships between EU citizens and domestic institutions , Community bodies and international institutions .
I have supported the resolution , I congratulate the rapporteur and I am proud to have been the first Slovak Member to launch a discussion on multilingualism within institutional frameworks through a written declaration .
I voted in favour of the van Nistelrooij report , given the importance of territorial cohesion for ensuring that the European Union continues to follow a path of sustainable and harmonious development , increasingly transforming its territorial cohesion and diversity into an asset .
The Green Paper represents an important step forward in the development of territorial cohesion and the shared responsibilities of the Union .
It also encourages broad debate on this subject among the European institutions , national and regional authorities , economic and social partners and other actors involved in European integration and territorial development .
The most positive aspects are the value attributed to the potential of the European territory and to its diversity , and also the three key concepts for more balanced and harmonious development in each region : reduction of the negative effects associated with differences in density ; connection between territories in order to overcome distance ; and cooperation in order to overcome divisions .
I congratulate Mr van Nistelrooij on his report and , in particular , on his readiness to take on board the various amendments tabled on his draft report .
I fully support this report .
I totally agree with linking the debate on territorial cohesion to the debate on the future of the EU 's cohesion policy , given that the reform of the latter must incorporate the conclusions of the former .
I agree with the report 's assessment of the Green Paper and with its analysis of the concept of territorial cohesion , and I endorse its recommendations for the future of territorial cohesion , particularly with regard to :
definition of territorial cohesion ;
publication of a White Paper on territorial cohesion ;
reinforcement of the European Territorial Cooperation Objective ;
integration of territorial cohesion in the future development of all Community policies ;
elaboration of additional qualitative indicators ;
measurement of the territorial impact of sectoral Community policies and proposal of ways to create synergies between territorial and sectoral policies ;
development of a comprehensive European strategy for regions with specific geographical features ;
establishment of a comprehensive system of gradual transitional assistance to the transition regions ; and
development of multi-level territorial governance .
I therefore voted in favour .
in writing . - ( SV ) In his report , the rapporteur writes that cohesion policy is one of the EU 's most successful investments .
That is a startling conclusion , not least because , as recently as November last year , the European Court of Auditors confirmed that 11 % of the EUR 42 billion that was approved in 2007 within the framework of the EU cohesion policy should never have been paid out .
The rapporteur seems to be fully aware of this and , in paragraph 17 , urges those involved in the debate on territorial cohesion to avoid all references to the budgetary and financial implications of the proposed policy : keep a lid on it , in other words .
The EU 's cohesion policy is badly thought out .
From a socio-economic perspective , where account has to be taken of taxpayers ' money , it is nothing more than a complete disaster .
Naturally , the June List voted against the report as a whole .
What does the rejection by the European Parliament of our proposals for a resolution on the future of EU cohesion policy mean ?
These proposals underlined that :
structural policy must have , as its primary and principal objective , the promotion of real convergence , by acting as an instrument of redistribution to the least developed countries and regions in the European Union ;
the objective of reducing the amount by which the least favoured regions lag behind must not play second fiddle to territorial cohesion ;
new Community financial resources must be found for new priorities , all the more so as the current Community financial resources are insufficient to meet the needs of real convergence ;
there is a need to boost the Community budget in order to promote economic and social cohesion at EU level ;
land management and planning are the responsibility of each Member State ;
measures must be adopted to cancel out the so-called statistical effect ;
competitiveness must not be a substitute for convergence in those Member States and regions which are lagging behind in their socio-economic development , and cohesion policy and its associated financial resources must not be subordinated to the competition and liberalisation advocated by the Lisbon Strategy .
One possible answer could be that , at the very least , the proclaimed cohesion policy is actually at risk ...
in writing . - The concept of territorial cohesion is now recognised as a key objective of the Union alongside social and economic cohesion .
Territorial cohesion is essentially about achieving balanced development across the EU and in this context it should constitute a central objective of all community policies .
This report highlights the fact that territorial cohesion will be especially relevant for geographically disadvantaged areas such as mountainous regions and islands .
The Commission now needs to proceed with a legislative package which outlines concrete provisions and policy actions concerning territorial cohesion , in order to achieve it .
The debate on territorial cohesion is much more than a budget debate or a debate on Community policies ; it is a debate on the guiding principles of one of the founding and fundamental concepts of the idea of Europe as we see it .
The assessment of cohesion policy and the search for the most appropriate solutions in a Europe enlarged to 27 members , which is currently going through an economic crisis , therefore deserve our agreement and our applause .
However , this does not mean that we agree with or applaud the whole content of the Green Paper .
Given the criteria that we value , the three key concepts of this assessment are correct , namely : to reduce the negative effects associated with differences in population density ; to connect territories in order to overcome distance ; and to cooperate in order to overcome divisions .
However , given the precise nature of what is at stake , this cannot lead to the level of structural aid being dependent on the number of inhabitants covered ; quite the contrary .
The idea of territorial cohesion must itself be based on the idea of making an area which people are deserting attractive and viable .
This is one of our objectives , which must be clearly pursued .
The idea of cohesion is basically an idea of solidarity by which we are all bound and from which we can all benefit .
I voted against the report by Mr van Nistelrooij on the Green Paper on territorial cohesion and the state of the debate on the future reform of cohesion policy .
The reasons for my disagreement derive from a different view of territorial cohesion , which is why I feel I cannot endorse the rapporteur 's considerations .
in writing . - I agree with the rapporteur that we need to define the principle of territorial cohesion more clearly .
I voted in favour of Mr Vlasák 's report on the urban dimension of cohesion policy in the new programming period .
I live in Poznań , the regional capital of Wielkopolska .
I see the positive effects of the city 's development on that of the entire region on an almost daily basis .
I would even stick my neck out and say that the long-awaited synergy between urban and regional development has come about .
Urban development has nothing to do with local centralism .
Those who are against the development of big cities are often unaware of the importance of those cities to the regions in which they are situated .
Due to their very nature , some functions of big city centres cannot be transferred to rural areas .
Persons managing cities have a particular responsibility .
The tasks they face , as regards planning ; spatial management ; social dialogue ; culture and education ; and the creation of sustainable knowledge-based jobs , are all highly complex .
Some of these tasks involve close collaboration with local governments at other levels .
It is also important that the urban dimension of cohesion policy does not compete with , but complements rural development .
Both rural and urban areas can and should undergo development , and both processes are supported by the European Union .
I voted against the report by Mr Vlasák on the urban dimension of cohesion policy in the new programming period .
Although I understand the importance of sustainable urban development , I think it will be difficult to achieve it without a common definition of ' urban areas ' .
in writing . - I support this report and would use this opportunity to reinforce the view that there has to be an integrated approach to cohesion policy .
This integration , however , should be an instrument for delivering benefits not a measure that could be restrictive , and this element needs to be carefully monitored .
Urban cohesion is essential in delivering sustainable economic and social progress .
In that regard I would highlight the role of transport and the provision of modern transport infrastructure as essential in delivering cohesion policy in the urban areas .
in writing . - The urban dimension of cohesion policy needs to be given a greater priority .
I voted against the report by Mr Mikolášik on the implementation of the Structural Funds Regulation 2007-2013 : the results of the negotiations on the national cohesion strategies and the operational programmes .
in writing . - It is necessary to monitor the implementation of the Structural Funds Regulation 2007-2013 closely in order to ensure proper use of taxpayers ' money and to enable us to evaluate properly for programmes post 2013 .
Small businesses play a significant role in creating jobs in Europe and we should make it easier for them to function .
I would like to emphasise that I support all initiatives which aim to promote small businesses in the EU and to help those who want to be self-employed .
I endorsed the Becsey report because it favourably assesses the initiative for micro-credits in Europe .
in writing . - ( LT ) A successful European initiative for micro-credits could fundamentally help achieve the growth and employment goals laid down in the renewed Lisbon Strategy and create a modern , creative and dynamic European economy .
Small enterprises are an essential source of growth , employment , business aptitude , innovation and cohesion in the EU .
Micro-credits may first of all support one of the four priorities of the Lisbon Strategy : to be precise , the opening of business opportunities by helping people to ( re ) integrate socially and economically and by employing them .
The Lisbon Strategy can only really be considered to be successful if the level of employment is increased considerably .
The outcome of a European initiative in the area of micro-credits should be modern , paying most attention to those purposive groups , which until now have not received sufficient attention .
in writing . - ( PL ) The success of micro-credits in reducing poverty in developing countries , particularly in Southern Asia and Latin America , has not yet taken hold in the EU .
However , the need for micro-credits is great , especially among people unable to take out loans in the traditional banking sector .
Micro-credits as a business differ from traditional banking .
They are granted not just on financial grounds , and not simply for profit , but also help promote cohesion by attempting to integrate people who find themselves in unfavourable circumstances , and want to set up a micro-enterprise .
A successful European initiative to develop micro-credits could help to achieve the aims of the renewed Lisbon Strategy for growth and employment and help to make the European economy more innovative , creative and dynamic .
In particular , they can help to implement the priority of releasing economic potential by supporting integration , or repeated social and economic integration of people through self-employment .
That is why I support the motion of the rapporteur , who is asking us to adopt appropriate national institutional , legal and commercial frameworks to promote a more favourable environment for the development of micro-credits and to establish a harmonised European framework for non-banking micro-finance institutions .
in writing . - ( PL ) I voted to adopt the report with recommendations to the Commission on a European initiative for the development of micro-credits in support of growth and employment .
I agree with the rapporteur that small enterprises are an essential source of growth , employment , entrepreneurial skills , innovation and cohesion in the EU .
We should emphasise the fact that micro-credit is often granted not only for economic reasons and not only for profit , but also serves a cohesion purpose by trying to integrate or re-integrate disadvantaged people into society .
I endorse adoption of the report .
Having regard to the fact that micro-credits may contribute to the unlocking of business potential by helping people through self-employment , I think that this method should be brought to the EU .
This report is vitally important in the context of the work that the EU is carrying out on cohesion policy and on cooperation and development policy .
This view was also broadly supported by the European Parliament in its written declaration P6 _ TA ( 2008 ) 0199 adopted on 8 May 2008 , of which I had the honour of being one of the first signatories .
I therefore voted in favour of this report , as any type of investment and expansion in this area is vital and urgent , particularly in the current context of economic and financial crisis .
As a result , specific and prompt action to increase the credibility and coherence of the system is now the goal of the European Commission and the Council .
in writing . - Until now the success of microcredit systems in relieving poverty in developing countries has up to now not been translated into the EU context .
I support this report because success of a European initiative on microcredit could contribute substantially to the achievement of the objectives of the Revised Lisbon Strategy , since small enterprises are an essential source of growth , employment , entrepreneurial skills , innovation and cohesion in the EU .
At the moment , discussions about measures for relaunching credit activities are on the agenda .
In the current economic crisis and especially in countries like Romania , which are currently negotiating loans from international financial institutions , it is vital for banks to resume their main function , which is to provide the population with credit again .
I feel that Mr Becsey 's report is innovative because it brings this issue back to the discussion table , however from a new angle , going outside the banking system to identify solutions to the current financial deadlock .
The report , which concerns the subject of micro-credits , is aimed at the disadvantaged groups in society , such as minorities , the Roma community or inhabitants of rural areas , who have untapped potential and want to set up a small business , but are not able to because they are not eligible to obtain a loan from a banking institution .
These people have few options available to them .
This is why I regard as timely Mr Becsey 's proposal to set up a Community fund to promote micro-credits for people and companies without direct access to bank loans and to improve the level of information about these financing instruments .
I wish to abstain on the report by Mr Becsey on a European initiative for the development of micro-credits in support of growth and employment .
I agree with certain points in the report , but I am decidedly against several other points , and therefore I cannot fully support the tabled text , hence my abstention .
in writing . - Microcredit schemes can help many of the world 's poorest out of absolute poverty , in particular women .
The EU institutions and Member States should do more to support such schemes .
Corrections to votes and voting intentions : see Minutes
- That concludes the explanations of vote .
We shall resume our work at 3 p.m. with statements on the preparation of the G20 Summit .
( The sitting was suspended at 1.35 p.m. and resumed at 3.05 p.m. )

Preparation of the G20 Summit on 2 April - with the participation of Gordon Brown , Prime Minister of the United Kingdom , Member of the European Council ( debate )
Ladies and gentlemen , dear colleagues , it is a great pleasure to welcome here this afternoon the Prime Minister of the United Kingdom , Gordon Brown .
Welcome , Prime Minister , to the European Parliament .
( Applause )
The Prime Minister will make a statement to the European Parliament on the preparations for next week 's G20 Summit .
This summit meeting , which will take place in London on Thursday 2 April 2009 , comes at a critical movement in the handling of the current international economic and financial crisis .
It offers a vital opportunity for the leaders of both the industrialised world and the emerging economies to work together on a common agenda for immediate economic stability and longer-term recovery .
The London Summit needs to agree on the macroeconomic policies and regulatory structures that can get us through the current crisis and put in place a better , more sustainable framework for the future .
As Chairman of the G20 , Gordon Brown has been offering active international leadership at what is proving to be one of the most difficult times in recent history .
The speed with which he has helped develop the G20 as a new tool of international economic governance is both encouraging and impressive .
The Prime Minister has also made a strong and positive impact in showing how the United Kingdom can work effectively with its partners in the European Union , as together we find innovative solutions to the many challenges we face in common .
I have always believed that it is vital that Britain plays a committed role as a central player in the European Union .
( Applause )
Prime Minister , we strongly welcome your determination to play such a role .
I have great pleasure in giving the floor to the British Prime Minister , Gordon Brown .
( Applause )

Prime Minister of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . - Mr President , for this special honour of an invitation to speak to you , and for your successful Presidency of the Parliament , let me thank you .
Let me thank you , European parliamentarians and members of the European Commission , led by President Barroso : it is thanks to the work of all of you , and the generations whose work we build on , that today we enjoy a Europe of peace and unity , which will truly rank among the finest achievements of human history and which is today a beacon of hope for the whole world .
( Applause )
And if anyone , in any country or continent , is in any doubt about how the human will and the courage of representatives with a mission can build a new future out of past decades of despair , let them simply reflect upon how , 60 years ago , Europeans talked of enmities that were forever entrenched and relationships that could never be repaired .
They talked of a hard , long and bitter Cold War .
They did not believe it possible that our Europe could ever be fully at peace , far less that it could unite and cooperate .
Then let them think of how today , after years of cooperation and unity , none but those on the political extremes would question that we are stronger together and safer together than ever we were apart .
( Applause )
On 9 November this year , we will celebrate the 20th anniversary of something that surely for each of us in this Chamber must count as one of the most defining events of our lives - the fall of the Berlin Wall .
It was a wall torn down by the resolution of people determined that no barrier , no intimidation , no repression , would ever again be allowed to divide the people of Europe .
Friends , today there is no old Europe , no new Europe , no East or West Europe .
There is only one Europe , and it is our home Europe .
I stand here proud to be British and proud to be European , representing a country that does not see itself as an island adrift from Europe but as a country at the centre of Europe - not in Europe 's slipstream but in Europe 's mainstream .
( Applause )
That is why I am also proud that by a large majority our British Parliament ratified the Lisbon Treaty .
( Loud applause )
I believe that we in Europe are uniquely placed to lead the world in meeting the wholly new and momentous challenges of globalisation ahead .
We are uniquely placed because of what we have achieved in our Union .
I want to thank the Members of this European Parliament .
You should all be proud of what together we have achieved - the greatest and biggest single market in the world , now bringing opportunities to 500 million people , and the most successful endeavour in economic cooperation anywhere in the world .
You should be proud that this is an achievement of the European Union .
You should be proud , too , of the comprehensive framework of environmental protection that we are building - a defining achievement of European coordination , with this continent the first in the world to set itself unequivocally on the path to becoming a low-carbon economy .
( Applause )
You should be proud , too , that , through the world 's biggest programme of aid , the most sustained commitment to saving and changing lives anywhere in the world has been made by this European Union .
So many of the consumer rights and workplace rights we all enjoy across Europe have resulted from the campaigns led by individual Members and groupings of this House .
Let us not forget that the European Union has the most comprehensive social protection anywhere in the world - a set of rights and responsibilities that was enhanced for the people of Britain when , I am proud to say , our Government led Britain into the Social Chapter .
Mr President , these successes of Europe would have been impossible without the cooperation between peoples that you and this Parliament have delivered .
Yes , we can see unity advanced by officials meeting officials across frontiers .
Yes , we see unity when leaders meet leaders .
But the unity that will last is the democratic unity rooted in the common values of people now represented in this Parliament , and more than treaties , more than institutions , more than individuals , it is these defining values that bind us closely together - our belief , as a European Union , that liberty , economic progress and social justice advance together or not at all .
These are the values rooted in the lessons we have learned by working together - the truth that freedom must never become a free-for-all , that markets should be free but never values-free , and the belief that being fair is more important than laissez-faire .
We have learned again in this crisis that wealth is of no great value to society unless it serves more than the wealthy .
Riches are of value only when they enrich not just some communities , but all .
This is not simply our political philosophy - in Europe we believe these truths because we have lived them in the work we have done in our countries .
Now , in the midst of a global crisis of a speed , scope and scale quite unprecedented in history , I want to discuss with you how , by applying these values that are now part of our DNA - these lessons we have learned over time in Europe - Europe and the world can rise to the four great challenges of globalisation : financial instability in a world of instant global capital flows ; environmental degradation in a world of energy shortages ; extremism and the threat it brings to security in a world of unprecedented mobility ; and growing poverty in a world of worsening inequality .
I want to discuss too how , with a global economy managed properly by us working together , billions of people in Asia and elsewhere , many of whom are just producers of their goods , can become tomorrow 's consumers of our goods , how we can see over the next twenty years the biggest expansion of middle class jobs and incomes ever seen , and how , despite all the problems we have today , we can see ahead a world economy that will double in size , creating new opportunities for all of us in all our countries .
I want to discuss how we can build , from a world which today looks unsustainable , unsafe and unequal , a truly global society which is sustainable for all , secure for all and fair to all .
Let me repeat : I believe that the European Union is uniquely placed to lead in building this future , precisely because we have proved over the last 60 years that we as Europe can meet and master the challenges of cooperation across borders , of coordination between peoples , and of building unity out of diversity .
Some of you will know that for many years I have advanced the case for a global Europe , and for the economic reforms to make it happen .
I know that some critics suggested that I was supporting global action more because I supported European action less .
But I have made this case so strongly in recent years precisely because I passionately want Europe to be leading on the world stage , and because I believe that the countries of Europe , having come together around values of liberty , fairness and responsibility , have so much to offer the world as it , too , comes together .
I want to see a globalisation that is open , free-trading and flexible , but which is also reforming , inclusive and sustainable .
That is the message , at these most testing of economic times , that Europe can send to , and share with , the rest of the world .
Today , as you know , an international hurricane is sweeping the world .
No European country is immune from its impact .
It is hitting every business , every worker , every homeowner and every family too .

Let us be honest with each other : our global economic system has developed and become distorted in ways that run contrary to the values that we celebrate and uphold in our families , in our communities and in every other part of our lives - values such as being fair to others and taking responsibility , honouring hard work and not rewarding irresponsible excess .
Complex products like banking derivatives , which were supposed to disperse risk around the world , have instead spread contagion .
No longer can we allow risk to be transferred around the world without responsibility .
I say that every part of what has been a shadow banking system must now come under the supervisory net .
( Applause )
Established limits to markets agreed in one country or region are being overtaken by global competition between all countries .
I say that it is not enough to promote self-regulation and allow a race to the bottom : we have to agree international standards of transparency , disclosure and - yes - of remuneration too .
( Applause )
Just as globalisation has been crossing national boundaries , we know it has been crossing moral boundaries too .
As we have discovered to our cost , the problem of unbridled free markets in an unsupervised marketplace is that they can reduce all relationships to transactions , all motivations to self-interest , all sense of value to consumer choice and all sense of worth to a price tag .
Yet a good society and a good economy need a strong sense of values .
Not values that spring from the market , but values we bring to the market ; the solid virtues of honesty , responsibility , fairness and valuing hard work - virtues that come not from markets , but actually come from the heart .
So starting at our debate today , as we prepare for the London Summit next week , I propose that we , as Europe , take a central role in replacing what was once called the Washington Consensus with a new and principled economic consensus for our times .
Faced with all these global problems , we cannot stand where we are .
We have to act .
Of course , we have a choice , and I know the temptation for some is to meet this new insecurity by retreating - to try to feel safe by attempting to pull up the drawbridge and to turn the clock back .
But I tell you that if there is anything we know from past history , it is that protectionism is the politics of defeatism , the politics of retreat and the politics of fear , and that , in the end , it protects no one at all .
( Applause )
Instead of heading for the rocks of isolation , let us together chart the course of cooperation .
That is in all our national interests .
That is why I propose that Europe take the lead in a bold plan to ensure that every continent now makes the changes in its banking system that will open the path to shared prosperity , that every country participate and cooperate in setting global standards for financial regulation , and that every continent inject the resources needed to secure economic growth and jobs .
What is the agenda ?
First , the market is there to serve us ; we are not here to serve the market .
That is why we in Britain , other countries in Europe and , yesterday , America , have removed uncertainty from the banking sector in order to get lending moving again for those people who need it to get on with their ordinary lives in the midst of extraordinary times .
I believe that the common principles behind the US , the UK and the European plans for cleaning up the banks ' balances sheets will help to rebuild confidence and help to restore lending to the wider economy .
For the first time ever across our world , we have a consensus , reflected in the de Larosière report , the G30 report of Paul Volcker , the Turner report in the UK and the financial stability reform , that , in the interests of protecting people 's savings , tough regulatory standards should be set across Europe and across the world , and be implemented and fully monitored , not just in one country , but in every continent of the world .
I believe that , for the first time , we can also agree the big changes necessary for coordinated action that will signal the beginning of the end of offshore tax havens and offshore centres .
( Applause )
Let us say together that our regulations should apply to every bank , everywhere , at every time , with no opt-out for a shadow banking system , and no hiding place in any part of the world for tax avoiders who are refusing to pay their fair share .
We know also that a worldwide fiscal and monetary stimulus to our economy can be twice as effective in every country if it is adopted by all countries .
I believe that this year we are seeing the biggest cuts in interest rates the world has ever seen , and we are seeing implemented the biggest fiscal stimulus the world has ever agreed .
I am confident that the London Summit can build on the action that the European Council and the G20 Finance Ministers agreed a few days ago .
We will do whatever it takes to create the jobs and the growth we need .
I believe that the whole of Europe will agree with President Obama in saying that our actions should be sustained and robust until recovery is achieved .
We also have a responsibility to the unemployed .
I believe that no one should go unemployed for months without the offer of training , a job or help to obtain a job , and that no school-leaver should be out of school and out of work for long without being offered the chance to get the skills they need for the future .
I believe also that in this crisis we must take urgent , serious and large-scale action to build a low-carbon recovery and make our economies sustainable .
Europe led the Industrial Revolution and now it can lead a low-carbon revolution - through investment in energy efficiency , the expansion of renewables and nuclear power , the demonstration of carbon capture and storage , the development of the smart grid , and the commercialisation of electric and ultra-low-carbon vehicles .
That is why I am proud to be part of the European 2020 package on energy and climate change that we agreed in December 2008 - a decision of this Parliament also which has set the highest standards for global leadership on the road to a climate change agreement we all want to see at Copenhagen later this year .
( Applause )
What we are now experiencing in some of the countries of eastern and central Europe demonstrates why we must build anew the international economic cooperation to help countries whenever they are in times of need .
A new , reformed , International Monetary Fund , in which we welcome greater representation from the emerging economies , and which must have at least USD 500 billion in resources - twice what it has today - must be empowered to help countries that are facing a flight of capital , help them assist restructuring the capacity of their banks and enable them to restore lending to their industries .
I want an International Monetary Fund that does not just react to crises , but prevents crises , and I want a World Bank that has the resources to prevent poverty and to facilitate , amidst the collapse of trade credits , the expansion of trade around the world .
As we remember and celebrate that our European Union and this Parliament have so successfully expanded to welcome new members of our family , I say to EU Member States from eastern Europe now that we will not walk away from you at any time of need .
We will do all that we can to be on your side .
( Applause )
Let us not forget either that , for hundreds of millions of people in the poorest countries , thrust into extreme poverty , this crisis is nothing less than a matter of life and death .
The grim truth is that , because banks can fail and markets and trade collapse , half a million extra children - ten and a half million children in all - will die this year because they are literally too poor to live .
Ten and a half million children is not just a statistic .
It is one child , then a second child , then a third child , then a fourth ; each of them not just a child , but somebody 's child ; each a funeral that should never have happened ; each a life that could be saved - a tragedy , I believe , that strikes at the very soul of my being and yours .

( Applause )
Times that are difficult for us must never become the excuse for turning our backs on the poorest of the world or allowing broken banks to lead to and justify there being broken promises on aid .
Instead of allowing our European aid pledges to drift towards being mere intentions , then vague aspirations , and , eventually , tragically quiet betrayals , we should instead redouble our efforts to make sure that ours is the generation that finally does make poverty history .
( Applause )
We can , together , deliver the biggest fiscal stimulus , the biggest cut in interest rates , the biggest reform in our international financial system , the first international principles governing banking remuneration and banking standards , the first comprehensive action around the world against tax havens and , for the first time in a world crisis , new and additional help to the poor .
How do we build this global consensus for the global changes we need ?
Let me say that one of the great opportunities ahead for us is for Europe and every other continent to work together .
Today I want to emphasise also that Europe and America can work more closely together .
I talked to President Obama yesterday about what I want to talk to you about today : a new era of heightened cooperation between Europe and America .
Never in recent years have we had an American leadership so keen to cooperate at all levels with Europe on financial stability , climate change , security and development .
Seldom has such cooperation been so obviously of benefit to the whole world .
Starting with the EU-US Summit a few days from now , when President Obama comes to Prague , we can transform that summit from just an annual meeting into an unstoppable progressive partnership to secure the global change that the world now needs .
Think of all the advances we - Europe and America - in a new era of transatlantic cooperation , can work together to achieve .
Let us work together for a new worldwide climate change agreement - a climate change agreement initiated at the G8 in 2005 by Chancellor Merkel - for the biggest cuts in carbon emissions the world has ever seen .
Let us work together , Europe and America , to defeat the growing threat of terrorism from Pakistan and Afghanistan that can strike any of our countries ' streets at any time .
With France under the leadership of President Sarkozy joining the centre of NATO again , let Europe and America work together to achieve something that was once a dream but is now , in my view , possible : a world where nuclear weapons do not proliferate and where the nuclear powers agree real reductions in their arsenals of nuclear weapons .
( Applause )
Let us work together also for an urgent imperative all of us want to see in our lifetimes and something that all parties in this Parliament , I believe , crave : peace in the Middle East , with a secure Israel side by side with a viable Palestinian state .
( Applause )
But the most immediate and the most urgently-needed gift our European and American cooperation could give is that , as a result of our actions , there will be more jobs , more businesses and more trade , as together we meet and master these great financial challenges of our time .
There is a quote from one of the most famous Europeans of all , Michelangelo , that it is better to aim too high and fall short , than to aim too low and succeed .
That is the choice , written by Michelangelo , that we face now , because , as I look round this Chamber today , I see that all of us here are not just witnesses and not just spectators , but potentially the makers of change , free to shape our own destiny .
The people of Europe need not be mastered by events .
No matter what they are , we can be master of them .
So let it be said of us that , in the worst of times , in the deepest of downturns , we kept to our faith in the future and together we reshaped and renewed the world order for our times .
I believe that only once the history books have been written will we be able to truly grasp the range and scale of the extraordinary challenges each country on every continent is having to deal with as a result of globalisation now .
This is more than a moment of change in our common history .
This is a world of change , and we should remind ourselves that the most epoch-making decades in European history have never been fully understood as they have happened .
If you look back to the Renaissance , one of the greatest ages the world has ever seen , we cannot attribute its impact on the world to a single date or person or breakthrough .
Or the Enlightenment - we cannot say with certainty when or by whom or how it was launched , merely that today 's Europe and today 's world could not exist without it .
When we look back at the Industrial Revolution , we cannot point to the day the whistle blew and it began , or highlight just one inventor or entrepreneur or a management committee that oversaw it .
We can only say today , of events that were not properly understood at the time , that we are all beneficiaries of them .
In this generation we face a world of change not yet fully understood , in which we can either hasten or delay progress by the myriad of decisions that we take every day .
I say , in this world of amazing change - climate change , environmental demands , energy needs , the risk of terror , poverty and inequality that has to be tackled , a financial crisis that has to be dealt with - let us not retreat into the protectionism that is the road to ruin .
Let this be our legacy : that we foresaw and then shaped a truly global society for our new times ; that , instead of globalisation being a force for injustice and inequality , we made globalisation a force for justice on a global scale ; and that , faced with the most difficult of challenges , a united Europe , founded on shared ideals and based on shared values , helped build this world anew .
( Sustained applause )
Prime Minister , on behalf of the European Parliament , I want to thank you for that very remarkable speech here in the European Parliament .
( Applause )
Now , it is a pleasure to invite the President of the European Commission , José Manuel Barroso , to make his contribution .
President of the Commission . - Mr President , the G20 Summit in London will be a milestone in the global response to the global crisis .
I am very confident that , under Prime Minister Brown 's leadership , it will be a success .
The initiative for a global response to a global crisis came from Europe .
I recall that both President Sarkozy and I went to Camp David to propose to President Bush a global response .
The G20 Summit in Washington in November 2008 was precisely the result of those joint efforts .
Europe has , therefore , a particular responsibility in the current G20 process .
We want the London Summit to succeed , and I am sure it will succeed .
Europe will be united in London and with a unified message .
As agreed last week by the 27 Member States in the European Council , we will have a proactive agenda for London .
We want concrete results on a stimulus for the world economy and on the regulation of all financial actors , from banks to hedge funds , to new rules on credit-rating agencies .
We should be clear that there is no dichotomy between stimulating the economy and improving regulation - we need both .
Indeed , we need to go beyond that : we need also to reject all forms of economic nationalism and protectionism and we need to renew our commitments to the less-developed world , making sure that Europe will respect the Millennium Development Goals .
The economic slowdown is particularly severe . So providing a coordinated stimulus to the economy through supporting overall demand is necessary .
The European Union is already doing a lot on this front : our overall fiscal effort , combining discretionary action and automatic stabilisers , is close to 4 % of GDP .
Now we must implement our recovery plans vigorously .
We know what we have to do : to get loans flowing again ; to keep people in jobs ; to improve their skills for when the upturn comes ; to continue to invest in productivity and European competitiveness .
The Commission will monitor and evaluate what Member States are doing to coordinate our overall response to the crisis .
On financial regulation , the European Union wants to move the frontier further : no financial product , no institution , no market , no jurisdiction should be exempt from regulation .
But not regulation for the sake of regulating - we need further regulation because we need markets to function properly again , funding jobs and investments .
Only in this way will confidence be restored , and confidence is key .
Putting ethics back in the financial system is also a condition for the confidence we need in open economies .
In the European Union , the frontier is already moving : proposals on capital adequacy and credit-rating agencies have been presented by the Commission and are currently being discussed also by this Parliament .
Over the coming weeks the Commission will table proposals on hedge funds , private equity and executive pay and , in time for the June European Council , the Commission will put forward a package for a new European supervisory system .
The European Union is moving : we will say it loud and clear in London so that we can work together with our partners , namely our American friends .
We want the others to move along with us ; we need global rules for a global economy .
Take the case of impaired assets : clearly , without cleaning the banking system , credit will not flow back to the economy .
The European Union now has a framework , provided by the Commission , to address this issue .
G20 Finance Ministers discussed at length the treatment of impaired assets less than two weeks ago .
The set of principles they adopted largely reflects European Union views on the matter .
So , once again , we had the unique experience of setting supranational and transnational rules and show that the European Union is better prepared than anyone not to impose but to propose the rules for this globalisation .
In London , the European Union must also give a strong message rejecting protectionism .
We will defend our internal market at home , keeping it open , and we will work for open , global markets too .
We must not give up on Doha and must reach an agreement soon .
Nor can we forget the countries most in need : we must stick to our commitments on the Millennium Development Goals .
We must always bear in mind that the actions we take are only the means to an end , improving people 's well-being .
These are measures not for the financial system - not for that particular segment of the economy - but for people .
At the current juncture , this means we must cushion and mitigate the effects on employment of the economic downturn in the European Union .
Indeed , employment is our first concern now .
We will hold an Employment Summit on 7 May to mobilise ideas and actions in favour of keeping people in jobs and retraining them for the jobs of the future .
We are working with social partners , because we believe that is also part of our model in Europe -the idea to work together with our social partners - and we believe that in this way we can help our workers to prepare them for the jobs of the future sustainable and low carbon economy that we want European to lead .
The meeting of the G20 in London will , therefore , have to deliver in quite a number of areas - a very ambitious programme .
I am sure that , under the leadership of Gordon Brown and with a strong European contribution , the G20 will deliver and will build a global consensus on the international economy .
( Applause )

on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - ( FR ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I should like to welcome the British Prime Minister , Gordon Brown , who will host a G20 summit in a few days ' time at which Europe is awaited as rarely before .
The first lesson to be learned from the crisis is that economies are now so interconnected that national solutions have become unthinkable .
The difficulties which , it must be said , are coming at us mainly from the United States as the result of a lack of regulation , have gained ground and Europe , Mr Brown , needs to understand that it will only be strong if it speaks with one voice to defend its common interests .
It even needs to be strong enough to drag all the regional economies onto the path towards new growth .
I cannot forget Mr Manuel Barroso and the fact that it is under the impetus of Europe - and Nicolas Sarkozy in particular - that the G20 has been called upon to help restore order to a financial system which has lost the plot .
Solidarity and responsibility are Europe 's two major principles .
Collectively , we are ready to come to the aid of and support those of us who are experiencing the most difficulties .
Even though I wish your country the best , Prime Minister , the most recent IMF figures on it are , unfortunately , very worrying for you , as they are in other countries in the European Union , especially Hungary .
I worked as a voluntary fireman for several years and I know that when a house is on fire , it does not take long before the neighbour 's house is also at danger from the flames .
My fellow Members , your friends , on the left of the House will doubtless call , when I have finished , for a more social Europe and more protection .
Before they do so , I would reply that these simplistic slogans which involve spending money which we do not have are precisely those which resulted in the failure of the policies of the 1980s in many European countries .
( Applause )
Not yours of course , Prime Minister ; I acknowledge that , in the 1980s , it was not your government .
The same Members will not fail to repeat that the current crisis has been born of globalisation and the market economy .
I would reply to them in advance that , thanks to this market economy , the average income of our fellow citizens has risen by 40 % over the last 40 years .
I would also remind them that , while people in countries outside the market economy , under the shelter of the Berlin Wall , met their well-documented fate , globalisation and the market economy enabled Western Europeans to prosper at an average rate of 2 % growth per annum .
All of which goes to show that the defenders of social Europe are not necessarily who we think they are .
Prime Minister , European integration has always been a question of solidarity between the citizens of its countries and , in the difficult period we are currently experiencing , the duty of Europe , more than ever , is to prove this once again through its deeds .
Supporting the banks was necessary because it prevented those who trusted in them from losing everything , and that is something , but it is not enough .
Our first concern must be to stand by those who lose their jobs and families who have trouble making ends meet .
It is only by returning to growth , it is only by restoring an economic and fiscal environment conducive to entrepreneurs that we shall experience a return to confidence and jobs .
The EUR 400 billion European aid programme will help us overcome the crisis .
It will allow new investments to be generated , it will strengthen demand and , by the same token , it will support growth and create jobs .
The internal European market may act as an important lever and , by contrast , any protectionist measure will only exacerbate things .
Mr Brown , it is not enough to condemn protectionism abroad .
We must also avoid sanctioning slogans like ' British jobs for British workers ' at home , because that will get us caught up in very dangerous economic nationalism .
However , I trust the Commission , the guardian of the Treaties , to ensure that the law is respected and that our enterprises can trade on a free and fair market .
Our priority is to set up a new global financial architecture with more stability , more supervision and , above all , more transparency .
We need to speed up the ' Basel II ' reforms and bring speculative funds under strict control .
Prime Minister , I appreciate that you have come here not to impose ideas but to listen to the citizens ' expectations .
Do not forget , Prime Minister , especially next week , that you are a true European .
( Applause )
on behalf of the PSE Group . - Mr President , what a courageous speech , and what a brilliant description of the necessities of our times .
That is exactly the way we have to go , and we the European Socialists and Social Democrats - and I am speaking not only on behalf of the members of my group , but on behalf of Mr Rasmussen , the leader of our Social Democratic movement in Europe - can subscribe to every word of your speech , Prime Minister .
It is an excellent direction .
( Applause )

( FR ) As regards the comments by my fellow Member , Mr Daul , the least that one can expect from the chairman of a parliamentary group in the European Parliament is that he is capable of distinguishing between protectionism and social protection .
There is a huge difference .
( Applause )
As for your grand President , Mr Sarkozy , he may know something about protectionism , but there is one thing he certainly knows nothing about and that is social protection .
( DE ) You are right , Mr President , it is indeed a great moment .
On the eve of the G20 Summit , Gordon Brown has come here to speak in front of the European Parliament .
This visit demonstrates that the forum for the European peoples , this Parliament , is exactly the right place to present the outlook which you , Prime Minister , have described to us today .
For this reason , your visit is more than simply a visit to the European Parliament .
It points the way ahead , because it shows that you , as the Prime Minister of your country and as the host of the G20 Summit , give the European Parliament the importance it deserves .
By this I mean that you regard it as the place where multinational and international policy must be discussed within the framework of the continental relationships of Europe and of Europe 's relationships with other parts of the world .
Thank you very much for this , Mr Brown .
You have done the right thing .
( Applause )
Prime Minister , you mentioned three fundamental principles which I would like to take up , because they are also fundamental principles of our movement .
It is not greed , individual greed , which was the decisive factor .
This has been a permanent feature of human history and will always exist .
This is about a system in which this individual greed can spread and become destructive .
It is this system which is wrong .
This system of unrestrained market radicalism and liberalism has failed and has become bankrupt .
This is why it must be changed .
Therefore , you are right in saying that we need European and worldwide regulation for private equity , hedge funds and offshore centres , which must be closed , and we need rules for credit-rating agencies .
In addition , short selling must be banned .
This represents a whole raft of measures which we , under the leadership of Mr Rasmussen and in the face of opposition from the other groups , have been demanding for a long time .
This is precisely what must be done .
( Applause from the left )
I know , fellow Members on the right , that it is difficult for you to accept that a policy which you have been promoting for 10 years has proved to be the wrong one .
You are having difficulties in keeping up with what is happening .
I can understand that , but it does not change the fact that you were always opposed to the policy .
You are right when you state that the nuclear arms race must be stopped .
You are right in saying that cooperation with the United States of America will allow us to enter a new age of nuclear disarmament .
You are also right that we need solidarity between people in society , but also solidarity between states .
Therefore , I will be signing on behalf of my group to ensure that the new states in this union can rely on the union .
This is indeed the right road to take , Prime Minister .
I would like to make one final point .
Please go to the G20 with the message that anyone who attempts , in the current economic crisis , to play off environmental policy against economic policy is making a disastrous mistake .
The economic crisis will pass , but climate change will remain .
This is why we need both things .
Above all we need an effective struggle for a better climate policy .
This struggle will also provide opportunities for creating many new jobs .
Combining these two things is exactly the right approach .
( Applause )
Gordon Brown has given a great speech .
The more that those on the right oppose what has been said , the more it becomes clear from your speech , Mr Brown , that we are on the right path .
We are pleased that a true social democratic head of government has spoken here today .
( Applause )
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - Mr President , I welcome the Prime Minister on this , the first leg , of the ' Brown G20 World Tour ' .
You have sketched a big agenda for the G20 , Prime Minister , from combating world poverty to nuclear disarmament , to peace in the Middle East , and I wish you success .
My group congratulates you and your colleagues in the European Council for mapping out the contours of a common approach , albeit on a more limited agenda , to the summit next week .
Opportunities to work with the Obama Administration should not be spoilt by a transatlantic war of words .
I know we share that view , but America retains its affection for skeletal regulation , and the reality of this recession shows that those who wilfully ignored bad practice are now suffering most .
We need a European financial services authority .
By all means press others to support the same standards , but caution from them cannot condone inaction from us .
As you say , we need to lock honesty , transparency and the rule of law into the financial system .
Reform of global financial institutions is necessary too , to stop current account surpluses and excess liquidity fuelling global boom and bust .
We need the IMF to fill that role .
Can it assemble more assets with increased access to crisis funds ?
Should it become a real asset manager for parts of the global savings pool , second-guessing speculators , preventing panic , stabilising markets ?
How can we reform its decision-making structures to reflect the demand for more democratic oversight and the power of emerging economies ?
It is crucial too , despite the pain of recession , to confront the challenge of climate change and the problems posed by poverty .
Prime Minister , you spoke about the need for action , so will you give the IMF and the World Bank an explicit mandate to tackle the drought , flooding and disease that accompany global warming in the developing world ?
Will you make sure they grant , lend and plan not just for market success , but to achieve social progress and green goals too ?
We need a new and sustainable economy enshrined in a global social contract .
The era of easy money is past .
For future growth , making a living must not equate to making a killing .
But to achieve these things Europe must marshal consensus , and the UK must be part of it .
Prime Minister , you and I carry different colours from the political pallet , but as fellows Scots with a burning belief in progressive politics , I know that we both understand Burns when he wrote : ' Oh would some Power the gift to give us , to see ourselves as others see us ' .
And those parties pushing themselves and Britain to the sidelines of Europe will cost their country dear .
So let Britain be a positive partner , cast in the European mould .
Prime Minister , I expect the single currency to emerge stronger from this crisis .
In the chill winds of recession , investors have sheltered under the euro 's wing .
You designed five byzantine tests that prevented British entry these past 10 years .
Will you now work to bring the United Kingdom into the euro in the post-recession period ?
The UK should not stand back to the wall while others take to the floor .
This is a dance that Britain should join .
( Loud applause )
on behalf of the UEN Group . - Mr President , rather than being hoisted on the petard of socialism , liberalism , conservatism or any other of the ideological ' isms ' which are bandied about this House on a regular basis , I want first of all to congratulate the Prime Minister on his willingness to come here to present a case , to defend it strongly , but most importantly of all to offer a bridge between Europe and America with regard to how we can solve some of the problems and difficulties that are laid before us , particularly because we now stand at a time of a global crisis .
But that global crisis should not be allowed to forget the successes of the past .
Over the last 15 years we have had unprecedented economic growth , unprecedented employment growth , unprecedented wealth creation and unprecedented action with regard to helping and assisting the developing world .
These new plans that we come forward with should not be about throwing out the baby with the bath water .
It should be about building on the successes that were there , recognising the failures that had been made and ensuring that we can both chart an ambitious plan forward for a global recovery predicated on common goals of common values with a common course .
That common course must at all times be based on the necessity of delivering better things for people , not better things for markets or better things for the economy .
Prime Minister , you quoted Michelangelo in your speech earlier on , and there is another good quote from an Irish poet , Oscar Wilde , when he said : ' We are all lying in the gutter , but some of us are looking at the stars ' .
And we can reach the stars now !
This new crisis presents an opportunity .
Barack Obama has rightly seen an opportunity to bring America back onto the world stage .
The reality is that , compared with the Marshall Plan after the Second World War , there is no big beast on the world stage today that can rescue the rest of the world economy .
We are interdependent on each other in the challenges that attack us , but also in the solutions which we can arrive at .
I think that , when we most need to chart this new way forward , of course we can speak about the carbon-neutral economy , the jobs created from that - this is very important - as well as retraining and reskilling , which are vitally important .
Social protection for those most in need is a necessity for development , but let us not be hung up on saying how much money a banker will get is the determining factor of what kind of a solution we come up with .
Better regulation , better supervision - but also better enforcement of those regulations - because , in a lot of cases with regard to the banking crisis , it was not about a lack of regulation but rather a lack of supervision and enforcement of the rules .
I think one of the key elements that we now have to look for and chart out for the future is instilling not just the certainty with regard to how the markets will operate , the kind of shelters that would be got rid of , the elimination of tax havens and shadow banking , but let us also give some confidence back to people .
Let us show them that there is a way out of this crisis , that there is light at the end of the tunnel , but most importantly of all , let us show them that they are part of the solution .
In the Irish language we have a saying called meitheal ; that is , people coming together , operating together to save the harvest .
Now is the time for us all to come together , not just to save this harvest , but to save the planet .
on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - Mr President , I am glad to see the Prime Minister here .
In view of the little consideration with which he viewed the EU and the European Parliament for a long time , I take his presence here as a good sign that people can change .
I am also confident that , perhaps , after today , Prime Minister , you will announce the end of a couple of opt-outs or even , as my friend Graham Watson said , announce the entry of the UK in the euro .
However , I have to remind you that on most of the issues you mentioned - democratic reforms , social issues , the Working Time Directive , taxes - your Government was on the wrong side .

( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , Prime Minister , you , together with a fair number of your colleagues and our own President Barroso , are responsible for the fact that the European Union does not have any financial regulation instruments or fiscal and budgetary policies that today would be so valuable in allowing us to tackle the crisis .
It is good to remember that because , when the aim is to propose credible solutions , it is good manners to admit that mistakes were initially made .
So let us look at the credibility of this crusade against tax havens .
They seem a very easy target - everyone hates them - but the reality is slightly different .
There is even a suspicion that we talk about them so much because we cannot agree on much else to talk about .
Prime Minister , we believe that it is important to stop thinking that it is impossible to limit free movement of capital , and that the millions of euro squandered on speculation cannot be put to good use .
We must stop , not regulate , the actions of speculative funds .
We must bring the banks back to a point where they do the job for which they were invented in Tuscany many centuries ago : financing the real economy .
Stepping up market surveillance is not enough ; we must cut the profits of those who speculate .
It should be pointed out that the mafia today has EUR 120 billion stashed away in tax havens .
We must aim decisively for double declarations and double transparency : those who deposit money in another country must declare it .
Banks which receive deposits must declare them .
There is no middle ground .
The rest is just idle talk , and I fear that idle talk will bury us if the G20 does not produce a result that is more powerful than the babble we hear around us .
Prime Minister , just like your predecessor , here you have used strong and emotive words in the language of Shakespeare , but , again like him , you have few concrete proposals .
You spoke of the ecological rehabilitation of the environment .
Yet under your government 's plan , only 7 % of investment is going towards environmental projects , while South Korea and China and even the United States are setting a pace that our fine words will be unable to keep up with .
You spoke of Copenhagen , but again , the European Council did not reach an agreement on a climate-change fund for developing countries .
You know only too well , however , that without a substantial financial commitment , Copenhagen is destined to fail and , with it , our ambitions to govern climate change , too .

Nice speech , Mr Brown , but what are you ready to do , really ?
( Applause )


on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group . - ( FR ) Mr President , Mr Barrot , Mr Brown , as you reminded us , 20 years ago the Berlin Wall fell , putting an end once and for all to the model which it embodied and which , in any case , had already been dying for some time .
In these circumstances the temptation to give unbridled capitalism full rein was too great .
The European Union has followed others in succumbing to this temptation .
The fathers of this new model or their successors have today been overtaken by their now unmanageable creature .
In order to get through what is also an existential crisis , we first have to dare to question .
I do not get the impression that we are on such a path .
At the last European Council , the President of the Commission said that we were equal to the situation .
The President-in-Office of the Council said that he was highly satisfied with the results obtained , while the first prize went , as it often does , to Mr Berlusconi , for whom the European Union is a healthy body hit by a virus .
Time will tell .
So far , the rare voices of self-criticism have come from economic circles themselves , such as that of the chairman of Morgan Stanley in Asia , who said that we are all responsible : the financial institutions , the regulators , the rating agencies , the boards of directors , the politicians and the central banks , and that we need to accept all this collectively .
That is what will change us .
I think , Prime Minister , that you are the first European political leader to have taken your turn in sketching a mea culpa .
It related to the attitude which you adopted 10 years ago following the Asian crisis : an attitude which you today consider was insufficiently firm towards those who thought that these were passing problems .
The old idea that markets were efficient and could regulate themselves is over , you said .
I must say that I prefer this gesture of humility to the less-than-adequate speech given in this very House by your predecessor in a previous life .
However , I am convinced that the problem lies elsewhere .
As stated in the recent report by the secretariat of the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development , we need to shut down the big casino .
The doctrine applied over the last 20 years has failed spectacularly .
That is why those who pompously announced the G20 as a new Bretton Woods at which capitalism would be recast or even moralised have deceived our fellow citizens .
There will be no ' eve of the revolution ' in London on 2 April .
Unit , a large trade union in your country has , I think , found a very simple and accurate phrase to say where the shoe pinches .
Its slogan for the march organised next Saturday in the British capital will be , and I quote , ' Put people first ' .
It may seem obvious , but it verges on a Copernican Revolution in comparison with what has become the dominant system .
This speaks volumes of the nature of the challenges of our times .
( Applause )
on behalf of the IND / DEM Group . - Mr President , the Prime Minister has received some criticism this afternoon for his comment ' British jobs for British workers ' , but you can brush that aside , because from the moment he said it I do not think anybody seriously thought that he would ever , as a British Prime Minister , put the interests of British workers above that of his European dream .
My goodness me , you showed that this afternoon , Prime Minister .
It is just a pity that , apart from UKIP , virtually nobody seems to have bothered to turn up to listen to you .
You are very popular here .
You are very popular indeed because within a few days of the Irish saying ' no ' to the Lisbon Treaty , you had rammed that Treaty through the British Parliament , breaking a specific manifesto pledge that you would give the British people a referendum on the Constitutional Treaty .
Shame on you , Prime Minister , for doing that .
You have devalued democracy in our country ; you have devalued the trust that voters put in you as a British Prime Minister .
Of course , we know the reason why . The reason why is that we would have voted ' no ' .
You said in your speech that none but those on the extremes oppose European Union .
Well , that may be right amongst professional career politicians , but a clear majority of the British people want us to have friendship and free trade with the European Union , but do not want to be members of this political Union .
You cannot continue to build this European Union against public opinion .
If you do it against the will of the people , you are storing up enormous social and political problems for the future .
Please let the peoples of Europe decide their destiny .
Do not have it done in parliaments like this and parliaments like Westminster .
It will not work !
As far as the economy is concerned , you have told us that somehow you are the economic guru ; you are the man who can save the world .
Well , I remember very well your first big act as Chancellor when you sold 400 metric tonnes of gold on the world 's exchanges at USD 275 an ounce .
At today 's valuation , that would be USD 10 billion higher .
It was not just the fact that you got it wrong , because we can all get it wrong .
It was the fact that you announced in advance how much you were going to sell and on what day you were going to sell it .
It was an error so basic that the average A-level economics student - even in these educationally devalued times - would not have done this .
To add to that , you have destroyed our private pension system , and you took away from the Bank of England its ability to regulate the banks and gave it to the ' tick-box ' bureaucrats of the FSA in Canary Wharf .
We have not heard an apology .
Your Government has apologised for the Amritsar massacre ; you have apologised for slavery ; you have apologised for virtually everything .
Will you please apologise for what you did as British Chancellor , and then perhaps we might just listen to you ?
Mr President , I see that the Prime Minister has already mastered the essential craft of the European politician ; namely the ability to say one thing in this Chamber and a very different thing to your home electorate .
Prime Minister , you have spoken here about free trade , and ' amen ' to that .
Who would have guessed listening to you just now that you were the author of the phrase ' British jobs for British workers ' , and that you have subsidised - where you have not nationalised outright - swathes of our economy , including the car industry and many of the banks ?
Perhaps you would have more moral authority in this House if your actions matched your words .
Perhaps you would have more legitimacy in the councils of the world if the United Kingdom were not going into this recession in the worst condition of any G20 country .
The truth is that you have run out of our money .
The country as a whole is now in negative equity .
Every British child is born owing around GBP 20 000 .
Servicing the interest on that debt is going to cost more than educating the child .
Once again today you try to spread the blame around .
You spoke about an international recession , international crisis .
It is true that we are all sailing together into the squalls , but not every vessel in the convoy is in the same dilapidated condition .
Other ships used the good years to caulk their hulls and clear their rigging - in other words , to pay off debt - but you used the good years to raise borrowing yet further .
As a consequence , under your captaincy , our hull is pressed deep into the waterline under the accumulated weight of your debt .
We are now running a deficit that touches 10 % of GDP - an almost unbelievable figure .
More than Pakistan and more than Hungary - countries which have already called in the IMF .
The issue is not that you are not apologising .
Like everyone else , I have long accepted that you are pathologically incapable of accepting responsibility for these things .
It is that you are carrying on wilfully , worsening our situation , wantonly spending what little we have left .
In the last 12 months , 100 000 private-sector jobs have been lost , and yet you have created 30 000 public-sector jobs .
Prime Minister , you cannot carry on for ever squeezing the productive bit of the economy in order to fund an unprecedented engorgement of the unproductive bit .
You cannot spend your way out of recession or borrow your way out of debt , and when you repeat in that wooden and perfunctory way that our situation is better than others , that we are well placed to weather the storm , I have to say you sound like a Brezhnev-era apparatchik giving the party line .
You know , and we know , and you know that we know it is nonsense .
Everyone knows that Britain is worse off than any other country as we go into these hard times .
The IMF has said so .
The European Commission has said so .
The markets have said so , which is why our currency has devalued by 30 % , and soon the voters , too , will get their chance to say so .
They can see what the markets have already seen - that you are the devalued Prime Minister of a devalued Government .
Prime Minister of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . - Mr President , it is a real tribute to this European Parliament that you can have so many diverse views expressed in such a short period of time by so many people , and I thank you for your views .
I hope , however , that even after the party politics has subsided , we will remember three things .
First of all , that it is important that the world comes together to deal with this crisis .
For us to sit apart , to be aloof , not to cooperate with other countries , is a recipe for failure and for an inability to solve a problem that is actually a global banking failure that has spread across the industrial economy .
If we do not understand the problem , we will not be able to understand the solution .
We had a power cut right across the banking system right across the world .
We found that banks that we thought were independent were completely entangled with other banks in different countries , and we have to deal with that problem .
Whatever the party political lines that people want to adopt on this , this is the truth : we have to deal with the problem of global banking restructuring .
Europe did lead the way .
We recapitalised our banks .
Other countries have now done that .
More than a trillion dollars has been spent on recapitalising banks across the world .
We have now created insurance schemes and other schemes to deal with the impaired assets .
This has to be done and it has to be done by global cooperation .
The second thing we have to realise , despite all the different political views in this Parliament , is that global cooperation - not just in banking institutions , but global cooperation in other areas , in fiscal and monetary policy and in trade - has to be a very important part of how we approach the future .
Like it or like it not , the world is changing incredibly fast .
More manufacturing is being done in Asia than in Europe .
There is trade round the world at a speed that we have never seen before until this crisis , and we have to deal with that by creating a global trading environment which is free , but also fair .
Whatever the views in this Parliament , I think people have to face up to that as well .
The third thing that comes out of this discussion for me is that to have global solutions to global problems we will also need not just our European institutions to be strong , but our global institutions to be strong .
I was asked by people who were replying to my speech what we could do to reform these global institutions .
The IMF , the World Bank , and the World Trade Organisation are all organisations built in the 1940s to deal with the problems of the 1940s .
We are in the year 2009 .
We had national capital markets .
We now have global capital markets .
We had domestic competition .
We now have global competition .
The world has changed fundamentally , and we need institutions that reflect a global economy in the way they operate and deal with the problems we have .
I was asked whether I would ensure , or try to ensure , that the International Monetary Fund had the resources necessary to deal with the problems of economies that could not at the moment sustain themselves when there was a flight of capital .
The answer is : we must do that .
I was asked whether the World Bank and other international institutions can help countries where there is substantial poverty being created as a result of the crisis .
We have got to do that .
I believe that the lesson of this crisis is that we are now in a global economy .
There are global problems that need global solutions .
That will require us to shape global institutions , and my message to this Parliament is very clear .
Europe has led the way in so many other areas : it is now time to lead the way in creating the global institutions that will deal with the global problems we have , and provide global solutions .
This is a test of how we , having over the last 60 years created a Europe which has social protection as well as economic progress , can help shape a world where we have economic progress , environmental care and social justice at the same time .
I believe that , whatever the different views expressed in this Parliament , there is a will across the peoples of this world to do that , and we , Europe , can play a major role in it .
( Loud applause )
Colleagues , the lively debate today has shown the importance that we in the European Parliament attach to ensuring a successful outcome to the G20 Summit .
I know that the Prime Minister has to leave shortly to go to New York for further preparations for next week 's summit .
Prime Minister , we are very happy that you were able to join us this afternoon , and wish you every success in the important work you are engaged in .
Welcoming a British Prime Minister to the European Parliament is always a very exciting occasion .
Today 's excellent debate has been no exception . Prime Minister , thank you very much indeed .
( Applause )
Statements are being made that would have been unimaginable a year ago .
However , at the same time , differences of opinion still exist between the main leaders .
This is evidence , on the one hand , of an attempt to avoid responsibility for the serious consequences of the neoliberal policies and , on the other hand , of dust being kicked up to obscure the view of the paths being taken , which are essentially the same as before , with a few very minor alterations .
This means that the principle of ' things have to change so that everything can stay the same ' , which Luchino Visconti dealt with so well in his film ' The Leopard ' , is once again being advocated .
Accordingly , while the British Prime Minister , Gordon Brown , has asserted that ' the market is there to serve us ' , adding that ' we are not here to serve the market ' , but without introducing basic measures to effectively control the market and limiting himself to insisting on coordination and regulation measures for tax havens , the President of the European Commission , Mr Barroso , has insisted on the liberalisation of international trade and the Doha Agenda .
Nothing has been said about measures to end the privatisation of public services and strategic sectors of our economies .
Nothing has been said about doing away with the liberal Lisbon Strategy or about defending jobs with rights , by putting an end to attempts to change labour legislation for the worse .
Approval of the Minutes of the previous sitting : see Minutes
EIB and EBRD annual reports for 2007 - Community guarantee to the European Investment Bank ( debate )
The next item is the joint debate on the following reports :
by Mr Mitchell , on behalf of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs , on 2007 Annual Reports of the European Investment Bank and the European Bank for Reconstruction and Development ; and
by Mr Seppänen , on behalf of the Committee on Budgets , on the proposal for a decision of the European Parliament and of the Council granting a Community guarantee to the European Investment Bank against losses under loans and loan guarantees for projects outside the Community - C6-0025 / 2009 - .
rapporteur . - ( FI ) Mr President , the European Union can provide developing countries and other countries not in the EU with financial assistance in the form of credit at low interest rates from the European Investment Bank .
The EU guarantees the loans in such a way that the lender does not incur any losses and it may finance its own borrowing further with market money .
When the EU 's guarantees in respect of the European Investment Bank were renewed and extended to cover more countries than before , it was the European Parliament 's view that the decisions should come under the codecision procedure and , furthermore , fall within the competence of the European Parliament , and not just that of the Council .
The European Court of Justice agreed and , accordingly , the Council 's unilateral decision was remitted back to the codecision procedure .
The new decision is to be taken by 6 November this year .
Now before us is the Commission 's proposal for a decision , which may be regarded as temporary , and regarding which the Commission will be allowed up to the end of April next year to prepare a new , general proposal .
Parliament has left its fingerprints on the ' temporary ' decision , and the Council has accepted that .
It is a positive sign that , after some tricky negotiations , there is now consensus between the Council and Parliament and that the decision can be taken today at first reading , without the need for any further deliberation .
In this connection I wish to thank the representatives of the Czech Presidency , who have worked so hard in the Council to bring about consensus .
But for the active participation of the Czech Republic , this decision would never have come into being .
All the same , I do have to censure all those who stirred things up at the European Investment Bank .
The European Investment Bank is accustomed to receiving the support of the European Parliament in its various affairs , but its representatives this time have failed to realise that the codecision procedure had been brought into play and that Parliament 's competence in this matter had been extended significantly .
Parliament wanted to exercise its powers fully , which was not possible at the earlier consultation procedures .
It was , I think , completely inappropriate that the European Investment Bank , which is one of the institutions of the EU , should not have shown some respect for Parliament 's established practices , but instead tried to influence the decision from the political periphery .
It is , nevertheless , a good end result .
The European Investment Bank mainly got what it wanted .
It earned Parliament 's sympathy in a decision-making procedure in which Parliament formed its own opinion .
This decision now has the vast consensus of the political groups behind it , whereas it would not have if the European Investment Bank 's approach had been adopted .
I would like to thank the Presidency of the Council of the European Union for achieving this compromise .
I would also like to thank the Committee on Budgets and its shadow rapporteurs for its consensus in order to reach a decision at first reading .
I am sure this will be a good decision for all concerned .
rapporteur . - Mr President , can I say at the outset that I really do strongly object to the way Members of Parliament have their time shortened here .
Question Time is not being heard this week , either by the Council or the Commission .
People can come in here and speak at all sorts of great length .
Members of Parliament introducing reports on behalf of Parliament are shortened without notice .
This is an outrageous imposition on MEPs .
As rapporteur , I would first like to welcome President Maystadt and President Mirow to the Chamber on this first time that Parliament has drafted a report on the activities of the European Investment Bank ( EIB ) and the European Bank for Reconstruction and Development ( EBRD ) concurrently .
There can be no doubting the fact that the current financial crisis has highlighted the importance of the work of the EIB and the EBRD .
Both banks are to be praised for their efforts in tackling the effects of the economic crisis .
They are both facing up to the challenges presented , and I commend them for this .
It is important that we consider both banks at the same time , so as to ensure better cooperation between them and the elimination of overlap .
Both banks should ensure that there is maximum synergy so as to prepare for and assist economic recovery .
The decision to increase lending to small and medium-sized enterprises by 50 % is particularly welcome .
The initially planned EUR 5 billion per year for SME lending has been increased to EUR 7.5 billion per year over the four year period 2008-2011 .
An example of new funding is the EUR 310 million approved recently by the EIB for investment in SMEs in Ireland .
The EIB has made it clear that more can be made available , and at very competitive interest rates , to Irish SMEs and to other SMEs .
In my view , Europe needs to think in terms of a Marshall Aid-type plan , which worked so well after the Second World War .
If the EIB could be persuaded to , say , borrow from China to invest in the Bank , it could use such resources to help kick-start the economic recovery and bring this about sooner .
This borrowing could be repaid by committing part of the extra customs duties that would be collected by the EU from renewed external trade and some of the new VAT receipts to this objective .
This would have the added benefit of taking the pressure off EU Member States and their individual requirements to keep within the Stability and Growth Pact in terms of additional borrowing .
In 2007 , EU inward investment in China was EUR 7.16 billion , while China 's inward investment in the EU was only EUR 0.6 billion .
Both the EU and China would benefit from increased trade .
I am conscious of the visit to China by the President of the Commission , the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and the President of the European Central Bank before Christmas .
The recent EU-China follow-up summit is a welcome sign of hope .
We got into a mess because we were not focusing on the issues .
It is time to start focusing on recovery , including making the EU more competitive , as proposed by the Lisbon Treaty .
I am very pleased about the proposals which are being made in the context of the energy crisis and climate control and , in particular , the role of the EIB in this .
I am also pleased that the recent decision of the Court on codecision has been announced and that Parliament will now have an enhanced role in relation to these two banks .
I have proposed in my report - and it has been endorsed by the committee and I am sure will be endorsed by Parliament - that the Commission and the two banks should come before the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs on a regular basis to account for the coordination of the roles , and for the implementation of the policies , of both banks .
I think this will be a very useful development .
What we need is more transparency and more accountability .
We heard Prime Minister Brown talking about this in terms of the international financial crisis .
We should be thinking about it in terms of accountability to this House for our own financial institutions and those that are part-funded by financial institutions .
I welcome the general thrust of the intent of the banks , particularly in relation to climate control and energy , and I hope the House will support the main thrust of the report which I have brought forward .

Mr President , this afternoon , on behalf of the Commission , I want to welcome the President of the European Investment Bank , Mr Maystadt , and the President of the European Bank for Reconstruction and Development , Mr Mirow .
Before this House , I want to thank them both , and also their institutions , for their extremely positive cooperation with the Commission , particularly during this difficult struggle with the economic crisis .
Mr Seppänen , thank you very much for your words and for your efforts as rapporteur on a subject which has been difficult , but which has had a happy outcome , as you yourself have said ; namely , the agreement at first reading to solve the legal problems that had arisen surrounding the external mandate of the European Investment Bank or EIB .
This external mandate allows us , through the actions of the EIB and in coordination with European policies , to take very firm and effective action on policies and areas of special interest to the European Union and to all the European institutions , including this Parliament .
The Commission expresses its satisfaction that , from now on , Parliament will be directly involved in discussions on this external mandate .
However , we must also warmly thank both Parliament and the Council for the flexibility that they have shown in reaching agreement quickly enough to avoid creating or increasing uncertainty , before the end of this year , over the possibility of continuing to use the resources and tools of this external mandate .
For our part , the next Commission will , at the beginning of 2010 , present the corresponding legal text to this Parliament and the Council .
We hope that once again at first reading , we will be able to ensure legal stability for an external mandate that , as I said before , allows European policies of interest to us all to be developed .
I also want to congratulate Mr Mitchell and thank him for his report .
This is the first time that a report has referred not only to the European Investment Bank , but also to the European Bank for Reconstruction and Development , or EBRD .
We feel it is right to deal with these two financial institutions together , particularly at the current time when the effectiveness of their actions must serve to reinforce our policies on the economic crisis , and when cooperation between these two institutions is especially important .
We are asking both banks to make a huge effort .
In the recovery plan adopted at the end of last year , we asked both institutions to considerably increase their lending capacity at a time when they too are finding it difficult to raise finance from the markets .
They are responding to this call for increased activity by acting in those areas which we feel are a priority , as Mr Mitchell has said , such as small and medium-sized enterprises , the energy efficiency sector and other areas as well .
In particular , we are extremely satisfied with the agreement reached by both banks with the World Bank , in a joint initiative to strengthen their financial instruments and improve their efficiency in the use of their lending instruments in the countries of Central and Eastern Europe , which are experiencing an especially difficult situation .
We hope that , between now and next year , the groundwork and discussions of the group of experts set up by the Council and the Commission , in agreement with Mr Maystadt , to consider the future of the EIB 's external mandate , and also the strategic review of the EBRD , which will also take place at the beginning of the next term of this Parliament and the next Commission , will allow us , at a calmer time than currently in terms of the economic situation , to continue using their know-how , lending facilities , financial resources , human resources and experience to assist the policies that we all agree must be the ones to guide the future direction of the European Union in the next decade .
draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on Budgetary Control . - ( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to summarise the opinion of the Committee on Budgetary Control on the annual report of the European Investment Bank .
The Committee on Budgetary Control calls on the EIB to play a more active role and to introduce a more active policy to combat fraud , involving zero tolerance for fraud , corruption , money laundering and terrorism financing .
Independently of any efforts that the EIB has made in the past , which deserve our recognition , it must now pursue a policy which is not only recorded on paper , but also involves concrete measures and transparency criteria for the purposes of traceability .
Therefore , companies which have been shown to be corrupt should not be allowed to take out loans and informers should receive effective protection .
The investigative and preventative function of the EIB must play a more prominent role than it has done in the past .
In particular , in consideration of the current financial and economic crisis , we want the same supervisory regulations to apply to the EIB as to all other commercial banks , because without real supervisory control , the EIB cannot be a credible player on the credit market .
We also need independent monitoring structures which will ensure the quality of the EIB 's results and its adherence to the code of conduct .
Our main concern is that Parliament should in future produce a separate report on the work of the EIB .
In our opinion a report of this kind would be both possible and appropriate , because the Member States are the only shareholders of the EIB , which means that it has a direct link with , and therefore a direct budgetary responsibility to , Parliament . Thank you very much .
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - ( HU ) First of all , I would like to congratulate the two rapporteurs on the report , and I am also pleased that this question , the problems concerning the two financial institutions , came before us at the same time ; indeed , I think that in the future we will have to examine these two institutions at greater length .
The first question , sticking to keywords only , is that of duplication .
Certainly we need to work out some sort of long-term division of labour between the two institutions and to make closer cooperation possible .
I saw that the rapporteur assigned major projects to the European Investment Bank , leaving activities relating to smaller enterprises to the European Bank for Reconstruction and Development .
In any case , I believe that some sort of advantageous specialisation is necessary .
I am pleased that the European Parliament can at last enter Mecca and debate the kinds of future orientations that should be adopted in this regard .
I am cautious with regard to this question of turning outward and inward .
Twelve years ago in Hungary we believed that we could forget about the IMF once and for all , and now here they are at our gates , and we are running to them for credit .
A few years ago we thought that the EBRD would not play a major role in those Member States , for instance , which are outside the euro area , and that the EBRD would instead move eastwards ; now we are pleased that along with the World Bank , these two institutions have made a large Central European fund possible .
I would like to draw your attention to the fact that the liquidity and financing of small and medium-sized enterprises is , to my mind - as Chairman of the relevant working group in my political group - absolutely essential ; therefore , I would ask that the options that have recently been decided should enter into force as soon as possible , so that together with the commercial banks we may effectively provide the possibility of liquidity primarily to Central European small and medium-sized enterprises .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , we are discussing the current economic crisis in terms of a problem of imbalance , with a deregulated market on the one hand and a lack of public interest on the other hand .
We have not always succeeded in arousing public interest in the financial markets and in the real economic processes .
This is why it is so important today that we are discussing the public investment banks , which are at exactly this interface , which allow the market to function and which have a public mandate to represent our future interests .
Therefore , my prediction for the presidents of these banks who are here with us today is that we will need them even more in the future than we do at the moment and have done in the past .
Mr Mitchell 's report has two areas of emphasis .
He urges us to find a good division of labour , an optimum position for focusing on strengths .
He also proposes that we allow the two banks to concentrate on the tasks which face us in future .
These are climate change , the concern that we will be threatened with mass unemployment and recession , unless we take countermeasures , and the call , in particular from small and medium-sized enterprises , for public infrastructure , so that we can make progress , create some breathing space and give ourselves a perspective on the situation .
Therefore , I would like to thank Mr Mitchell for his good work .
He has produced a positive report .
The European Parliament has fought to retain its role and will perform its role more forcefully in future .
That is the message from my group .
One more comment to Mrs Stauner who has just referred to the supervisory regulations .
Of course , public banks must be subject to supervisory regulations and to proper controls .
However , the same supervisory regulations cannot be applied to them as to normal banks , otherwise they would not be in a position to take on the risks which we often want them to accept .
For this reason , I am in favour of controls , but of a different kind .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the European Investment Bank and the European Bank for Reconstruction and Development have existed in the shadows for a long time .
Over recent years a large section of the public has hardly been aware of their presence .
I hope that in times of financial and economic crisis this will now change , because these important European institutions are becoming more significant than ever .
Given the large amounts of money which both banks handle and allocate in the form of loans , it is crucial that they work according to clear criteria and principles .
The fact that these are public institutions is not in itself a guarantee that this is the case .
We have public banks , for example in Germany , which have breached these principles and have got into difficulties , in just the same way as many private banks .
I hope that both institutions , the EIB and the EBRD , set their priorities on the basis of very clear considerations and that these priorities will in future , when we look back on this period , be seen as correct and realistic .
The important thing is , and I can only support the banks in this respect , that they continue to focus on medium-sized companies , which are the backbone of the European economy , and that they focus on projects which clearly fulfil the criterion of sustainability .
The banks have a very good rating , better than triple-A .
This enables them to obtain and provide financing on relatively favourable terms .
We must ensure that we do not place them under excessive strain and , particularly in times of crisis , do not attempt to use them as a source of capital in areas where other sources of capital may already be drying up .
I am pleased that the Members of the European Parliament will be involved in identifying the priorities from next year onwards .
I believe that the fact that the banks are even more accountable to Parliament than they have been in the past will form the basis for good and constructive cooperation .
One last point : I would encourage both banks to increase their efforts and to make sure that they do not duplicate their activities .
They should instead supplement each other 's work and work together in a complementary way .
It also seems important to me that the EBRD continues to play a role in the transition countries , because we must not abandon these countries , especially in times of crisis .
on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , firstly I would like to thank those responsible for both reports , which we in the Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance support .
We are in favour of extending the activities of the European Investment Bank in the developing countries .
We have long campaigned for EIB project funding to adhere to social and environmental standards and to uphold human rights .
In practical terms this will now happen because of the Community guarantees for EIB projects .
We would like to thank the Committee on Budgets which has taken up this point and successfully followed it through with the Council .
The EIB is a very important tool within the EU , which enables the social , environmental and economic development of the Member States to be controlled .
I would therefore ask for closer checks than those that have been carried out in the past on all projects supported by the EIB , to determine whether socio-environmental sustainability and profitability can really be guaranteed .
This is especially important in the current financial and economic crisis .
For example , it would be a serious mistake for the EIB to support large-scale projects such as the bridge over the Straits of Messina or the Brenner base tunnel for high-speed passenger trains .
These projects require large amounts of machinery and are highly capital-intensive .
Support for modernising and extending existing infrastructures is far more beneficial in terms of the labour market and environmental impact .
The quantitative growth comes from an outdated philosophy of ' faster , higher , further ' .
We need a sustainable socio-environmental policy for both our citizens and the environment . Thank you .
on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group . - ( EL ) Mr President , the report welcomes the activity of the two banks , without however mentioning their responsibility for and contribution to the capitalist crisis .
The EIB has taken upon itself the role of lender to banks and companies , with the aim of supporting the profits of capital .
The European Union 's recovery measures are accompanied by mandatory measures of financial prudence .
A common component of the European Union is the anti-grassroots policy of the Lisbon Strategy , of the Stability Pact and of the Treaty of Maastricht , the objective of which is to shift the burden of the crisis on to the workers ' shoulders by cutting wages , making flexible contracts of work the rule and sharing out unemployment and with new anti-insurance reversals .
One typical example is my country , against which the excessive deficit procedure has been opened twice in five years .
The Commission is demanding measures of a permanent and lasting nature : additional measures to cut social spending , especially on public health and care , while at the same time the private sector in this sector is growing richer .
At the same time , it is demanding increases in taxes on grassroots consumer products and an increase in VAT rates .
The only approach which serves grassroots interests is the path of rejection of the measures being imposed by capital , and on which basically all the forces that support Maastricht and the European Union agree , and the formation of a socio-political alliance for a grassroots economy and grassroots power .
on behalf of the IND / DEM Group . - Mr President , what worries me most is the suggestion that the European Investment Bank ( EIB ) has a significant role to play in solving the financial crisis - that it can somehow act as the Europe-wide body to provide stimulus where Member States have singularly failed to coordinate their own stimuli .
The danger is that , if it expands its activities too far into supporting commercial banks and governments - as has been suggested - then its enviable high credit rating may be downgraded , like some of our governments .
The EIB has a leverage of about 35 times , and its shareholders are Member State governments .
It would be a serious issue if it were to go bust , like some of our commercial banks .
The report even encourages the EIB and the Commission to increase lending by experimenting with new innovative financial instruments .
I thought the world had seen enough of clever financial tricks .
Mr President , first of all I would like to cordially thank our Finnish colleague Esko Seppänen for his efforts which contributed to reaching a compromise with the Commission and the Council on EIB loans and Community guarantees .
As we all know , after the European Parliament won a case before the Court of Justice , the respective Council decision was annulled , but to remain in force for one year until a new decision is adopted .
The Commission proposed the codecision procedure and tomorrow we are to vote on the compromise agreed during the trialogue and bring this codecision procedure to a close .
It is important to remember that the EIB was originally set up to finance operations within the EU .
So the Community guarantee to the EIB against losses and loan guarantees are the basis for its activities outside the EU .
The proposal we discuss today covers around 10-15 % of the EIB 's activities , i.e. the bank 's activities outside the EU in the pre-accession countries , Mediterranean countries , Asia , Latin America and South Africa .
These EIB operations are especially relevant in middle-income countries and infrastructure , financial and commercial sectors .
These EIB operations are of utmost importance in an environment of global financial crisis and recession .
I am happy that we managed to reach a compromise on all the major issues , such as the deadline for the presentation of a new proposal for a decision , which is now 30 April 2010 , as well as on the sunset clause , which is 18 months after the deadline , 31 October 2011 .
The European Parliament amended the Commission 's proposal pointing out the importance of respect for human rights , development policies , energy diversification , request for strategic documents , greater transparency of the EIB policies and activities .
We have a good result , and I hope that tomorrow the compromise will be adopted by the necessary majority .
I am counting on the support of all the political groups of this House .
( PT ) Mr President , I join my fellow Members in applauding the magnificent work carried out by our rapporteur on the Committee on Budgets and the way in which he managed to fight for the rights and prerogatives of the European Parliament .
In accordance with the Court of Justice judgment of 6 November 2008 , the European Parliament has full codecision powers in this area .
Furthermore , the European Investment Bank has a clear mandate to support sustainable economic and social development , the integration of developing countries into the world economy , the campaign against poverty , and compliance by these countries with the rule of law , human rights and fundamental rights .
We will be here to ensure that the EIB 's investments pursue these objectives .
( LT ) The European Investment Bank is the world 's largest bank and it is clear that it has an important role to play in developing the economy in the European Union 's internal market and beyond .
Currently many proposals are being put forward to extend the functions carried out by the European Investment Bank .
I am a member of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs , but I cannot even remember many of those proposals .
It seems that now everyone knows what the European Investment Bank must do .
There are also many proposals to re-evaluate the operations carried out by the bank outside the European Union .
The document drafted by the rapporteur is specifically intended to extend the validity of the Community 's guarantees to cover losses incurred by the European Investment Bank 's lending outside the European Union .
The variety of proposals clearly shows that we need broader debate on the activities of the European Investment Bank and the direction in which those activities should be developed .
I hope that the Commission will find time to examine this problem more closely in the overall context of the European economic stimulus plan .
As for the guarantees offered by the European Investment Bank , many additional conditions have been laid down to take human rights and aspects of equal development into consideration .
This is a welcome initiative , but in its external policy the European Union should aim to make other banks , operating in third countries , implement or carry out their activities based on these principles as well .
Only then will there be equal competition outside the European Union and the European Investment Bank will not risk experiencing many losses .

( FR ) Mr President , Commissioner , Mr Maystadt , my first question concerns the report by the European Investment Bank .
I wonder : has the regulation and supervision mission demanded by Parliament been set up ?
Furthermore , Commissioner , I cannot understand why you do not take the initiative devolved upon you under Article 105 to refer this to the Council , so that such a mission can be undertaken by the European Central Bank .
Your answers to me have been very evasive , which I find regrettable .

I must also refer to the guarantee issue : I do not understand why the guarantee being granted in this way is not remunerated .
Of a total planned guarantee of approximately EUR 30 billion , that would represent a loss of resources of between EUR 30 and 100 million for the Union 's budget .
Nor do I understand , Mr President , why the Committee on Budgetary Control , under whose remit European Investment Bank issues fall , has not been referred to for its opinion on this issue of the guarantee granted to the Bank .
( PL ) Mr President , the European Investment Bank and the European Bank for Reconstruction and Development are two extremely powerful institutions that can help regional development both within the European Union and in third countries .
This is particularly evident today with the financial crisis and the resulting restrictions in access to investment loans .
When the majority of banks were drastically cutting back on loans to countries neighbouring the EU for their financial programmes , both of the above banks were vigorous in promoting investments in transport or the environment .
At the same time , the European Investment Bank is a major source of loans and loan guarantees for the European small and medium-sized enterprise sector .
In the present difficult times , this constitutes invaluable support for entrepreneurs .
What is also important is that the six priorities implemented by the European Investment Bank include ensuring sustainable and secure energy competition for the European Union .
EBRD . - Mr President , thank you very much for this report and the chance to continue the discussion begun with the committee in November .
It is timely and welcome in particular for three reasons .
First , the context of the financial and economic crisis renders any encouragement of greater cooperation between EBRD and EIB more relevant than ever .
Yet the crisis also means that cooperation between public international financial institutions is no longer just a policy-driven aspiration but a vital necessity .
Faced with the dramatic decline in private flows of credit , we came together last month with the World Bank group to launch the joint IFI action plan in support of banking systems and lending to the real economy in central and eastern Europe .
This is a EUR 24.5 billion package over 2009 and 2010 of which the EBRD will contribute EUR 6 billion .

The action plan recognises that an effective crisis response in Europe 's integrated financial markets requires fast and coordinated action by all stakeholders : parent banks which own a large part of the region 's financial sectors ; important local banks ; home and host country authorities of cross-border banking groups ; European institutions and the IFIs .
With this wide range of stakeholders we are working together to implement the plan and are developing the coordination and cooperation mechanisms to do so .
And we see - as we saw last August when faced with the conflict-driven banking crisis in Georgia - that this kind of IFI cooperation , born of need , is the kind that works best .
Second , under the aegis of the European Union , new structures of cooperation between EBRD and EIB offer great new opportunities for us to work together .
I refer in particular to the Western Balkans investment framework , now being launched , as well as to the Eastern Partnership announced by the European Council in recent days which will build on the good cooperation we have already established through our memorandum of understanding and the neighbourhood investment facility .
These initiatives , facilitated by EC funds , bring us together to work concretely on specific projects and programmes combining the strength of each institution and , as such , offer an excellent crucible in which to forge the development of our joint work .
I believe it is in this context that we may find divisions of labour , applications of joint expertise and the necessary mechanisms of cooperation , including common standards , which you have called for .
Third , I take the European Parliament 's views as welcome input to the early stages of the EBRD 's fourth capital resources review which we will conclude at our annual meeting in Zagreb in May 2010 .
The EBRD has taken a proactive stance in response to the crisis : supporting our clients in countries of operations , we are expanding our instruments , and aim to invest EUR 7 billion in 2009 - an increase of more than 20 % .

At the same time , we have to acknowledge that our risk exposure is also increasing .
The full implications of the current situation on our portfolio and on the development of our business cannot yet be clearly seen .
Yet the importance of our partnership with the EIB and with the European Union in meeting our commitments , both to our shareholders and to our countries of operations , is clearer than ever .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , allow me first of all to thank you for once again giving us the opportunity to pursue the constructive dialogue that has been established between the European Investment Bank and Parliament for some years now .
I am particularly happy to have the opportunity to discuss the two reports being presented to us today , because they are two reports - that of Mr Mitchell and that of Mr Seppänen - that are interesting and that raise entirely relevant issues .
I hope that we will have the opportunity to return to these issues later .
Today , of course , we are facing a crisis on an exceptional scale - probably the most serious crisis since the end of the Second World War - and it is therefore quite normal in this context for Member States to call on our two institutions to try to make a contribution to the European Union 's response to this crisis .
You know that in this context the Member States , which are our shareholders , have asked the EIB to substantially increase the volume of its lending in 2009 , an increase of some 30 % compared to the initial forecasts , and to channel this additional effort essentially into three areas : firstly , loans to banks for small and medium-sized enterprises ; secondly , energy , and in particular the fight against climate change ; and finally , a special effort for those countries that are hardest hit by the crisis .
What point have we reached today ?
I will give you the statistics covering the last three months of 2008 - in other words , starting from the time at which the first appeals were made to the EIB - and the first two months of 2009 .
During those five months we lent more than EUR 31 billion , which represents a 38 % increase compared with the same period of late-2007 / early-2008 .
In the first area , as regards loans for small and medium-sized enterprises , EUR 5.6 billion in loans were issued in this short period .
Several of you have stressed the importance of aiding small and medium-sized enterprises in the current climate .
In fact , we are making a very special effort in this area , and I can already tell you that the objective that we were set of releasing EUR 15 billion of these loans during the years 2008 and 2009 will be exceeded .
As regards the second objective , energy and the fight against climate change , here too we have made a particular effort , and it is in this context that financing for the automotive industry must be placed .
We must be clear : in this sector our funding is going towards projects involving research , development and production of eco-friendly cars , that is , cars that will meet the Union 's new standards regarding the reduction of CO2 emissions .
Finally , regarding the third area : aid for countries that have been hardest hit by the crisis : during this same five-month period we issued EUR 910 million in loans in Hungary , EUR 600 million in Latvia , EUR 1 billion in Romania and EUR 1.1 billion in Lithuania .



I therefore think that I can say that we have been doing our best to respond to the Member States ' appeal and to implement the agreed measures without delay .
Mr Mirow himself has already alluded to the joint International Finance Corporation-European Bank for Reconstruction and Development action plan regarding aid for the banking sector in Central and Eastern Europe .
Naturally , this increase in the volume of our loans is only possible thanks to the increase in capital on which our shareholders have decided - it will not cost the Member States anything .
However , it was decided that we needed our shareholders ' authorisation to turn our reserves into capital .
Several of you have asked questions about monitoring and supervision of the EIB , and I personally think that the question is totally legitimate .
When a financial institution grows in such a way , it is normal for there to be concerns about how it is monitored .
There is what is already in place , which is not insignificant : there is a certain amount of internal monitoring and , above all , there is external monitoring by an independent audit committee that reports directly to our governors .
Moreover , the Treaty of Lisbon makes provision for strengthening this audit committee with the addition of people who have proven experience of banking supervision .
Might we go further ?
I would remind you that the Court of Auditors already monitors all the EIB 's activities whenever these involve the use of funds from the European budget .
Should we go further towards a formal system of banking supervision ?
That is what Mrs Stauner was hoping for .
Mr Bullmann pointed out that things were perhaps not that simple .
In any event , it is worth discussing .
All I can do today is confirm that the EIB is fully open to being subjected to formal banking supervision , if it is considered worthwhile .
For the moment , we have organised , alongside the Financial Sector Supervisory Commission in Luxembourg , a form of informal supervision .
In answer to Mr Audy , I would say that the action that he requested last year from the Committee of European Banking Supervisors ( CEBS ) has indeed been carried out .
We have therefore questioned the CEBS , but it informed us that it itself did not have any authority in the area and that it could not even act in an advisory role .
We are therefore still in the hands of those who would like to take an initiative in this regard .
I say again that we are open to such initiatives .
A word in conclusion on cooperation between our two institutions .
Mr Mirow has already indicated that it was developing well , particularly in the Western Balkans , and with our neighbours in the East , most recently in Turkey .
All I want to say , in order to keep to my speaking time , is that we are in full agreement with the recommendations featured in Mr Mitchell 's report .
We think that it would be in the common interest of both our institutions , and of our borrowers too , for us to move towards a more rational and functional division of labour .
A word in conclusion on Mr Seppänen 's report .
I would like to say how much we have appreciated Mr Seppänen 's constructive approach .
He proposes a temporary solution , which allows the EIB to continue with its activities , but which fixes a date for an in-depth discussion of the role that the EIB should play outside the European Union .
I am in no doubt that this is a debate on which we will spend some time and that , I believe , has come at just the right moment .
Mr President , I want to thank all the Members who have spoken in this debate .
I believe most of the speeches expressed a high level of agreement and consensus on the guidelines that have just been set out by the Presidents of the two banks , at this time of crisis but also of opportunity .
By using their resources and actions , they intend to support such essential policies in the European Union as energy efficiency , the fight against climate change , support for small and medium-sized enterprises and support for clean technology in sectors which are very badly affected at the moment , such as the car industry .
I believe that there is also very broad agreement on the need to intensify , as far as possible , the actions of both banks in those countries particularly affected or hit by the crisis , both within the European Union and beyond our borders .
I agree with all those Members who have asked the banks to do more .
I do not agree with the person who told the banks to do less or to be more prudent at this difficult time .
I believe , in fact , that the existence of banks such as the European Investment Bank or the European Bank for Reconstruction and Development is particularly justified at a time like the present .
I have a few final words to say on the comments regarding the supervision of the EIB .
I am delighted that Mr Maystadt has demonstrated his openness , which in fact I had already seen before , towards reviewing this issue and finding a solution to it , as was previously mentioned in the debate last year .
Of course the Commission is ready right now to work together with Mr Maystadt to identify the most effective tools , which at the same time comply with our rules , in order to find a solution to such an important issue , particularly at a time when the EIB and also the EBRD are having to resort to markets where it is more difficult than in previous years to raise finance under favourable conditions and with the highest possible rating with which both banks work .
rapporteur . - Mr President , let me thank the Commissioner and both Presidents for their contributions and all the Members of the House who contributed .
Let me make three brief points in response .
The comments made by President Maystadt that the EIB 's additional financial support will allow quick disbursements and contribute to the real economy , notably by protecting good projects and helping viable companies in these difficult times , are very encouraging .
It is my opinion that we need to support struggling companies as much as possible to provide them with the credit they need to keep their businesses afloat and to ensure that jobs are not lost .
The report calls , however , for vigilance with regard to the use made of EIB loans by commercial banks , and for a code of conduct between the commercial banks and the EIB in this respect .
I hope Members would note that from some of the comments that were made .
Secondly , the current mood in Europe is one of apprehension : housing prices continue to tumble in some countries and people are hoarding their savings .
To combat the effect of this crunch , we must begin to talk about the recovery .
We took our eye off the ball when it came to the crisis we are in .
We are taking our eye off the ball again .
Recovery is coming : it may be at the end of this year or it may be next year , but it will come .
We need to start talking about recovery and preparing for recovery and , in particular , being competitive enough to take advantage of recovery .
I urge that on the three institutions represented here today and on the House .
Lastly , there is a need for the EIB and the EBRD to work together with other international and regional financial institutions - such as the World Bank , the Asian Development Bank and the African Development Bank - in order to promote development in areas further afield from Europe .
These banks have a positive impact in delivering aid to developing countries , but I believe that this impact needs to be properly assessed .
The financing of land ownership in developing countries needs to be looked at as an investment cost under the EIB external lending mandate .
I have raised this issue on a number of occasions .
The country I come from experienced famine .
We experienced all sorts of things that people in African countries are now experiencing .
What changed the north-eastern part of our island was that people invested in universally small pieces of land .
Look at this model for the developing world .
We need them as our future trading partners and I urge both banks to consider what I have said here , because I think that is a way to help the developing world .
This is an issue raised here today only minutes ago by the Prime Minister of Great Britain , and I commend that particular point to both banks .
Thank you , Mr President , for the opportunity to respond to this debate .
I hope we will continue to go forward in an atmosphere of mutual cooperation for the benefit of Europe .
rapporteur . - ( FI ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I note that there is a large consensus in this House regarding the legal basis for the European Investment Bank 's new External Lending Mandate .
As the EIB representatives arrived late and did not hear my initial speech , I would like to bring to their attention the fact that the matter is now being decided in the context of a codecision procedure and that the European Parliament is no longer a pushover , as it has been up till now in matters to do with the European Investment Bank .
The EIB will no longer be able to count on the support of a few trustworthy Members in the future .
In the codecision procedure it will require the broad support of the European Parliament .
For that to happen , the EIB will need to make its practices more constructive in relation to the European Parliament than we felt to be the case whilst this mandate was being considered .
I believe that during this time this has been made clear to the bank and I hope it understands the message that Parliament has sent it .
All 's well that ends well .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place on Wednesday 25 March 2009 .
Written statements ( Rule 142 )
in writing . - ( IT ) The role of the EIB in the implementation of European development and cohesion policy has become increasingly important .
Although the EIB has come in for some criticism in the past because it was considered somewhat removed from the economic and social cohesion objectives pursued by the European Union , by focusing its efforts above all on public bodies , it would seem to be changing course as far as the development and cohesion prospects for 2007-2013 are concerned .
By cooperating more closely with the European Commission , the EIB is today presenting itself as a modern and dynamic bank , and this is thanks to the increase in the number of types of financial projects designed to help restore the socio-economic balance of less-advantaged European regions .
As regards the implementation of measures , we are particularly pleased to see the introduction of support mechanisms for SMEs , which will be able to increase their investments as a result of having better access to the financial markets .
In addition to the package of measures laid down by the European Commission for assisting SMEs at Community level and which are currently being implemented , the EIB must provide added value and get SMEs ' activities up and running and developing quicker , as these represent the main , non-substitutable source of new jobs in Europe .
The basic issues dealt with in this report do not concern the Community guarantee per se , but rather the ways of making a more effective use of the finance granted by the EIB .
The EIB 's role as an EU instrument for supporting economic development is indisputable .
The EU has a series of financial instruments in the area of external relations and the EIB 's activity must be complementary to them .
With regard to the financing priorities , I am pleased that the current version of the report also features my proposal to include a necessary clarification about the energy projects in Eastern Europe and the Southern Caucasus , namely that they must be ' in line with the objective of Community policy of diversifying energy sources and with a view to guaranteeing stable and secure resources for consumers . '
I am pleased that European leaders have reached a compromise within the European Council regarding the financing of energy projects by the EU as part of the Economic Recovery Plan .
I am also pleased that the Nabucco project survived this compromise and that it has been declared a priority energy project .
I hope that the EIB will be involved so that this project can reach the necessary level of investment and that , starting from 2013 , we can transport gas from the Caspian Sea to Europe .
The ABB-ABM method as a management tool for allocating budgetary resources - Mid-term Review of the 2007-2013 Financial Framework ( debate )
The next item is the joint debate on the following reports :
by Mr Virrankoski , on behalf of the Committee on Budgets , on the ABB-ABM method as a management tool for allocating budgetary resources ; and
by Mr Böge , on behalf of the Committee on Budgets , on the Mid-Term Review of the 2007-2013 Financial Framework .
rapporteur . - ( FI ) Mr President , before us is the report on Activity Based Budgeting and Management .
I would like to thank the entire Committee on Budgets for its robust and consistent support , as well as the Committee Secretariat and all those who assisted me .
Activity Based Budgeting ( ABB ) and Activity Based Management ( ABM ) were introduced during the Prodi Commission , spearheaded by Commissioner Kinnock .
The stimulus for reform was provided by the report by an external group of experts that was commissioned to look into the crisis the previous Commission was going through .
This report represents a sort of mid-stage review of what is referred to as the ' Kinnock reforms ' .
The aim of ABB and ABM is to clarify administration by budgeting available resources and human resources according to policy area .
Administration should be able to show the results achieved clearly in order to make their value compared to input clearly visible .
The main focus is results and not so much how they have been achieved .
The approach reflects that used in business .
The system can also be expressed more simply .
It is not enough that money is spent - or even ' blown ' - legally or in accordance with the rules : the results determine the quality of administration , not good intentions .
The results also show how efficient management and administration are .
Let us take the structural and cohesion policy as an example .
If , two years and three months after the programming period starts , over three-quarters of the administration and control systems have not been adopted , administration cannot be regarded as being efficient .
It may be the fault of both the Commission and the Member States , though the fact remains that the administration is bureaucratic and inefficient .
ABB and ABM put the emphasis on and promote efficiency .
They reduce bureaucracy and strengthen the legal status of citizens and those affected by the administration affects , as regards management .
Activity Based Management puts the emphasis on personal responsibility , but it also allows for freedom of action .
With a good administrative system there is a clear division of responsibility .
Management has a face , at both the lower and the upper level .
Because the goal of management is good productivity , a manager should not put unnecessary constraints on work .
Only essential regulations are necessary .
There is no need for inessential reports and planning .
This report is based on recent studies , the most important of which are listed in the explanatory statement section .
Their general tone suggests that the implementation of ABB and ABM has been a success and has brought about a major cultural change in the Commission whilst at the same time helping to clarify personal responsibilities and accountability , and making management more effective , result-oriented and transparent .
Bureaucracy and the fact that it is on the increase , however , are a real danger .
We particularly need to assess whether the current annual Planning and Review Process involves too much planning , especially in comparison to the presentation and evaluation of the results achieved .
We should also examine how the five-year strategic objectives of the Commission , its ' Government Programme ' , are linked to the multiannual financial frameworks ( MFF ) and , moreover , to the Annual Policy Strategy .
The Annual Policy Strategy is often associated with elements that have no obvious connection with the Government Programme , the five-year strategic objectives or the multiannual financial framework .
This generally causes problems for the drafting of the budget , as resources are included in the revision of the financial framework , which is what the Council objects to in particular .
There have been clear examples of this virtually every five years .
The Commission has particular difficulties determining the ' negative priorities ' , to wit , the activities that are unnecessary or less important and which should be abandoned .
It is to be hoped , in this respect , that the Commission will be bolder in its approach .
It is still hard to estimate administrative expenditure , although this is budgeted separately , because administration is still financed from functional appropriations , and that includes executive agencies and , frequently , technical assistance in Member States .
That is why the report gives attention to the importance of monitoring human resources .
Finally , Mr President , the report before us is based on our European heritage - Article 15 of the Declaration of the Rights of Man and the Citizen of the great French Revolution of 1789 : ' Society has the right to ask a public official for an accounting of his administration . ' .
rapporteur . - ( DE ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , today we are discussing the mid-term review of the 2007-2013 Financial Framework .
I would like to remind you once again that we originally agreed on a series of interinstitutional declarations which this report calls to be implemented and which we are handing over to the newly elected Parliament in the form of guidelines for the future conduct of the European Parliament in its debates over the next few months .
There were three main declarations which required Parliament to be included in future discussions of revenue and spending policy , in a way which has never been the case in the past .
Therefore , the Commission undertook to present a report on the functioning of the Interinstitutional Agreement at the end of 2009 .
The Commission also undertook to present a full , wide-ranging budget review covering all aspects of EU spending , including the common agricultural policy , and of resources , including the United Kingdom rebate , in 2008 / 2009 .
In addition , we must not forget that a mid-term review of many of the multiannual programmes will take place in this House in 2010 .
Anyone who looks at the papers from the public consultation will see that the Member States , in contrast to the other bodies which expressed an opinion , are attempting to shirk their responsibilities and the undertaking they have entered into by moving directly to the subsequent Financial Perspective .
I have just come from a discussion on the so-called Economic Recovery Plan , and I would like to say that what is happening here , with the constant search for margins which are no longer available , and with new plans which infringe on the budgetary rights of Parliament , makes it clear that we cannot go on as before .
This is why I am calling on the Commission to present a proposal in the autumn which will not only cover the period after 2013 , but will also include a review of the Financial Perspective and open up new prospects for the future .
We state quite clearly in this report that we will focus first of all on existing deficits and the long-term outlook , without dealing in detail with the budgetary impact of the Lisbon Reform Treaty .
For this reason , in the Committee on Budgets we have voted with a large majority in favour of a three-step approach : resolution of the shortcomings and obvious deficits in the outstanding issues that we have not been able to negotiate successfully and clarification that there are budget headings - the main areas of emphasis of our policies - which are chronically under-funded .
For example , we will not achieve our objectives in research and innovation .
In the areas of headings 3a and 3b we will not be able to achieve what we wanted to with regard to culture , youth , education and ensuring our internal and external security .
The Common Foreign and Security Policy is also chronically under-funded .
This is why we have made the following offer to the Council : let us discuss these shortcomings and hold negotiations in this area , but not as part of the struggle over the annual budgetary procedure .
Our proposal is to resolve these problems in an ambitious review and , at the same time , to extend the existing Financial Perspective until 2015 or even 2016 , so that in the long term we achieve the necessary democratic legitimacy in the financial framework .
This will involve bringing the term of office of the Commission and the period covered by the financial framework more closely into line with one another .
In addition , we must not forget , in particular in the context of the debate on the European Investment Bank , to ensure that there are no shadow budgets outside the Community budget .
I would like to conclude by saying that this report is in agreement with the reports produced by the Committee on Constitutional Affairs .
This is why we are giving the following message to the Commission and the Council : for us the objective of achieving a five-year financial framework which runs in parallel with the term of office of the Commission is not negotiable .
We are only prepared to negotiate about how we achieve our objective . Thank you very much .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , thank you very much for these two reports - which we can evaluate as being for the new Parliament and , probably , for the current Commission still , as well as for the new Commission - on how we will negotiate , what tools we will have to manage the European budget and what kind of future European budget it will be .
On this point , I wish to congratulate us all , including Parliament and the Commission .
Over five years we have had unprecedented events .
We have revised the financial framework three times - which had never happened before - Galileo , the Food Facility and , now , EUR 5 billion .
That is exactly due to the capability of the institutions to use this rigid environment in which we operate in financial frameworks today to the best of our capabilities , to deliver where it was needed .
The Commission therefore takes note of both reports , especially Mr Böge 's report , which relates to the future shape of the European budget .
The Commission is ready , and will be ready , to negotiate on the basis of what you include in your report .
We will confirm our obligation to deliver the mid-term review and evaluation of how the IIA is working .
We confirm that we will deliver on what we have been obliged to do , and as has been promised in the IIA , on budget reform by the end this year .
Taking that into account , I would like to thank Parliament personally .
I am probably talking to you on one of my last occasions here and I would like to thank you for all the cooperation I had , for all the understanding I have had from you right from the very beginning .
In these difficult times we have been able to deliver very good results together .
draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on Foreign Affairs . - ( DE ) Mr President , firstly I would like to give my support to the three-step approach to the mid-term review developed and presented by Mr Böge .
It gives the opportunity for a careful analysis of our political objectives , the necessary changes to the tools available to us and the question of funding .
Ceterum censeo : as a foreign affairs specialist , I would like to demand once again an end to the chronic under-funding of foreign affairs .
The Commission has agreed to present an evaluation of this area .
We want to see short-term solutions as part of the current financial framework and workable options for the next financial framework .
Among other things , appropriate funding must be provided for the European External Action Service .
We want a European Union which fulfils its obligations in the area of foreign relations and can react rapidly and appropriately to crises .
Our credibility and our ability to be an effective partner depend on this .
We welcome the further development of European Neighbourhood Policy to include the Eastern Partnership and the Union for the Mediterranean , which gives the partners two efficient and reliable frameworks .
However , we will have to find out whether the financial arrangements are workable against the background of our foreign policy challenges .
We are calling for new legal regulations and appropriate funding in the next financial framework for cooperation with third countries outside the context of public development aid .
I would like to express one more wish for the future above and beyond the Lisbon Treaty .
I think that all the funding for external activities should be included in the EU budget .
This relates both to the European Development Fund and the Athena mechanism .
Our governments should not be afraid of creating transparency in a specific area in order to make it clear how much we are already undertaking jointly in the European area in terms of foreign policy , including and in particular in military action .
draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on Budgetary Control . - ( DE ) Mr President , I would like to congratulate the Commission on this communication , which it has presented openly in just the way we had imagined in the past .
Congratulations !
The 300 or more contributions are worth following up .
They are committed proposals which will help us to move forward .
I am very grateful that the subjects of accountability , transparency and the visibility of policies have been covered in the communication .
This will be a decisive influence .
My applause for the previous speaker was , of course , as a result of the impression created by the question as to what extent the Council can withdraw the European Union from the control of the European Parliament .
With regard to Lisbon this means that if they really acquire more rights , there will be no parliamentary and public control over the eight billion .
To make it entirely clear , I come from a neutral country .
I should be able to tell the people who elected me what is happening with the money .
I cannot do this , even though I am chairman of the Committee on Budgetary Control .
Therefore these considerations must be taken into account in future .
I am very grateful for your suggestions .
I am sorry that this debate is falling into political limbo , as we are already saying goodbye to one another and wishing each other luck .
I would like to do the same .
You have done a good job as Commissioner .
Congratulations !
draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on Industry , Research and Energy . - ( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , Europe has managed to create a so-called zero budget .
We are the only political level which has a zero budget .
We have 0.89 % of gross national income available to us and we are a good example of how carefully European taxpayers ' money can be used .
In addition , we have shown over a number of years that our revenue exceeds our spending .
We have a little left over every year and we should at last get around to using the money which remains for creating European added value in future .
Parliament and the Council should agree on how this money can contribute to European added value .
It is very important that we put these foundations in place .
Furthermore , we have just had a debate on the European Investment Bank .
I believe that , in particular in times of crisis , funds should be made available as quickly as possible .
We need an immediate allocation of funds , especially in the area of research , which offers future opportunities for new services and new products .
Simplifying the administration and reducing the amount of bureaucracy are important requirements , in particular for small and medium-sized enterprises , because they want to do business on world markets and to do this they need our support .
A strong focus on developing the infrastructures between the Member States , which the Economic Recovery Plan begins to address - to give one example , Nabucco and other energy pipelines - is crucial in this respect , because rapid investment is possible in this area .
If you think about how much steel is needed for these pipelines , it will become clear that our steel industry could , at least in the short term , achieve peak sales and job security .
We should work to achieve this .
draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on Regional Development . - ( BG ) Ladies and gentlemen , as rapporteur for the Committee on Regional Development , I would like to emphasise the importance of the mid-term review of the 2007-2013 Financial Framework .
I welcome Mr Böge 's report because it also indicates areas where changes and improvements are needed , thereby paving the way for a more efficient European Union .
From my committee 's point of view , we are mainly interested in how cohesion policy resources are spent , as this is one of the fundamental parts of the budget .
We maintain our long-term stance that the majority of financial resources must be targeted at the less developed regions which require the EU 's support .
I am pleased that the report does not conflict with our stance on this issue .
There are new global challenges present with a significant territorial impact .
In order to overcome them , sufficient funding must be guaranteed for the period beyond 2013 .
0.35 % of the EU 's GDP may not be sufficient to achieve our objectives .
We regret that the report does not fully take on board our suggestion , but we welcome the fact that it reaches a conclusion which is very close to ours .
We also reviewed the status of the Structural Funds where , unfortunately , there is a low level of use of resources in some countries .
National authorities are guilty to a certain degree of using them ineffectively in their work .
I believe that the complexity of the system is also one of the reasons for the low levels of use .
Our committee suggested simplifying the procedures and I am pleased that Mr Böge 's report follows a similar line of thought .
Our committee believes that we need to initiate the debate again on the spending of the resources which we are losing due to the N + 2 / N + 3 rule .
During the negotiations on the Structural Funds Regulation 2007-2013 , Parliament suggested that the unspent resources should be used for operational programmes with a better level of use .
The Böge report does not consider this idea , but I think that we must take it into account as a starting point for further discussion .
I would like to conclude by thanking Mr Böge for his constructive cooperation and the excellent report which he has compiled .
draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development . - ( NL ) Mr President , I had actually wanted , today , to address the Council , but I understand that no one from the Council is present and that somewhat less importance is therefore being attached to this debate .
This surprises me a little , as necessary undertakings in relation to the budget were made last weekend and then , when it comes to debating the specific funding of those undertakings , the Council cries off .
I stand here , in any case , with the requisite sense of irony .
Officially , we are here to debate the mid-term review , but in reality everything required has already been said about the economic stimulus package about which a deal was reached last weekend .
That package sets out where the mid-term review and the multiannual budget fall short as , since the beginning of the current multiannual framework , we have on three occasions in a row tampered with our own deals .
Galileo , the food aid for Africa and the way that that is funded were no things of beauty .
Now , once again , we have the debate about the economic stimulus package .
The Council has given undertakings but does not seem to know yet where the money is going to come from .
In the field of energy , for instance , just 2 billion or so has to be found for energy projects , not only from this year 's budget , but also from next year 's budget and possibly the one from the year after that .
That means that we will already be groping around in the margins of the agricultural budget .
In doing so , people will say , well , it is not agricultural money , it is the margin , but there only has to be one animal disease outbreak and that money actually will be needed within the agricultural budget .
Maybe you remember the outbreak of foot-and-mouth disease ?
Or what happens if the poor prices on the dairy market continue and intervention is required ?
Furthermore , the margin on the agricultural budget is only going to get smaller over the next few years .
The Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development 's report for the mid-term review quite rightly points that out .
I would therefore like the Commission and the Council - should the latter put in an appearance , or , failing that , in writing - to confirm that we will first be looking into the existing obligations in relation to agriculture before moving on to looking at what the margin is , and only then seeing whether that margin can indeed be put to use for other purposes .
These are the rules that we have agreed with one another .
If we do not stick to them , I think we would be throwing the baby out with the bathwater .

on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to thank Mr Virrankoski very warmly for his own-initiative report which deals with an old concern of the Committee on Budgets , in other words the questions : how do we go about our planning ?
Which planning tools do we make available ?
How do we ensure that our priorities are implemented ?
Thank you very much , Mr Virrankoski , for your hard work .
We believe it is important that our budget priorities are also reflected in the issue of human resources .
This is why we would like to make an offer to the Commission .
We should make better use of the Commission 's reporting obligations to bring together the Annual Policy Strategy and the draft budget .
We believe that the annual reports from the Directorates-General do not cover in sufficient detail or fail to consider altogether the hit rate from the budget .
What we would like to know is what happened to Parliament 's priorities ?
How high is the hit rate of the Annual Policy Strategy in this respect ?
In my opinion , we all have a lot still to learn and we also need a lot more experience , if the entire reporting process is not to remain a purely theoretical objective .
It is not a theoretical exercise .
It is necessary in order to be able to manage money correctly .
This is why we are asking for the management tools to be developed further , to help us to find out more about the way in which the budget is implemented and to include more of the implementation process in the planning procedure .
We are also asking ourselves how the annual management plan can be integrated more effectively into the Annual Policy Strategy .
We would like to know more about the costs of the ABM cycle , which also needs to be simplified .
It has been suggested that these questions should be included in the screening report .
We already have the current screening report - thank you .
We will study it and become familiar with it .
However , this means that these things must be included in the next report at the latest .
Two amendments have been tabled which our group cannot accept .
We do not believe that an extension to two years is correct , because it devalues the management tool even further , instead of improving it .
We want to make the ABM / ABB management tool better , not extend it over two years .
We will also vote against the study amendment .
It is a good amendment , but it has no place in this report .
We would like to thank the Commissioner for her work and we wish everyone success in the elections .
on behalf of the PSE Group . - Mr President , out of this budget review , we simply have to ask ourselves one question : does the budget reflect the political priorities of the 21st century ?
If it does not , it needs changing .
Is it flexible enough to reflect changing times ?
Because one of my frustrations at the moment with the budget is how we deal with negative priorities .
Too much is left in the budget because we cannot change things because of the restrictions of the MFF .
If I could turn to activity-based budgeting and management , I think the Commission has made huge progress on this but I would warn against over-bureaucratising this exercise because what we want to ensure is a qualitative evaluation , not simply ticking boxes .
We do not want people spending all their time evaluating themselves when they should be getting on and doing some work .
So we have got to be careful about that .
I personally think the annual policy strategy would be better if it was every two years or every two and a half years to fit in with the parliamentary cycle .
This would allow us to get a much clearer idea of our policy perspectives on top of the Commission 's annual work programmes .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , reform of EU finances is long overdue and I am grateful to Mr Böge , the rapporteur , for establishing this .
We need a fair , simple , transparent , reliable and sustainable revenue and spending system for the EU .
The finance for the EU budget should come only from two sources , in other words the traditional own resources and the payments based on the economic power of the Member States , that is , a proportion of gross national income .
In this case , the Member States should contribute a maximum of 1 % of their GNI .
Instead of making more money available for the EU , the funds should be redeployed to areas where genuine added value can be obtained on a European level , for example common foreign policy , trans-European networks , management of external borders and research .
On the other hand , there should be no more long-term subsidies .
This also means that the VAT-based own resources should be abolished and , most importantly , that there must be no EU tax , regardless of its form , while the EU is not a truly representative democracy .
It is right for there to be a ban on EU public indebtedness .
This is an excellent policy and must be retained .
In addition , all the EU finance ministers must at last make a national statement of assurance .
Thank you very much and I wish you every success in your new role .
on behalf of the UEN group . - ( PL ) Mr President , both of the reports presented today are based on making assessments we have been forced to make by the decisions of various bodies of the European Union .
Evaluating the tools of Activity Based Management , Activity Based Budgeting or ' Strategic Planning and Programming ' may be necessary , but give the impression of creating ' art for art 's sake ' .
How can achieving political objectives be compared with building a power station or transport networks ?
Is the European Union a business undertaking to which we are attempting to apply similar mechanisms of assessing efficiency ?
The same applies to the mid-term review of the multiannual financial framework .
Every day we are carrying out evaluations and diverting resources from our annual budgets .
These decisions are made by the European Council , which increases the funding available for implementing important individual tasks .
Stable multiannual financial frameworks give us all a multiannual sense of safety , and that is what we should appreciate the most , particularly in the difficult times at present .

I cordially congratulate Mr Böge and Mr Virrankoski on their very good reports .
Mrs Grybauskaitė , I wish you the greatest success in the coming elections .
on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , at the time of the vote on the current Financial Perspective all three European institutions - the Council , Parliament and the Commission - understood that we need reform if we want to bring ourselves up-to-date .
Now the Member States are shying away from this , which is the wrong approach .
In contrast , it is right that we need a balance between continuity and predictability on the one hand and the ability to adapt rapidly to new challenges on the other hand .
We need to change the rigid structure .
For this reason , the European budget - the medium-term financial plan - must cover five years and therefore be linked in political terms to the responsibility of an elected Commission and an elected Parliament .
This will contribute to transparency and to political clarity and the readiness to make decisions .
Today we have heard what Mr Brown is proposing and what should be on the agenda .
President Obama has also announced today his intention to invest 129 billion in renewable energy .
I would like to say that we should also make it clear to the citizens of Europe that we must modify the European budget .
We must link agricultural policy , for example , to environmental energy production and no longer make direct payments dependent on the size of the farms in hectares .
We must create more links with rural development which will really benefit the people who live in rural areas .
We must adjust all our economic policies and growth policies to the paradigm of climate change and sustainability , if we really take the debates that we have here and the Lisbon Strategy seriously , and we must adapt to the new challenges that face us .
This also means that we must invest more in education , research and development at European level .
All three institutions must find the political courage to do this together .
The report makes certain points which , to a limited degree , highlight what we have been saying for a long time ; namely , that the current Community budget is less than what is needed to properly and effectively promote the proclaimed economic and social cohesion within the European Union .
This is even more the case as , despite being in the midst of a crisis , the inadequate limits agreed in the current 2007-2013 Multiannual Financial Framework are not even being fully used - nearly EUR 29 billion short between 2007 and 2009 - and the amounts included in the budget are not being implemented as an ' expenditure ' objective , particularly with regard to convergence and to agriculture and fisheries .
On the other hand , new priorities are being added , which clash with what we believe should be the objective and central priority of the Community budget : an instrument of redistribution with regard to the costs , inequalities and asymmetries caused by the internal market , by Economic and Monetary Union and by the liberalisation of world trade , for those countries and regions in the European Union which are economically less developed .
We should have a Community budget that prioritises real convergence , based on social progress and on protecting and promoting the potential of each country , the sustainable use of natural resources and environmental protection , with the aim of economic and social cohesion , in addition to effective development aid .
We also stress that the Community budget should be based on a fair contribution from each country according to its gross national income , therefore firmly rejecting any more or less disguised attempt to introduce European taxes .
on behalf of the IND / DEM Group . - ( SV ) Mr President , as always when it comes to our budget , this is a conscientious and competent piece of work , but , from a purely political point of view , it has unfortunately got stuck in a rut .
As the previous speaker said , it is not a budget for the 21st century .
It is clearly based on the idea that the EU 's expenditure should just carry on increasing ad infinitum .
At some point we must put a stop to this .
I would like to mention three points very briefly .
It says here that if GNI falls , which it will do now , the EU 's budget must not be affected .
We cannot carry on operating like this .
It is better for money to be spent in the individual countries when they see their economies slump and collapse in the way that is happening now .
The report proposes more money for new areas of activity based on the Treaty of Lisbon .
This is arrogance towards the democratic ground rules .
That Treaty has been rejected .
At the same time , the report fails to propose any cost-cutting measures .
However , there is actually scope for large savings in agriculture , the Structural Funds , the European Economic and Social Committee , the Committee of the Regions and elsewhere .
Please make these savings !
( ES ) Mr President , the time has come to assess how the 2007-2013 Multiannual Financial Framework has functioned so far and what changes might need to be made in the almost four years left of its life .
Firstly , we must acknowledge the limitations of the Financial Perspective agreement adopted in 2006 by the Member States .
We denounced it at the time and can now clearly see how inadequate this agreement is .
Regrettably , the current Financial Perspective has demonstrated its limitations just at the worst moment , just at a time of crisis when the Community budget should have been acting as the spearhead for the European Union in the fight against the economic crisis and unemployment .
At the moment it would be an almost amazing feat to find EUR 5 billion in the Community budget to be used in the next two financial years in order to relaunch energy research , ensure energy interconnections or improve communications in the rural areas of the EU .
Entire regions of the European Union , such as mine , Asturias , are hoping to find a viable and sustainable way of using coal as a clean energy source .
This , for example , is what the Community budget should be used for .
However , its inflexibility and the under-funding of the various expenditure headings will only allow this EUR 5 billion to be found if the money for the common agricultural policy for the 2009-2010 period is not fully used .
This is not budgetary efficiency ; it is quite simply an accounting trick .
Mr Böge , as rapporteur , has today started a very useful discussion about transforming the Community budget into a truly active instrument of economic policy .
We cannot allow ourselves any more failed Financial Perspectives in the future .
( SV ) Mr President , as the shadow rapporteur for the Socialist Group in the European Parliament with regard to this matter , I would like to express my thanks to Mr Böge for his positive spirit of cooperation .
A long-term framework is important , but a seven-year freeze with rigid budget ceilings both overall and by sector is an unreasonable model in today 's rapidly changing world .
The current long-term budget , which is valid until 2014 , was , in fact , determined in 2005 .
What could we have known then of the current economic crisis , of the situation in Kosovo or Gaza , of the extent of the climate crisis or the extreme oscillations in food prices ?
No , we cannot carry on doing things this way .
My conclusion is that we must have a detailed overview of the current long-term budget : the multiannual financial framework .
This will apply to a particularly large extent , of course , if the proposal of the Committee on Budgets is implemented , in other words , the extension of the current financial framework by the suggested two years in order to synchronise it better with the Commission 's and Parliament 's terms of office .
So what do we want ?
Several things , in fact .
Firstly , our aspirations for the budget review itself .
In our view , it is unacceptable to focus only on the forthcoming financial framework .
The Committee on Budgets has adopted a number of amendments which mean that we will require the Commission to submit a proposal for a sound review of the content of the current long-term budget as early as possible .
This is particularly relevant , of course , if our demand for an extension should be implemented .
We also demand that the Swedish Presidency this autumn processes this proposal from the Commission actively and promptly .
We must get to grips with this .
Secondly , as regards the political approach , we have received clear signals from the broad open consultation that the Commission has carried out .
There are a few areas in particular where the EU must be more forceful .
These include climate policy ; jobs and growth ; and foreign and development policy .
If the EU is to be capable of playing a global leading role in these areas , it needs resources .
This is absolutely clear .
Currently , all of these areas are significantly under-funded .
Thirdly , we need to make a number of necessary technical changes .
I do not need to elaborate on this , as Mr Böge has already talked about it .
We want to have five years instead of seven and an adjustment to the period so that the new Parliament and a new Commission can have real influence over the framework that is to apply during their term of office .
Fourthly , we want a revised and fairer system for the EU 's own resources .
What we need now are rapid proposals and a sound mid-term review of the current long-term budget to bring rhetoric and resources closer to one another and to begin the process towards a more long-term sustainable approach to the EU budget prior to the next long-term budget period .
( PL ) Mr President , there are three points I would like to put to the Commission in this debate .
The European Commission needs to propose a system of support for the regions exceeding 75 % of GDP per head in the current Financial Perspective , but which will require continued financing in view of the strong internal imbalances in development .
I should mention that some regions of Spain , Portugal , Italy and Greece are receiving such transitional funding during the current Financial Perspective .
There also needs to be a final decision on a retreat from the latest attempts to re-nationalise the common agricultural policy .
It will not be possible to guarantee mandatory cofinancing of the CAP at similar levels by individual Member States , as this will result in competition being significantly skewed , or in other words the disintegration of the CAP .
Regarding the European Commission 's ambition to separate direct payments from production , it is also necessary to remove the great disparities in support for farmland of less than one hectare which currently exist between the old and new Member States after 2013 .
Otherwise , if the situation persists after 2013 , it will constitute de facto tolerance of two common agricultural policies on the territory of the EU .
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - ( PL ) Mr President , allow me to continue in a language that Mrs Grybauskaitunderstands .
Our contributions today are based on two completed budget years within a seven-year perspective .
This should clearly urge us to be cautious in the way our interventions are formulated .
It appears to me that the unanimous adoption of Mr Böge 's report to the Committee on Budgets shows that he has found the common denominator in the views of various political groups .
What strikes me is the fact that almost EUR 5 billion from the 2008 budget remained unused .
This must not be repeated .
It would be a failure for all of us .
There are initiatives by the Commission aimed at making it easier to obtain funding .
As that is how things are and should be , regional policy will not and cannot in future be a source of funding for those sections of the budget that are chronically under-funded : we spoke of this when negotiating the Financial Perspective , and this has been fully corroborated in our foreign policy : heading 1a and heading 3 .
If we continue to rely on 1 % of budgets , we will clearly fail to reach a reasonable solution for the European Union budget issue .
In the report I refer to , Mr Böge poses the key question of adapting the parliamentary term to the period of the Financial Perspective .
That is indeed the position of this House .
However , we should bear in mind some misgivings among countries affected by the cohesion policy , which are looking for some certainty about the policy and do not yet know exactly how reducing this period will affect this predictability in obtaining Structural Funds .
Finally I would like to cordially thank Mrs Grybauskaitfor cooperating with the Parliament , and of course , like other speakers , wish you success in your campaign .
Such multiplicity of voices , despite the differences in political views , augurs well in these elections .
( FR ) Mr President , Commissioner , first of all I would like to remind you that this debate is part of a long process that is several years old : European Commission consultations ; the ' health check ' of the common agricultural policy ; the fourth economic and social cohesion report ; and the Lamassoure report on ' own resources ' for the budget .
Our European Commission has announced its intention to present , at the latest in autumn 2009 , its main guidelines for this revision , which has given rise to some remarkable work by our Committee on Budgets , under the leadership of Mr Böge .
We know that this revision will be carried out once the next European Parliament is in place .
It is not our current Parliament that will carry it out .
I would therefore stress a basic political point , namely that we have almost achieved unanimity so that the future financial framework tallies with the political mandate of the future Parliament , and that is an arrangement that we would like to see perpetuated .
This seems very important to me because , finally , we will have consistency between the results of the elections and the budgetary guidelines to be overseen by the Commission .
Next , I wish to remind you that the opinion of the Socialist Group in the European Parliament is that the budget should be refocused on the fundamental missions : employment , growth and innovation , as our colleague Mr Färm said .
However , before finishing I would like to make a point of saying that the real future of the Union depends on this revision , and I hope that the future Parliament makes use of the Böge report so that it is able to achieve our European ambition in the face of the national self-interests relayed daily via the prevarications of the Council .
It is up to Parliament to issue European policies that give all of our fellow citizens real hope in a project that is political and not just economic .
( EL ) Mr President , today there are 27 of us and we spend less than 1 % of our collective wealth on the Community budget , roughly the same as we spent when there were 15 of us .
This figure alone illustrates why the Böge report we are debating today is one of the Union 's basic political ventures for the next five years .
It is a crucial question which we must answer : how much money and for what policies ?
Where do we set the limit , the measure of our ambitions ?
This time we must put everything on the table without any preconditions and the discussion must start from a zero base .
We shall have to address two important difficulties in this major negotiation :
the first is that now there are , of course , more of us than there were on the previous occasion when similar negotiations were held ; and
the second difficulty is that , unfortunately , this negotiation is taking place when the fat-cat cycle has closed and we are being hard hit by the economic crisis .
Nonetheless , the negotiation which is basically starting today with the very realistic approach taken by Mr Böge should confirm three basic preconditions which are pivotal to Europe :
firstly , that the future of farming in the Community must be secured even after 2013 ;
secondly , that the principle of cohesion and solidarity between the Member States must not end ; and
thirdly , that the time has come for us to talk about smart development , about money which also goes into brains and not just into asphalt and cement .


( EL ) Mr President , Commissioner , the report by the Chairman of our committee , Mr Böge , which we are debating today is , in my opinion , very interesting and crucial for three reasons : firstly , because it highlights certain sectors which require improvement ; secondly , because it outlines certain proposals ; and thirdly , because it paves the way for the major debate in the next parliamentary term .
Sectors which require improvement relate mainly to the mismatch between political choices and Community choices and the inability to manage our budget resources properly .
Proposals :
one very basic proposal is the five-year cycle of the financial framework and a policy of a five-year cycle for financial policies ; in other words , the term of our Parliament would coincide with political proposals at budget level ;
secondly , the question of flexibility is very , very important .
However , flexibility does not just mean change between sectors ; it means a general response .
Flexibility alone is not the solution to the problem .
So all this is preparing us for the major debate in the next parliamentary term on a new political and coordinated budget on new bases .
. - ( RO ) Reducing the financial programming period to five years , as also recommended in the Böge report - and I would like to take this opportunity to congratulate Mr Böge for his particular contribution to this report - would provide concrete proof of the European institutions ' maturity and an indication of cutting red tape .

At the same time , we must be realistic and consider how feasible such a measure is so that we do not end up in extreme situations where it will take us two years to adopt a five-year budget .
The key question is how we should go about simplifying the procedures so that European money is used within a reasonable period of time .
There are incidents which have already become legend involving European money which has failed to arrive months , if not years , after the time it was really needed .
Just allow me to give you an example involving money from the Solidarity Fund .
As you are aware , Romania is going to receive EUR 12 million for the five counties hit by flooding .
The floods took place in the summer of last year , we voted on the issue this month , but it is likely that the money will not arrive until roughly a year after the floods took place .
Romanians who receive this money will not be aware that they are being helped by the European Union .
rapporteur . - ( FI ) Mr President , I would like to thank all those who have provided feedback on my report .
I would say , now that the European Union is a Community of 27 Member States and 480 million inhabitants , that management and administration need to be simplified and made more efficient .
Activity Based Management and Budgeting clearly allow for that , with power and responsibility being divided at appropriate levels , to make for responsible management and the efficient implementation of programmes .
Finally , I wish to thank all of you , and I especially want to wish Mrs Grybauskaitevery happiness and success in her future challenges .
It has been a very great pleasure to work with you , and we have noted the excellent levels of cooperation there have been between Parliament and the Commission .
Thank you and best wishes .
rapporteur . - ( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to start by thanking the Commissioner .
After an initial phase of getting to know one another , we have worked together effectively , constructively and openly .
This has been evident in the results of a number of negotiations over recent years .
I wish you all the best during the next few weeks .
I would also like to extend warm thanks to my fellow Members for their hard work and for the discussion which took place in advance of tomorrow 's vote in plenary and to Mrs Guy-Quint in her role as rapporteur with regard to the budgetary consequences of the Lisbon Treaty .
We agreed on a common procedure for the key points of the reports , in particular with regard to the three-step approach and the time line .
As we understood that the current Financial Perspective 2007-2013 and , in relation to this , the Interinstitutional Agreement from 2006 represented the maximum that could be achieved in negotiations , we were also fully aware of the failures to act .
This is why it is so important that this report calls for forward-looking agreements in good time and ensures that they involve full commitment .
Our job over the next few weeks and months , in particular with regard to the current negotiations , is all about the Economic Recovery Plan and about reminding the Council that all the elements of the Interinstitutional Agreement , because there are a number of instruments which the Commissioner referred to , are an inseparable part of the overall financial framework .
If all the Member States were a little more aware of this , we would have made more progress with our existing regulations .
Finally , I would like to take the opportunity to call on the Commission in the autumn to take into account the fundamental findings and considerations which Parliament will adopt tomorrow .
This could be an excellent start to making the necessary ambitious changes in the form of a joint effort by the Commission and the European Parliament and , at the same time , to developing a budget which looks to the future and is combined with greater political legitimacy .
This is what Parliament is calling for very strongly and collectively in this report .
- The debate is closed .
The vote will take place on Wednesday 25 March 2009 .
Written statements ( Rule 142 )
A review of the current financial framework is a good opportunity for reflection , not only on the way in which available resources are allocated , but also on the future form of the EU budget .
When introducing changes to the present budget and when planning the next Financial Perspective , we should be guided above all by an aspiration to deepen integration and achieve specific objectives .
Recently we have been able to observe far-reaching changes in the structure of the EU budget .
Expenditure on the CAP no longer uses up the largest part of the Community 's cash .
Currently cohesion policy and measures connected with realisation of the Lisbon Strategy can count on the greatest support .
There is no doubt that this evolution is beneficial to the future of a Europe oriented towards an innovative , knowledge-based economy which guarantees a high level of employment .
However , such a change must not take place at the cost of undermining European food security and reducing the incomes of farmers .
Equally disturbing is the advancing reduction in the level of the EU budget in relation to the GNI of EU Member States .
Statistics show that if in the current Perspective we had maintained the budget at the level it was in the period 1993-1999 ( calculated according to the same percentage of GDP ) , we would have an additional EUR 200 billion available for the realisation of European policies .
The pressure which we observe to reduce the Community budget is harmful , because this limits its flexibility and its ability to adapt to changing needs .
Therefore I appeal for adaptation of the EU budget to new challenges not to be made by moving resources from the CAP , but by an appropriate increase in EU budgetary means .
Future of the car industry ( debate )
- The next item is the Commission statement on the future of the car industry .
Vice-President of the Commission . - ( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , this is now the second occasion in just a few months on which we have come together in the Chamber to discuss the situation of the car industry in Europe .
Regretfully , I have to say that the situation has worsened since our last debate .
In the last quarter of 2008 , sales of new cars fell by 20 % and car production by 29 % .
This negative trend is continuing in 2009 .
In January and February of this year , the sales figures dropped by 29 % and 18 % respectively .
The fall would have been larger , if some Member States had not launched successful initiatives to stimulate demand .
The crisis is not restricted to the European market .
Exports to third countries have been reducing rapidly which means that we can expect a negative impact on the European balance of trade .
Throughout the world the car industry is under pressure .
There is no prospect of improvement in the remaining months of this year .
Overall production of cars and commercial vehicles in Europe is likely to fall by between 20-30 % .
This means that around 5 million fewer vehicles will be produced in Europe in 2009 than in 2007 .
The negative forecast applies in particular to commercial vehicles where a fall in production of 35 % is expected .
As you know , the Commission has responded quickly to this situation .
In October 2008 , we made the first recommendations in the CARS 21 group for overcoming the crisis , including the involvement of the European Investment Bank and the scrappage incentives .
At the beginning of January I met with EU finance ministers to agree on a common approach to the crisis .
On 25 February the Commission presented a concept which was approved a few days later by the European Council and the Competitiveness Council .
Our responses are aimed directly at the most important causes of this very severe crisis .
These causes include rapidly falling demand , difficulty in accessing capital , liquidity problems and structural overcapacity .
In the case of structural overcapacity , this is a worldwide phenomenon .
What we want to do now is to maintain the integrity of the European internal market , avoid protectionism and preserve the solidarity of the Member States , in order to save jobs in the car industry .
I would like to state very clearly at this point that the industry itself must make the first moves .
Within CARS 21 we have established the basic conditions for a forward-looking car industry and are constantly improving them .
To be quite clear about this , the European car industry must now make efforts across a broad front to bring the types of cars onto the market which we need at the start of the 21st century , in other words , energy-efficient cars with low fuel consumption , which make careful use of resources .
On the political side , the Commission has made its position clear .
In our opinion , the most important task is to enable the financial system to function effectively once again , so that the high level of investment needed by the European car industry can be provided .
This high level of investment is necessary because the industry must develop and bring onto the market the European car of the future .
We have adopted the Temporary Community Framework for State aid , which gives the Member States more room for manoeuvre in solving liquidity problems .
This was a necessary step to ensure that otherwise profitable companies did not fall victim to the acute effects of the crisis .
In addition , we wanted to ensure that companies continued to invest in research and modernisation , in particular during the crisis .
We have made good progress with the measures that we have taken .
This year the European Investment Bank has already approved projects for the car industry with a value of more than EUR 3 billion .
Further projects with a total value of several billion euro are already being planned for 2009 .
These projects involve not only car manufacturers , but also suppliers to the car industry .
The European Investment Bank , which I would like to thank very much for its cooperation , is also working on a special programme for the medium-sized companies in the automotive supply industry which have been particularly hard hit by the crisis .
We will be making EUR 1 billion available for a research partnership with industry in order to accelerate the move to a low-carbon , energy-efficient economy .
This is needed in order to put European industry in a good position for the period after the crisis , so that it can really benefit from the positive development which we are expecting then .
We can also do something on the demand side .
A number of Member States have introduced scrappage incentives to stimulate demand .
The Commission has laid down guidelines which the Member States must follow for the introduction of incentive programmes of this kind .
This is aimed at ensuring that national measures do not have a discriminatory effect or interfere with the internal market .
I am pleased to be able to tell you that this has been successful .
Of course , we also need to cushion ourselves from the effects of structural change , keep social costs to a minimum and retain skilled workers in the car industry .
If the European automotive industry wants to remain competitive in the long term , some structural changes will be unavoidable .
The process will be painful , but it is inevitable .
We need a vigorous , competitive industry with significant employment potential , not companies which are permanently dependent on subsidies .
The European Commission has made money available from the European Social Fund and the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund to support workers who are hardest hit by the temporary effects of the essential restructuring of the industry .
In April we will hold our first round table with representatives of the industry , the workforce and the Member States in order to discuss the social dimension of the crisis and our response to it .
However , I would advise companies to provide vocational training now for their employees in order to improve their chances of finding jobs either in the car industry or in other sectors of the economy .
I would like to say something about the situation of a specific manufacturer , General Motors in Europe , which is made up of Opel , Vauxhall and Saab .
I would like to repeat at this point that it is not in the interests of Europe to allow this company to go under .
More than 200 000 jobs throughout Europe are dependent on the company .
I am not of the opinion that the disappearance of General Motors production sites in Europe would help to solve the capacity problem in the European car industry and is therefore to be welcomed .
The workers who are affected are not responsible for the crisis within their company .
The crisis comes only from America .
There is no national solution to this problem .
There is not even a European solution .
There can only be a transatlantic solution which involves the parent company .
Therefore , it is important for us to know what will happen in the United States .
At the moment we do not know .
Even the American Government does not yet know .
I am pleased that all the European governments with General Motors sites in their countries have agreed not to go it alone , but instead to work together on the European part of the solution .
The result of this solution can only be a successor company which is competitive and can survive on the market .
In addition , it must be possible to provide economic as well as political justification for the solution .
The jobs at General Motors in Europe are too important to allow them to be dragged into elections or the politics of national interest .
This is why the Commission will continue to make every effort to find a European solution of this kind .
Finally , the Commission will also ensure that it does not impose any additional financial burdens that could be avoided on the car industry at this difficult time as part of its legislative programme .
The time for talking about the severity of the crisis has passed .
We have in place a European plan with coordinated measures both at EU and at Member State level .
It is now time to act and to implement these plans in full . Thank you very much .
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , I would like to thank Commissioner Verheugen very much for bringing up this subject and to congratulate him on his success in coordinating the European measures and preventing individual Member States from going it alone during a meeting of ministers on 13 March .
We have requested a debate on the basis of your written report because we believe that the crisis is so serious that the European Parliament must discuss it .
We have drawn up a joint resolution which covers the most important points .
I would like to repeat some of what you have said .
Of course , the rescue of an individual company can only be successful by taking into account the company 's own responsibility - and the special circumstances of the General Motors case - together with the intellectual property rights and many other factors .
Overall it is a very large industry .
With a total of 12 million jobs dependent on the car industry , annual investments of EUR 20 billion , an annual turnover of EUR 780 billion and added value of EUR 140 billion , it is a very important industry , which has got into difficulties partly through its own fault - I am thinking here of the overcapacity and the model policies of some manufacturers - but in general terms mainly because of the effects of the international crisis on the financial markets .
Therefore , we welcome the fact that all these collective measures are being taken .
They should help to ensure that the car industry is more sustainable , to stimulate demand so that the industry can emerge from the crisis and to make it easier to provide investment and finance for buyers and for the industry .
In addition , these measures , as you said at the end of your speech , should not bring about new legislative problems which would apply additional pressure to the competitiveness of the European car industry .
On this basis we can adopt the joint resolution .
My group will vote in favour of the amendment from the Socialist Group in the European Parliament on paragraph 5 , to refer specifically to the special case of General Motors , so that with a broad majority we can encourage the Commission to offer workers job security and to open up new prospects for the car industry .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , for the foreseeable future humanity will not be able to manage without cars or lorries .
These means of transport must become less polluting and more energy efficient .
However , even the best possible and most desirable organisation of public transport will never be able to replace the flexibility of individual means of transport .
The European automotive industry is the sector 's world leader in technological terms .
This cutting-edge industry must be protected .
It is strategic for the whole of Europe 's industrial fabric .
Millions of jobs depend on it directly and indirectly .
The Socialist Group in the European Parliament wants to protect jobs .
It is calling for any potential restructuring to involve prior discussion with workers and their trade unions .
In the wake of what has been done for the banks , China has financed the modernisation and technological adaptation of the sector .
In this respect , I completely agree with Mr Verheugen 's remarks .
Europe must face up to its responsibilities .
Where necessary the European Investment Bank must be recapitalised so as to be able to aid the restructuring of the sector and its thousands of subcontractors , which are essentially SMEs .
We expect the Commission to continue organising constructive dialogue between all European countries in which there are sites belonging to US manufacturers and these firms .
We also congratulate Mr Verheugen on the initiative he has taken with regard to this .
However , we must still provide for protection of European intellectual property and repatriate to Europe patents for inventions created in Europe , but currently kept in the United States .
That is akin to aggravated theft or at the very least to expropriation without compensation .
It is unthinkable that European sites should have to pay royalties in future for know-how developed by engineers and workers in Europe .
As regards the situation of General Motors , Mr President , the Socialist Group agrees with what Mr Verheugen has said in this House .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , Commissioner Verheugen , once again we are meeting to discuss the subject of cars , and rightly so .
This crisis has hit one of our key industries very hard .
A total of 12 million jobs , 6 % of the work force , the largest investor in research and development - this makes discussing the problem and finding solutions very much worthwhile .
However , it has now become clear that the EU does not have suitable instruments available to deal with this crisis .
The Member States are pressing ahead individually , the framework for competition has at times been put at risk and the European Investment Bank , the universal cure-all , is overstretched both in terms of its finances and its staff .
Therefore , we need to find new approaches .
I am grateful to Commissioner Verheugen for adopting this framework directive very quickly in order to investigate how we should proceed in the context of competition law .
However , the EIB needs to be better equipped .
The EIB needs to be offered special conditions by the European Central Bank to allow it access to fresh capital , which is not currently permitted by law .
It is also important that state aid is more closely linked to the paradigm shift towards new technologies and away from the internal combustion engine .
In addition , funds , such as the Structural Funds and the agricultural funds , should be focused on developing stronger infrastructures for these new technologies .
I would like to look more closely at General Motors .
I agree with the Commissioner and the previous speakers that this has a European dimension , because the company has sites in many of the Member States of the EU .
The bottom line , however , is that the state , including the EU , should not intervene in the economy .
The crisis has not changed this principle .
Although the car industry is a strategic sector , it is not systemic in the same way as the banking industry .
Therefore , we should avoid taking shareholdings in the car industry .
However , I believe that guarantees are the right approach , if there is a private investor to take on a guarantee via the EIB .
This assumes that we are following the paradigm shift and moving into new technologies .
Daimler and the Abu Dhabi Investment Authority have recently taken this type of step , so it should also be possible for us .
I would like to thank the Commissioner for taking such active measures .
I would also like to thank my fellow Members for supporting the initiative involved in this resolution .
on behalf of the UEN Group . - ( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the car crisis is one of the most serious in the global manufacturing industry because , aside from having grave economic and employment-related repercussions for European factories and allied companies , it is hitting third countries , to which production has increasingly been shifted over the past few decades .
Moreover , if the Union is to bring the industry 's profits at least back up to what they were in 2007 , it cannot sustain the social cost of around 350 000 job cuts .
We should therefore welcome what is at least harmonised assistance for the sector , provided that it is in addition to job protection .
The key words for European businesses must be cutting-edge research and development .
It is clear that , as the market develops , recourse to mergers or strategic agreements is another possible route , but this must not be at the cost of Europe 's car-making tradition , which is the jewel in the crown of the Community manufacturing industry .
on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , Commissioner , what concerns us most in this debate are the workers in the car industry .
The figures are so huge that it is hard to imagine the scale of the problem .
In your speech , Commissioner , you made one of the alarming issues very clear , which is that in contrast to this there are also the figures relating to the appalling levels of overproduction and the striking failure to innovate in the areas of efficiency and climate protection .
If we are now prepared to give the car industry state aid , this must be dependent on the funding being used to secure jobs and to create sustainable employment .
In addition , it must be conditional on these companies genuinely focusing on innovation .
Something which makes me a little suspicious , Commissioner , is the considerable influence of the CARS 21 group and the influence of the industry in the process which is being kick-started here .
I am familiar with some German car companies and I am aware that they have been putting the brakes on when it comes to climate protection and efficiency .
I have also noticed with great interest that a new exemption was requested two weeks ago to suspend environmental requirements .
This must not happen .
The aid must be dependent on conditions such as the provision of jobs , genuine innovation , training and skills development for employees and this applies to suppliers , in other words , the many SMEs which depend on the large organisations , and to the workers in the car industry .
My group would be happy with that .
However , without these strict conditions , we will not be contributing to the creation of sustainable jobs .
on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group . - ( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , this debate on the car industry is unfortunately too late in the day and also inadequate in content .
In fact we are debating when decisions have already been made by the national governments outside any real European framework , and there have already been tragic social consequences in terms of unemployment and unemployment benefit .
Staying on this subject , the text of the resolution does not propose any fundamental elements for ensuring that the measures to be taken are effective and fair .
I should like to point out that , a few months ago , when dealing with climate change , Europe acted very differently , treating it as a real political issue .
It is not doing the same with the economic crisis .
It has given a free rein to the governments which have acted in a disjointed manner and , I would say , also with an eye to winning votes .
This is of course due to the political weakness of the Barroso Commission , but also to the difficulties involved in tackling situations that call for new powers with decisions relating to industrial , social and employment policies .
Can we accommodate nationalist measures ?
Can we sustain a wave of redundancies when aid is being given to firms ?
Can relocations in the car industry and associated businesses continue to take place , as they have done in the case of the Italian firm ITONO and now with Indesit , which is in another fundamental sector ?
Can we extend the scope of the European funds without increasing them ?
On this basis , it is not enough to say that this is a car-industry problem and that so many meetings have taken place .
We need to set guidelines for action , by which I mean that firms must not lay people off when they are being given aid , that the aid must be linked to innovation as laid down in the climate-change package and the Sacconi regulation , and that relocations and competition between EU Member States must stop .
My group has tabled amendments on all of these points .
In other words we need a new policy , one that this Europe does not appear to have and one that we must create before social hardship becomes so severe that we cannot give our workers any definite answers .
- ( SK ) The dramatic fall in global demand for cars has also affected Europe .
In the final quarter of 2008 , European car sales showed an annual decline of over 19 % and they are still falling .
Many of the key Member States of the European Union have decided to support the vehicle-manufacturing sector .
However , doubts are appearing concerning the approaches that have been selected and drawn up , as they smell of protectionism .
I therefore support the standpoint of the European Commission which is warning against protectionist measures in support of domestic producers .
The call made by the Commission to resolve structural problems as a matter of priority is to the point , especially with regard to high overproduction and investments in innovative technologies .
All public sector support must be transparent and it must respect EU rules on competition and state aid .
We must prevent rivalry over subsidies between the various players on the European market .
The situation is made more difficult by the fact that these rules do not take account of global competition , particularly from the US .
It is expected that US subsidies for resolving the problems of car producers will be extended to parts suppliers as well .
If the situation becomes acute , Europe may face not only the issue of how to sort out production and sales problems in Europe , but also the problem of imported cars that have been produced with excessive state aid .
In such a situation Europe could also threaten to enforce measures within a World Trade Organization framework .
Many European countries have introduced scrappage schemes and efforts in this direction have now begun in the UK .
However , scrappage schemes can resolve the crisis only in the short-term .
They quickly deform markets , drain money from the public purse and cause the postponement of necessary solutions that focus on investment in innovative technologies .
- ( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I wished to speak on this matter also because , over the past few months , I have followed with great interest the work carried out within the European Parliament , within our committees and , now , in this Chamber , precisely on the requests for specific commitments that we have put to the car manufacturers of our continent .
We have set important targets , especially in relation to CO2 , when we asked them to play a part in meeting the major targets Europe has set itself of reducing CO2 over the new few years , ambitious targets which all the countries across the world are watching with great interest .
We have asked the automotive industry to achieve an average reduction of 120 mg by 2012 and a further 25 mg reduction by 2020 .
These are substantial targets that require substantial investment .
We should add to this the fact , which has already been mentioned by some of my fellow Members , that the automotive industry directly or indirectly employs 12 million workers in Europe , that is , 6 % of the European workforce .
If Europe is serious about giving its car industries the means to meet the CO2 targets we have set and if , on the other hand , we want to keep people in their jobs , which is a problem for our continent right now , then we need to implement a coordinated strategy for providing aid to this sector .
Various Member States are launching plans for boosting sales , which is all about maintaining the level of turnover of cars .
However , such policies must form part of a single Community strategy for preventing dangerous market distortions .
( DE ) Mr President , I would like to state very clearly that I fully support everything that the Commissioner has said .
In my country , Austria , many thousands of workers are directly or indirectly affected by the crisis .
This also applies to our neighbour , Slovakia , and many other countries .
I am particularly concerned because , of course , it is clear that the car industry is a key industry .
It should not be seen as an outdated industry , because a great deal of research and development is linked to the existence of the car industry in Europe .
In addition , a large number of small and medium-sized supply companies are dependent on the car industry .
We always visualise the very large companies and have little sympathy for them .
However , when I look at all the suppliers , the small and medium-sized enterprises , the situation seems quite different .
In particular , I would like to reinforce what you have said , Commissioner , about General Motors .
We have a large General Motors manufacturing site in Vienna .
We are familiar with the fears of the people who are waiting to find out about the decision to be made in America .
I hope that this will be a positive example of transatlantic cooperation in which America - because it is not the American Government , but America as a whole - which is always demanding that Europe does more to combat the crisis , sets a positive example , so that Europe has the opportunity to succeed with its own companies .
Finally , a word about protectionist measures .
Only a common European solution will be acceptable .
That must be our goal .
- ( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , this is the third debate on the car industry that we have had in the space of a few months .
Our demands have not yet been adequately met by the Commission or by the Council , either from the point of view of support for demand or in terms of external competition with appropriate support for exports .
While I regard the European measures for tackling the financial crisis as significant , I do believe , in contrast to what was concluded at the recent summit , that the European response to the recession and to the difficulties of the real economy is inadequate .
We are at war , and our soldiers , which are our businesses , are firing blanks .
The automotive sector is a fundamental sector of our industry , subject to new requirements , to reorganised factors of production and to strong demands for process and product innovation .
Incentives to coordinate the EU-wide scrapping of all types of protectionism ; refinancing , including by the European Investment Bank , of credit lines targeted at this sector ; incentives for environmentally friendly and hybrid cars only ; more funds for research into clean engines ; and effective action within the World Trade Organization to create conditions of real reciprocity within the global car market are the most significant requests of those who do not wish to encourage the deindustrialisation of Europe in one of its crucial high-added-value and employment sectors .
- ( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , Commissioner Verheugen has stressed the need to be very careful not to propose or support protectionist measures .
I should like to remind him that , across the Atlantic , such measures are being taken and they obviously benefit European manufacturers ' competitors .
I have the impression that the strategy pursued thus far by the European Union is not sufficiently targeted - as it should be in such a critical situation as this - at supporting only or mainly ' European ' cars designed and built here in Europe .
I have seen trade union representatives cry crocodile tears over deindustrialisation , relocation and so on .
Years ago , when a person such as I upheld these arguments at the meeting even of a large Italian car manufacturer , they were not taken very seriously .
Today , unfortunately , the facts prove us right .
If Europe limits itself to measures designed solely to boost demand , ones that can obviously be directed towards non-European producers also , it will not obtain the results we require .
Rather , to obtain them , it must take urgent action to boost European car production .
European producers must be encouraged to invest in research in order to guarantee the future of an industrial sector of excellence , one that also includes car-production ancillary companies , which today are also suffering from the European banks ' policy of withholding funds .
( PT ) We should not forget that last November we had exactly the same debate in this House , when it was already clear that we were facing a crisis in the capitalism system , which required fundamental changes to increase the purchasing power of the majority of the population .
We therefore insisted on increasing wages and pensions to ensure a fairer distribution of income .
This still remains the basic measure that could increase demand and thereby ensure that the car industry and its suppliers continue to have a secure market .
Unfortunately , the social situation is becoming increasingly complicated , because politicians are not adopting the necessary measures , and unemployment and precarious and poorly paid work are still on the rise .
We therefore insist on new policies which prioritise jobs with rights , which support industrial production in the EU countries and which counteract the strategy of the multinationals that are using the crisis as a pretext to cut jobs , increase worker exploitation and boost profits .
It is vital that EU industries are duly supported in order to maintain and create more jobs with rights .
However , we also need to pay particular attention to countries with more fragile economies , such as Portugal , by increasing financial support to prevent unemployment and to help micro- , small and medium-sized enterprises in the car industry , associated sectors and the parts industry and also small repair shops .
( FR ) Mr President , globalisation gone mad and its mad exponents are making European automotive workers pay a high price for the consequences of their fundamentalist open-market and free-trade order .
The financial virus of the US mortgage crisis has thus been able freely to contaminate the financial system , the world banking system , leading by extension to the contamination of our economic system and the destruction of our businesses and jobs .
As a Member , together with my colleague Mr Le Rachinel , for the French regions of Picardy , Nord-Pas de Calais and Normandy , in which thousands of jobs are doomed , I am anxious to tell you that European trade policies have a human and social cost that is unbearable , unjustifiable and unacceptable .
However , the fanatics of the open market persist and sign up to this .
Only today , Mr Brown and Mr Barroso reaffirmed their refusal to protect Europe , our industries and our jobs in the name of the all-important free market and globalisation .
The socio-globalists of the left , the liberal globalists of the right and the alter-globalists of the extreme left who want to see and understand nothing are betraying and abandoning European workers .
Globalists all over the world unite !
Workers of our countries disappear !
That is the manifesto of the globalist party .
Moreover , the continuous harassment of motorists and the motor car by eco-citizens , governments and certain local councillors is scarcely compatible with the defence and promotion of our automotive industries .
Finally , the demagogues of the extreme left who see the current crisis as a godsend for the revolution are totally incapable of meeting the needs of French and European workers .
It is through economic and social patriotism , national and European preference and national and European protection that we will be able to breathe new life into our industrial sectors .
( SV ) Mr President , the problems that the European car industry is facing are to a large extent a result of the economic and financial crisis .
In that respect , it is hopefully a problem that will pass .
However , in another very important respect , it is also a problem that has to do with overcapacity .
Therefore , in order to safeguard the future of the European car industry , it is extremely important for us to ensure that it can be based on realistic and sensible business plans and have responsible ownership .
This prompts me to say that if we are to succeed in retaining a successful car industry in Europe with all the opportunities that entails for technical development , healthy employment and the role that the car industry plays in the European economy , the state aid that is currently granted by the Member States must be used to guarantee its survival through the recession and the financial crisis , but not to distort competition between Member States or between car manufacturers .
State aid that distorts competition and creates mistrust between Member States in actual fact jeopardises the European car industry 's ability to survive , and this is the context in which I would like to put the question about what has now happened in Slovenia and France and the state aid that has been granted in France .
One of the Commission 's most important tasks is to ensure that there is no infringement of the rules that have been set out , to monitor what has happened and to create complete confidence in the fact that no state aid is granted to the detriment of any other Member State or any other car industry .
Aid that leads to a distortion of competition undermines the future of the European car industry and will have negative consequences for both employment and technical development .
- ( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , first of all I should like to express my appreciation for the timely commitment made by the Commission and the Council in support of the car industry and ancillary and parts companies , but unfortunately it is still not enough .
Since the first measures were taken by the Member States , the sector has picked up slightly : data from Italy records an 18 % drop in sales in February , while in January there was a 22 % drop .
Clearly , in view also of the data that Commissioner Verheugen himself was quoting , Europe needs to move forward by guaranteeing more finance from the EIB and even greater coordination of national measures to prevent unfair and discriminatory competition .
Europe also needs to try to coordinate its efforts closely with workers ' representatives and trade associations when creating restructuring plans , so as to put together a European strategy for reviving the sector on the basis of investment in research and new technologies .
Also in light of the terrible data relating to redundancies and unemployment benefit measures , I call on the Commission to submit more effective proposals on the best use of the Social Fund and the Globalisation Adjustment Fund .
( SV ) Mr President , what we are experiencing now is both a financial crisis and a climate crisis .
We can observe that there are some car companies that are coping better than others with this double crisis .
Some makes and models of cars are coping better with these crises , namely those that have invested in sustainable technical development .
Then there are companies like General Motors , which demand USD 350 million from the states in which they operate .
We must not throw good money after bad .
We need to support those people engaged in the car industry .
We should support the regions where there are problems and the small businesses within the supply chain , but we must ensure that we do this with products that are appropriate for the market of the future .
The Commission can do more by opening up the Structural Funds , the Social Fund , the regional funds and the agricultural fund , to biofuels , social measures and the regions .
Furthermore , I believe that the European Parliament 's activity in Strasbourg should be discontinued .
- ( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the car industry is one of the key industries of the European economy and one that has a great deal at risk with the current crisis .
Therefore now is not the time to repeat that we should be against protectionism and unfair competition .
All that is terribly superfluous .
Now is the time also to offer strategic , clear and courageous certainties to European producers and workers with - I wish to stress this point - a support plan that gives the same opportunities to all the Member States .
The objectives include , of course , guaranteeing better use of the European funds , including the Globalisation Adjustment Fund , but above all simplifying and increasing financial support for the sector through the EIB and the ECB , so that it can apply for low-interest loans , and also simplifying the administrative procedures .
To conclude , I would say that more generally , the aim is to keep the sector competitive and to ensure that all European initiatives , in addition to tackling the current crisis , can help to launch a positive phase of restructuring and transformation of the car industry .
( NL ) Mr President , British Prime Minister Gordon Brown captured it perfectly this morning when he said that we must not bumble around , now is the time for action .
It is indeed time for sustainable and robust action .
We , Europe , must now take control of and lead the switchover to a sustainable automotive sector , something that is only possible if we guide the sector through this severe and life-threatening recession .
Hence this call , Commissioner Verheugen , to you and to the Commission .
We really want Europe , all of us together , to do much more for the future of our car companies .
We , as the European Union , have a unique opportunity here to show that we are on the side of the workers - of the 200 000 Opel workers in Germany , Poland , Austria , Spain and Belgium , to name just a few .
For that reason , quite specifically , the European Investment Bank must release credit and exploit its leverage functions and potential to the maximum extent .
Two weeks ago , we had a consultation with the upper echelons of the sector here in Parliament and it became clear that there is one huge problem : the sector is suffering from an acute shortage of capital .
That is why cheap loans and state guarantees are absolutely necessary , not only for survival , but above all in order to unflinchingly make the switchover to the car of the future , a car which is to be electric , hybrid and , most importantly , environmentally friendly , and which is ready to go into production .
The social partners , and certainly the employees ' representatives , must be closely involved in this European recovery plan , as this issue is also a litmus test for social dialogue at European level .
Commissioner Verheugen , it is not too late for action .
Please , let us not allow the situation to go to the dogs .
( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I would like first of all to thank the Commissioner for his speech , but also for his bold actions over the last few weeks and months concerning the car industry and his clear statement that a solution must be found for General Motors , because the company is needed , in particular in relation to the strategy on new drive systems .
I would like to thank him very sincerely .
I would also like to pick up on what Mr Langen said about the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats supporting our group 's amendment , because I believe this to be important and also the right thing to do .
I am grateful that we as a Parliament are making a statement on General Motors .
For a long time it looked as if this would not happen , but better late than never .
Thank you very much .
In our resolution we have discussed short-term measures .
However , we should also speak about medium-term measures , as the CARS 21 group of experts has done , and about harmonising car tax rates .
I know that this is a difficult task , but it would represent a European economic recovery plan for the car industry .
We are in a time of crisis and we should start these measures now .
The 27 finance ministers should make a joint effort .
( NL ) Mr President , Commissioner , you yourself already said that we cannot have a debate about the motor industry without also saying something today about General Motors .
We welcome the fact that you brought Europe 's ministers for economic affairs together to find a European approach .
That is also what you , personally , would like to see - a European approach rather than a national one - yet such a European approach is also only possible if you involve the European Works Council in the debate and if that European Works Council is given all the information the law stipulates it should receive .
I am therefore going to ask you quite explicitly whether you are prepared to launch an initiative of that nature and to pass on the information possessed by each of the Member States separately , provided to them by General Motors , to the European Works Council .
Secondly , you referred to the European funds that serve to relieve the social impact on workers .
It is my belief that these funds must also be used in a preventative manner .
We must prevent job losses rather than simply using these European funds where jobs are lost .
Mr President , on behalf of the 350 Ford workers being made redundant at Warley and Dunton in Essex , and on behalf of the 1 400 General Motors workers at IBC vans in Luton - double if you count suppliers - I want to welcome tonight 's announcements that these car manufacturers will not be allowed to go down .
However , when Commissioner Verheugen says that General Motors must not follow a ' beggar my neighbour ' policy , can he join with me in asking them four questions : firstly , to fully disclose their restructuring plans , not simply to the German Government but to the British and other Member State Governments too ; to complete a full environmental impact statement on the carbon impact of the EUR 3.3 billion package they propose ; to bring clarity to the future of their joint venture with the French company Renault for van production in Luton , in particular ; and to outline to you and to us what guarantees exist that a subsidy in the short term will secure production and employment which are genuinely sustainable ?
Last week I met the Luton workers , one of whom told me that IBC 's chances of survival are just 50 / 50 , in a town which has had vehicle production for more than 80 years , and where 50 % of jobs are still in manufacturing .
I will fight for the future of their jobs .
( ES ) Madam President , Europe must firmly back the car industry as it is key to developing a technologically advanced economy , which can lead the fight against climate change and ensure high standards of efficiency , safety and quality in personal and goods transport .
The EU is the world 's leading producer of cars and the second largest manufacturer of lorries , with 19 million vehicles , of which 20 % are exported .
The sector accounts for 3 % of GDP , 6 % of employment , 8 % of national incomes and one-sixth of household expenditure .
The structural and strategic challenges for the car industry have increased with the current crisis .
We must tackle these challenges with a European , sectoral and forward-looking approach and through social consultation .
Only in this way can we prioritise employment and training , prevent discrimination and unfair competition and defend European interests at world level .
In the short term , we must provide temporary incentives and financial support , through the European Investment Bank or other means , to ensure the survival and recovery of the sector .
( RO ) In Romania car sales fell by half by the end of 2008 .
The turnover for Romania 's car industry saw a 7 % reduction in 2008 in relation to the estimated level before the crisis started .
In view of this economic downturn affecting the whole of Europe , I believe that national governments and the European Commission must join efforts to support the car industry .
We must take into account that slowing down car production triggers a crisis vertically in the industry , in other words , affecting the manufacturers dependent on the car industry : manufacturers of cables , engines , electrical equipment and so on .
In specific terms , it results in thousands of workers becoming unemployed .
For example , to support the local car industry , the Romanian Government has adopted the ' Rabla ' programme .
Under this programme , consumers are compensated for taking cars more than 10 years old to be scrapped with a premium which will be used as a down payment for purchasing a new car .
I therefore invite decision makers to reflect on this example and propose a viable strategy for supporting the European car industry during the current global economic crisis .
( ES ) Madam President , I must thank the Commissioner for his willingness and efficiency in inviting all the interested parties to prevent and solve the problems of Opel Europa , and also the car industry , which is certainly a competitive industry , faced with the global problems of General Motors in the United States .
Furthermore , I strongly urge him to make this rescue - which is giving fresh impetus to the recovery of Opel Europa - into an example of how the European Union can tackle the misery caused by globalisation , with the necessary response that we have also learnt from globalisation , through a European approach .
As a result , I should like us to be able , first of all , to repatriate the rights of ownership over European innovation .
We also need a system of adequate guarantees to give Opel Europa the independence that it needs to continue offering us ever safer , more innovative , more energy-saving and more sustainable cars .
We also need to increase social dialogue , by empowering the Opel trade unions and the European Works Council , which are demonstrating a great deal of joint responsibility .
Finally , Commissioner , I believe that , in order to defend the European approach , we also need to get there first .
In other words , to ensure that Europe enjoys credibility and success , we cannot wait for governments like mine , in Aragón , which has already offered a guarantee of EUR 200 million .
Europe still seems to be thinking about it .
On behalf of the 7 000-plus workers at Opel 's Figueruelas plant , I ask you to please do more .
( DE ) Madam President , if Europe provides money and , in particular , if the Member States provide a lot of money to help the car industry out of its crisis , it cannot only be a question of maintaining the status quo and preventing bankruptcies , because a number of other concerns are involved .
The most important of these have already been mentioned .
This is about ensuring that people who are looking for jobs and who need jobs can find them in the long term .
Therefore , we must provide more support for new technologies , innovation and , most importantly , for sustainable transport systems than we have done in the past .
For this reason , we should link all our measures to these objectives , so that we do not have to reproach ourselves in a few years time with the fact that , if we had thought about this years ago , we would not be in the next new crisis .
- ( CS ) Ladies and gentlemen , the crisis is a test of EU cohesion .
Unfortunately , governments are adopting short-term measures on an individual basis , such as the scrappage schemes which are not coordinated , although they have brought instant positive results to combat the crisis .
If we are to criticise US measures against fair competition and protectionism , we should focus all the more closely on joint strategy within the EU .
Scrappage schemes help to reduce emissions , increase road safety and prevent unemployment in the car industry , which provides a living to 12 million employees and thousands of firms in other sectors .
Given that we imposed tough environmental and safety requirements on the automobile industry in CARS 21 , scrappage schemes offer a good opportunity for a joint approach by European governments , especially at a time of crisis , and they should be financed from common resources .
I am asking the Czech Presidency to begin negotiations on this matter .
( SL ) Commissioner , I totally agree with you when you say that the car industry is structurally overheated and that we need greener and more energy-efficient cars .
We would be making a mistake if we tried to maintain with aid measures the direction we have taken hitherto , namely that of quantitative development .
We will be most socially minded and show the greatest solidarity if we support ecology and energy-orientated restructuring .
The current crisis has also shown that the European car industry is strongly interconnected .
This kind of industry will simply not tolerate protectionism on a national level .
I expect Community policy to take account of that .
Vice-President of the Commission . - ( DE ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to thank you first of all for the unity in this House and for your broad support for the Commission 's policy .
I believe that it is very important and also a very important signal to the workers in the car industry who are at the centre of this debate .
This is only right and proper .
Some Members , including Mrs Harms , Mr Hökmark and others , have looked at the question of the link between innovation and competitiveness .
Once again I would like to emphasise very clearly that without this link with innovation the European car industry will not be competitive in the long term .
The goal of our policy is to ensure that the European car of the future is the most innovative , in other words , the cleanest , most energy-efficient and safest , in the world .
I have confidence that our manufacturers , our technical specialists and our engineers can achieve this .
We have the potential to achieve this .
I would like to move on to a second subject , in other words , financing in the crisis .
The banks are not providing funds .
Companies are not able to obtain the loans that they need .
The European Investment Bank is now our all-purpose tool .
I must state quite clearly that the European Investment Bank has already reached the limits of what it is able to do .
The car industry is not the only sector which we are asking the EIB to help with .
What about finance for small and medium-sized enterprises ?
What about finance for our highly ambitious climate-protection objectives ?
All of this is being provided by the EIB .
I know now that we will receive requests from industry which the EIB simply will not be able to respond to , because we want it to do business on a sound basis and not to create bubbles , as others have done .
Therefore , the problems are likely to increase in the second half of the year and we must prepare for this to happen .
I also support everyone who has said that we need intelligent incentives to ensure that all the cars which we want to come onto the market are actually bought .
I very much share Mr Groote 's opinion on CO2-based vehicle tax .
The Commission proposed this a long time ago and I am very sad that some Member States did not follow this proposal at the time .
Mrs De Vits spoke about the role of the trade unions and the works councils .
I am very pleased to be able to inform you that the last detailed discussion which I had before coming to this session was with the Chairman of the works council of General Motors in Europe .
We are in constant , regular contact and exchange all the information that we have .
I must say that until now I have benefited more from this exchange of information than the Chairman of the works council .
I find out more from him than he does from me .
However , I hope to be able to return the favour in future .
In a few days , we will be meeting with the European metal-working unions and automotive unions and , of course , the unions are the main parties involved in the round-table meetings , which I have already mentioned .
Therefore , I believe that we have met all the requirements .
In the ' catch-the-eye ' procedure there were several references to scrappage incentives .
We do need to ask ourselves whether this will really help in the long term .
It could also be the case that we are creating artificial demand which will lead to another collapse .
Nevertheless , all the manufacturers were impressed by this idea because it will help them through the very difficult phase which they are in at the moment .
It is like a supply of oxygen and it has helped significantly to ensure that there have as yet been no mass redundancies among the major manufacturers in Europe and that they have been able to retain their workforces .
In this respect , I believe that it has fulfilled its purpose .
The scrappage incentive is a standard European initiative , in the sense that clear rules are in place which everyone has observed .
It goes without saying that we cannot finance the incentive from the Community budget .
The budget is not intended for this purpose and this would not be possible either in political or legal terms .
The incentives have also had a positive cross-border impact .
Mrs Roithová , your country in particular has benefited very much from the generous incentive schemes in other European Member States .
There is a certain amount of European solidarity involved here , which should not be underestimated .
I have seen this debate as a call to continue to take action on this issue and to stay on the ball .
I can promise you that we will do so .
As far as the car industry is concerned , we have established excellent cooperation among the different parties .
I hope that it will not be necessary to debate the European car industry again during the term of office of this Parliament , but if it should be necessary , the Commission is ready to do so at any time . Thank you very much .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow ( Wednesday , 25 March 2009 ) .
Written statements ( Rule 142 )
The distinctive characteristics of production and marketing mean that any downturn in the European automotive industry has an effect on other sectors in every Member State .
In addition to the fall in demand due to the economic crisis and the liquidity problems resulting from the financial crisis , the automotive industry is also struggling with long-term structural problems : high fixed costs , oversupply and price competition have meant that many car manufacturers had already begun to focus on cutting costs and increasing internal efficiency .
The situation is not expected to improve in the near future , yet over the long term the car industry has promising global prospects , and for this reason it is especially important for the EU car industry to be able to survive this setback and be ready to take advantage of opportunities when demand begins to increase once again .
To this end , it is indispensable that consumer expectations be met and that more environmentally friendly , safer and smarter vehicles be designed .
The primary responsibility for handling the crisis rests on the industry itself .
The EU and Member States can contribute to this by helping to create appropriate conditions and suitable prerequisites for competition .
Targeted and temporary state aid at EU and national levels can supplement the efforts of the sector to survive the crisis , and can help mitigate the negative effects of the impending restructuring on employment .
The latter must be the subject of particular attention at both national and EU levels .
It is good that the second debate on the crisis in the automotive industry acknowledges the motions of the European Parliament which were presented during the debate in February .
Ensuring the competitiveness of the single market is most important for us .
We notice with unease measures being attempted by some Member States which may result in violation of the principles of competition .
Therefore we welcome decisions which aim to establish pan-European frameworks of action .
In this context we must also continue to assess the influence on the European market of the situation in the industry in the United States and Asia and possible reactions of the Community .
We are pleased to note the fact that the importance of stimulating market demand has been emphasised .
Balancing such measures as making low-interest loans available and simplifying administrative procedures for obtaining financial resources , and on the other hand creating incentives for consumers to buy new cars , can help to stimulate the market .
The proposal to use the crisis to carry out a kind of ' cleansing ' in the automotive industry remains unchanged .
We see the possibility of creating products with a new level of quality , based on new , environmentally friendly and safe technologies which are an answer to the challenges of new trends in 21st-century Europe .
The car manufacturing industry is a sector which employs roughly 2.3 million workers and on which another 10 million jobs are indirectly dependent .
A large number of SMEs , subcontractors and suppliers are affected by the financial crisis .
Social Europe assigns the same level of importance to economic development and social development .
To be able to preserve jobs and a decent living for employees in the car manufacturing industry , it is important for companies to have access to finances .
I urge the Commission to make sure that European funds , such as the European Social Fund and the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund , will be used so that employees in the car manufacturing industry can receive training and support when they are affected by the companies in this sector experiencing a drop in activity .
The legislation adopted by the EU on promoting green vehicles is generating investments in the design and production of cars with lower carbon dioxide emission rates .
However , what is needed is time , innovation and , above all , significant investment in human resources , as well as in new production capacity .
The procedures giving economic agents access to funds for research and innovation must be simplified at national and European level , while research programmes must be geared towards specific areas , involving applied research , in the car manufacturing industry .
The performance and sustainability of the European aviation system - Aerodromes , air traffic management and air navigation services ( debate )
The next item is the joint debate on
the report by Marian-Jean Marinescu , on behalf of the Committee on Transport and Tourism , on the proposal for a regulation of the European Parliament and of the Council amending Regulations ( EC ) No 549 / 2004 , ( EC ) No 550 / 2004 , ( EC ) No 551 / 2004 and ( EC ) No 552 / 2004 in order to improve the performance and sustainability of the European aviation system - C6-0250 / 2008 - , and



the report by Marian-Jean Marinescu , on behalf of the Committee on Transport and Tourism , on the proposal for a regulation of the European Parliament and of the Council amending Regulation ( EC ) No 216 / 2008 in the field of aerodromes , air traffic management and air navigation services and repealing Council Directive 2006 / 23 / EEC - C6-0251 / 2008 - .
rapporteur . - ( RO ) The Single European Sky II package is designed for the entire air transport system , with direct , positive ramifications for airlines , air navigation service providers , traffic controllers , airports and the aeronautical industry .
It is actually the legislator 's response to the need to harmonise and make European airspace and air traffic more efficient for the benefit of the environment , industry and , first and foremost , passengers .
The agreement reached with the Council on the SES II package is a step forward for us on the road to consolidating the European Union .
This is the next natural step after a common market , adopting a single currency and creating the Schengen area .
From 2012 we will have a Schengen airspace .
Routes will be shorter , traffic control more efficient and air navigation services will be optimised and , in the future , integrated .
As a result , flights will be shorter , less fuel will be used and carbon dioxide emissions will be lower , which should normally lead to a reduction in airline ticket prices .
The compromise reached following the negotiations with the Council reflects the need to speed up the formation of functional airspace blocks .
We have reached agreement on a deadline for putting FABs into operation , which is six months ahead of the European Commission 's initial proposal .
The operation of FABs is the main element in creating a single European sky .
This is why I welcome the agreement signed in November last year for the largest FAB , which covers Central Europe .
I would like to take this opportunity to call on the European Commission 's support in approving the project linked to the Danube Romania-Bulgaria FAB as part of the TEN-T financial framework .
With the support of the representatives of the French and Czech Presidencies , whom I would like to take this opportunity to thank , we successfully managed to balance the decision-making relations and skills between the Member States and European Commission , particularly with regard to the performance scheme , a key element in the SES II package .
The Commission will make the decision concerning the proper harmonisation and implementation of the targets covered in the national performance plans .
The Commission 's initial proposal has been supplemented by two elements introduced by Parliament .
The first of these is the Functional Airspace Block System Coordinator .
We considered it necessary , based on the TEN-T model , to appoint a coordinator to facilitate the signing of FAB operation agreements , thereby accelerating the process of achieving a single European sky .
The second element relates to the clarification of the ' common projects ' concept and the definition of the financing sources relating to them .
The European Parliament also managed to have special attention focused on the human factor .
The compromise reached with the Council also clarifies the interdependencies between SES II and EASA , bearing in mind that extending the Agency 's powers at aerodromes , ATM / ANS and ATC is actually the ' safety ' element in the package .
I think that it is extremely important for a clear , complete definition to be found for aerodromes which come under the provisions of this regulation .
The new specifications issued by EASA must integrate with the existing ones .
In addition , the opportunity has been given to mention the derogations granted so far .
I also succeeded in introducing some provisions referring to the need to strengthen and extend the consultation process involving all stakeholders .
The reports which will be voted on tomorrow mark an important step forward on the path to creating a single European sky , and I am sure that they will be a success and a triumph for all stakeholders .
Vice-President of the Commission . - ( IT ) Madam President , honourable Members , on the eve of the European elections and two weeks away from the adoption of the third maritime package , the European institutions are about to send another positive signal to EU citizens , demonstrating that , at this time of crisis in particular , the Commission , Parliament and the Council are on the side of the citizens , are capable of tackling a difficult crisis and are capable of providing practical answers .
The single European sky reform is an important signal that will have consequences for industry and for citizens and that will reduce environmental pollution .
The data that we have on the difficulties being faced by the air transport sector are well known - other data have arrived today and I shall list them during my answer - and therefore we have shown that we can react to a crisis , and this is definitely a positive thing , as it makes Europeans realise that the institutions exist and that they are capable of facing up to difficulties .
For this reason I should like to thank Parliament for the speed with which it has adopted this decision .
I am grateful to Mr Marinescu , with whom I have a long-standing friendship forged by our working together , side by side , in Parliament - I know his abilities , which he has been able to show once again by working alongside the Commission and producing an important result in a very short amount of time - and , with him , I should also like to thank all the shadow rapporteurs , who have enabled the institutions once again to support the people of Europe .
This has certainly been a major commitment and one that , I repeat , constitutes an effective response .
Air transport is in fact waiting for practical and tangible measures that will enable the requirements not only of carriers , but above all of passengers , to be met .
To this end I have insisted on the introduction of a service regulator , to ensure that monopolies do not hinder service quality .
Furthermore , the swift introduction of an air traffic network manager , in addition to facilitating the deployment of national systems , may set an example for all modes of transport , but also for the telecommunication and energy sectors .
I should like to point out the support offered by Parliament to the Commission with regard to the development of a new instrument for financing cross-border infrastructure projects , stemming from , among other things , the SESAR programme .
Parliament has understood the importance of the partnership and has reaffirmed the important role performed by operators in terms of implementing this ambitious approach .
I am pleased to see Parliament joining with the Commission in recognising , through a joint declaration , the importance to be attached to the human factor .
In particular , Parliament has given its backing to strengthening the position of the military through the creation of the single sky , and this is a position that I fully support , not least because , for a time , I was a military air defence controller , and so I cannot fail to understand the important role that military controllers perform in the air traffic sector .
I would cite , by way of example , operations rooms that I have visited , where civilian operators and military operators work side by side to guarantee the safety of air transport .
The joint declaration , which I support , stipulates that the Commission must affirm the need to take human factors duly into account in order effectively to implement the single European sky regulations , must be convinced that safety can never be taken for granted and must recognise the need to further strengthen the culture of safety , in particular by integrating a reliable accident alerting and just culture system , so as to learn from accidents that take place .
The Commission declares that it will build the service model on the basis of a genuine culture of safety , integrating an effective accident alerting and just culture system as a basis for safety provision .
It will ensure that professionals responsible for guaranteeing safety have a sufficient level of skill , and it will promote the involvement of staff representatives in the creation of the single European sky at national , functional-airspace-block and Community level .
It will assess the integration of human factors in the creation of the single European sky no later than 2012 .
To conclude , for the first time every aspect of the entire aviation sector will be dealt with .
Thanks to this new approach , safety of movements on the ground in airports , in air corridors and during landing and take-off will be handled by a single body .
This is therefore the start of a new phase for the Aviation Safety Agency .
Such a swift adoption of the package - and I thank you once again - demonstrates the strong political will that exists at European level to realise the great ideas of an important predecessor of mine , who is sadly no longer with us : Loyola De Palacio .
She wanted a real single sky for the benefit of European citizens .
Today we have been able to realise this reform .
Madam President , the Committee on Industry , Research and Energy regards the Commission proposal as positive , as it solves the shortcomings of the first package with regard to coherence , effectiveness , cost reduction and improved management .
The main contributions of the Committee on Industry relate to financing .
The ATM Master Plan requires huge resources , which is why it must be possible to use public financing where necessary , and the initial investment should not be pre-financed by users .
They also relate to the role of Eurocontrol , which we believe needs to be completely overhauled in order to ensure its good governance and control over the provision of services .
As regards the privatisation of services , I still think it is more efficient to carry out a prospective study , without any preconceived idea , and to decide according to the result .
Lastly , I would highlight once again that building the single sky is fundamental to making progress towards the Kyoto targets and that , as a Spaniard , I am satisfied that the error that arose regarding Gibraltar has been rectified .
I also want to thank the Commission for its excellent cooperation , and the services of the Committee on Industry and my parliamentary group for their invaluable help .
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - ( DE ) Madam President , Mr Tajani , ladies and gentlemen , we should all be very grateful to Mr Marinescu .

In a very short time , he has succeeded in coming to an agreement with the European Council with the support of the Vice-President of the Commission .
This second package of legislation will allow us to manage our airspace more efficiently in the years to come .
It will also enable the airlines and in the end the consumers to save up to EUR 3 billion and to cut CO2 emissions by up to 12 % .
These are important objectives in terms of costs , the consumer and the environment , which are now within our grasp .
In the first of the two regulations , the Member States undertake finally to do what they should have done years ago , which is to establish functional airspace blocks within a short time .
These blocks of airspace , which are no longer divided up along national boundaries , but instead according to functional flows of air traffic , will allow airspace to be managed more efficiently and more safely and will help to prevent unnecessary holding stacks in the sky .
I am very grateful for the Commission 's support and for the rapporteur 's determination to appoint a European coordinator for the functional airspace blocks , because we will have problems in ensuring that the Member States really do establish these new blocks .
It is important that a coordinator working on behalf of Parliament and the Commission will be able to press for these new blocks to be created .
It is also important that military airspace management is integrated into this system and that we have a genuine master plan for the single European sky , which applies and implements the technological results of the air traffic control research project SESAR .
Finally , it is also important for us that the European Aviation Safety Agency is given the task of implementing the standards and management activities for airports , air traffic management and air navigation services .
This organisation must be provided with the staff and equipment it needs in good time .
We are very much in favour , and I hope that the Commission will support us in this , of the EASA consulting with the relevant areas of industry with regard to practical solutions in all its new activities , so that really effective solutions can be found .
on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( DE ) Madam President , Commissioner , I know of a song which contains the line ' There must be unlimited freedom in the sky ' .
This is simply not true .
The European sky consists of a patchwork of 60 national control centres .
This is twice as many as in the USA , but with half the amount of air traffic .
In addition , military no-fly zones prevent planes from flying in a straight line from one airport to another .
This is not sustainable , particularly in the light of the fact that the volume of air traffic doubles every 10 to 15 years .
When the amount of traffic doubles , the safety risk increases fourfold .
This led us in 2004 to initiate the single European sky concept .
Unfortunately the Council of Ministers insisted at the time that Member States should agree among themselves which airspace blocks should be created .
This was a mistake , because the Member States have now wasted a great deal of time and become bogged down in issues of national competence .
Now the Parliament and a good rapporteur have put in place a regulation with clear objectives and ground rules for the introduction of these airspace blocks by 2012 .
This makes a contribution to safety , to climate protection and to reducing the costs of air traffic .
Flights which are 50 kilometres shorter , a 12 % cut in CO2 emissions , savings of EUR 3 billion for the airlines and fewer delays for passengers .
In brief , I hope that this sectoral reform in the sky will finally be successful and will take us a step further .
Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , it is my turn to express my delight at this report on the single European sky .
It is a real step forward , which many of us welcome .
These two regulations meet high expectations on the part of all the actors concerned in all the countries of the Union , since the excessive fragmentation of the current system has very costly effects and , above all , causes serious inefficiencies in terms of traffic management .
Thanks to this new European sky , aeroplanes will gradually abandon the non-linear flight paths that they are currently forced to use to follow flight paths that are more direct and consequently more efficient and , above all , cheaper for travellers .
I am genuinely delighted that this will allow a reduction in air transport 's environmental impact , of course , and in its cost to the consumer .
Together with the harmonisation of safety standards , this also constitutes a very beneficial step forward .
It will be able to simultaneously make air transport safer and quicker , of course , but also , and above all , less polluting and less expensive .
On behalf of the Group of the Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe , I would however call on the Commission to make available financial resources , in particular , and logically the funds for the trans-European networks , but also contributions from the European Investment Bank , to finance all common flagship projects aimed at improving European air navigation .
I believe that , once again , Parliament has successfully overcome its divisions in order to go forward and provide the impetus for the Council to reach a swift agreement on this report , which is essential for European aviation and the reduction of its environmental impact .
I , together with the Commissioner , am also delighted that this sends out a concrete , tangible signal to our fellow citizens .
on behalf of the UEN Group . - ( LV ) Thank you , Madam President .
I welcome the fact that the new legislative provisions will unite air traffic management technologies and make progress towards a combined functional air space block system , thus reducing the fragmentation of European Union air traffic .
As a result , more effective planning of air traffic routes will reduce fuel consumption and harmful emissions , and air transport will thus become more environmentally friendly .
In relation to the discriminatory and unlawful payments , however , that Russia collects from European Union carriers for flights over Siberia , we were unfortunately not able to provide the European Commission with a mechanism that would make its position in the talks with Russia on this point adequate .
In my view , however , in one way or another the European Union will have to have this mechanism at its disposal , in order to influence situations where a non-EU country discriminates against European Union carriers ; the principle of such a mechanism is , in fact , none other than mutual equality , so that task remains for us to accomplish .
Thank you .
on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - ( DE ) Madam President , firstly I would like to thank the rapporteur who has entered into these negotiations with a great deal of commitment and expert knowledge .
These negotiations were necessary , as although the boundaries in the sky are not visible , they are clearly present .
They were primarily national boundaries , which , it must be said , were based on national egoism and which have helped to prevent the unification of the European airspace .
In light of the speed of travel , the safety requirements and the huge growth in air traffic , it should have been possible to introduce these improvements much earlier , especially as the concept of airspace blocks has been under discussion and negotiation since 2004 .
I believe that we can now make significant progress in this area .
It is not only a question of improving the flight paths , increasing passengers ' comfort and improving calculability ; it will also , if it is implemented effectively , result in a reduction in emissions .
We urgently need this reduction in air traffic emissions , because the volume of air traffic is growing so much and because our air traffic emissions trading system has not been very effective .
The Council has opposed this right until the end .
Its opposition was not as successful as it had hoped and therefore even I can vote in favour of this report .
on behalf of the IND / DEM Group . - Madam President , in this building there is an insatiable demand for power and control - levels of control which previously only the USSR would have dreamt of .
EU controls that kill innovation and EU power to distort market demand , flying in the face of what the voters expect .
Now even the sky is not the limit .
Under the excuse of efficiency , the EU - one of the most inefficient bureaucracies in the world - wants to control efficiency in the sky .
The EU seeks to put obstacles in the way of innovation from free-marketeers such as Easyjet and Ryanair because they please the public , and we know how the EU ignores the public .
The EU wants a functional air space block system coordinator : a fancy title for a dictator ruling over air traffic control , airports and also industry .
This is the same kind of over-control that eventually sent the USSR into oblivion , but all for the sake of flying whose flag ?
This is all about EU flag-waving .
It is not to satisfy the public and has nothing to do with demand .
Success depends on efficiency and meeting demand as can only be achieved in the free market - not by damaging EU controls , not with EU lack of understanding and not with EU lack of expertise as displayed in this building .
Let us resurrect efficiency by allowing the supply to feed the demand and allowing innovation .
This is not the business of the EU .
Please vote against .
- ( IT ) Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I welcome the creation of the single European sky , and I am reasonably certain that it will improve efficiency and safety , and also reduce the environmental impact of aviation .
Moreover , I should like to point out that Italy has already launched ' Blue MED ' with Cyprus , Greece and Malta .
This is a functional airspace block that improves flight efficiency and enables costs to be reduced precisely by eliminating the fragmentation of the skies across a large section of the Mediterranean .
In short , when the aim is to increase transparency - I am addressing this point to the Member who spoke before me - and types of incentive are introduced that make services more efficient , we cannot fail to say that we are satisfied .
To conclude , I also welcome the objective of optimising airport management .
I therefore hope that something is done soon to improve airport passenger services which , as in the case of Rome airport , are often unsatisfactory .
I would like to thank Mr Marinescu for his excellent report and the Commission for its initiative .

( DE ) Madam President , both of the reports by Mr Marinescu concern improving the organisation of air traffic in Europe .
We have managed to achieve a great deal in a first reading agreement , not least because of the important and successful work of the rapporteur .
This is important , particularly at a time when the airline industry in Europe and worldwide is in a difficult situation .
However , we should not only be concerned about improving functionality here and now in the current crisis .
We should also continue to focus on important issues from the past .
These include passenger rights .
Before the crisis of 11 September , we drew up a passenger regulation on the subject of denied boarding and delays , in which we deliberately used the airline industry 's need for protection as our standard and not the passengers ' need for protection .
The airlines have blatantly exploited this in the current situation : the crisis , plus bad winter weather conditions .
Their behaviour has been shameless .
My next point concerns liquids .
Many things are changing in the skies at the moment , but the old regulation on liquids still remains in place .
It does not make anyone safer .
It provides a few people with employment in the security checks at airports .
It annoys a lot of people and as has already been said , except for an alibi , it has produced no results .
Mr Tajani , you and your predecessor have assured us that this ridiculous regulation will be abolished after checks have been made to show that it does not bring any additional safety benefits .
We are waiting impatiently for the regulation to be abolished .
( DE ) Madam President , it is not simply the case nowadays that aircraft fly across national borders .
Although the people up on the right , who may not exactly be saying ridiculous things , but are hiding behind their beautiful flags , do not seem to have understood , it is the case that the European airspace is fully deregulated and in this situation it is essential that this deregulated airspace should be centrally managed , centrally monitored and centrally implemented .
These two reports represent the right way of achieving this .
It is essential that flights in Europe should be better coordinated .
It is also essential that the same high safety standards apply everywhere and I am convinced that the path that we are taking here is the right one .
As a result of our current airspace blocks , there are too many flights , which are too long and have very circuitous routes .
In addition , CO2 emissions are much too high and the airlines are subject to enormous costs .
All this will be changed and improved by the regulation which we will adopt tomorrow .
I would like to take this opportunity to thank the rapporteur , Mr Marinescu , for all his excellent work .
I think we have worked together to achieve something very positive for the people of Europe .
That is what we are here for .
Madam President , Mr Tajani said at the beginning of the debate that this sends a good signal to Europe 's citizens .
I agree , and that is the purpose of our work .
I want to refer particularly to aerodromes because it is important that we bring these establishments under the umbrella of sensible European legislation .
I think it is sensible , as it is protecting the citizen , and we do so by extending EASA 's remit .
There are , however , a few areas where I would seek a little bit of clarification .
I think it is correct that we eliminate small aerodromes just serving the recreational or leisure aspects of flying and take them outside the scope .
Amendment 44 tabled by Mr Marinescu and others is important , because it changes the basis from the weight of the aircraft to the runway length of 800 m .
I wonder , however , if the Commissioner or Mr Marinescu could , when summing up , give me an assurance that the definition of ' open to public use ' is properly explained so that there is no ambiguity as to the actual definition of public use .
Could they explain whether it means commercially viable , whether it means people buying tickets for flights , or whether it means ones to which the public can actually get access ?
That could be a future stumbling block which I hope could be cleared up .
Vice-President of the Commission . - ( IT ) Madam President , honourable Members , I am very pleased that this House has voted unanimously , or virtually unanimously , in favour of the single European sky reform .


I understand that only Mr Nattrass is against it , but I do not understand why : perhaps either I have not understood , or he has not read the draft single European sky reform properly .
I do not understand what the Soviet Union has to do with it : everyone is free to say what he or she wants ; I do not feel nostalgic about the Soviet Union .
However , with regard to the serious points contained and raised in the debate , I should like to point out that this is a practical response that we are providing to a crisis within the air transport sector .
The data supplied today by IATA are worrying .
According to statements made by the Director-General , in this financial year the sector stands to lose USD 4.7 billion , or almost EUR 3.5 billion , thus performing worse than was initially expected .
Its profits are set to drop by 12 % .
Thus faced with a crisis of this kind , we are however capable of introducing cost-cutting standards .
In all , once applied and working at full capacity , the entire reform , including SESAR , should lead to a total saving of approximately EUR 40 billion , and then the next important figure - and I think that this is close to Mrs Lichtenberger 's heart - is also that of the reduction in pollution , which will be substantial .
With regard to the problem raised by Mr Zīle concerning reciprocity and overflight taxes to be imposed on all aeroplanes flying over Siberia , the issue was the subject of an agreement signed with Russia , but it has not yet been applied .
We have raised the problem during several meetings with the competent transport ministers .
It was also raised at the last summit the European Commission had in Moscow with Mr Putin and Mr Medvedev , and with the transport minister , with whom I met bilaterally .
I do not see significant progress being made by Russia , but we shall persevere .
The principle of reciprocity , which could have been included in the text , did not receive the Council 's support .
Most of the Member States opposed it , and so a debate was held at the last Council of Transport Ministers .
Since there was no possibility of including it , it was not included in the legislative text .
However , with regard to the issues raised by Mr Romagnoli concerning the airports in the city of Rome , I can say that , as usual , checks are always performed by the European Commission .
I can say that , as regards the application of the regulation safeguarding passengers with reduced mobility , Fiumicino and Ciampino airports can be held up as examples because they applied the Community regulation earlier than other airports , so much so that I even presented the new regulation at the end of July last year at Fiumicino airport .
This does not mean that we should rest on our laurels : I am thinking of the scandalous business of the 42 million items of luggage that are mishandled across the world , of the 1 million suitcases or bags that are lost .
Faced with this data I have launched an inquiry by the Directorate-General for Energy and Transport .
I have allowed one month for answers to be obtained from all the competent organisations , and if these answers confirm the data supplied and featured in the press , I shall set about proposing a reform of the existing regulation , which I consider to be slightly weak as regards passenger protection .
I am thinking of perhaps entrusting some national bodies with the task of checking that the Community regulation is applied .
My attention is certainly focused on the ' passenger rights ' issue , and so I wish to reassure you , in response to the question put by Mr Romagnoli , and to reassure Parliament as a whole , as well as to confirm my ongoing commitment to try to safeguard passenger rights even more .
It is no coincidence that , following the regulation submitted and approved on air transport , regulations on maritime transport and bus transport are being discussed .
I would also say to Mr Evans that the criteria taken into consideration are the commercial value of airports and runway length , to which he referred .
The definition to which he refers has been somewhat superseded by the criteria listed .
I believe I can once again thank you and insist on the matter of air transport safety which , with this reform , will be even stronger , even though I am convinced that flying in European skies today is safe , but there are never any limits where safety is concerned .
We must always do more , and therefore in all of these sectors in which it is possible to strengthen transport safety I will see through my commitment in full , and I will try to submit proposals to Parliament and the Council that really show EU citizens that the European institutions are there to help them .
To conclude , I am grateful to you once again .
I am grateful to Mr Marinescu , but I wish to thank all the Members , all the coordinators , all the elected representatives who have taken the floor during this debate , because we could not have done without such a strong commitment from Parliament - which has shown on this occasion that it does not want to waste any time - to intervene in practice on issues that directly affect EU citizens , a commitment that it has made alongside the Commission .
I am also grateful to the European Commission services , which have done so much , and I am pleased that during the speeches someone thanked the services , also , for their cooperation .
Together , we have also all been able to make the aeronautical industry realise that the institutions are capable - I repeat and I stress - of tackling a difficult crisis .
I believe that the people of Europe , the world of enterprise do not expect across-the-board aid or mere legislative measures from us , but need to be shown that the institutions are capable of being there , are capable of supporting the citizens , entrepreneurs and all those who are committed to tackling this crisis .
They need to feel that the institutions are capable of standing by them and of supporting them in overcoming together this difficult period for the European economy , which will survive - and I am deeply convinced of this - by implementing serious and precise rules that apply to everyone .
The lack of rules and existence of weak rules has given rise to the financial and economic crisis .
We Europeans , who identify ourselves as part of a civilisation that is the fruit of Roman law and the Napoleonic code , which is based on rules and on respect for rules , are convinced that , thanks to these rules , we will be able to overcome the present difficulties and , above all , we will increasingly be able to have a system that is capable of being free but also of withstanding financial and economic difficulties .
I thank you once again for your great commitment .
I am pleased to be able to take part in and share this important political moment with you .
rapporteur . - ( RO ) Just some brief replies .
On the subject of Eurocontrol , the reform process has started so that new responsibilities can be received .
On the subject of the ' owner of the air ' , I think that the happiest organisations after the approval of this report will be the airlines , including Ryanair .
On the subject of ' public use ' , this is the description which excludes even airports for air clubs or airports for pleasure flying .
This is the reason why we wanted to remove these airports from the regulation , so as not to complicate matters further .
I would also like to thank you for the positive feedback you have given on my efforts .
I think , however , that I could not have done this job alone , in any way at all .

This is why I would like to thank sincerely the rapporteurs from the other political groups , Mr Stockmann , Mr Leichtfried , Mr Degutis , Mr Zile and Mrs Lichtenberger for the special contributions they made to this dossier , as well as for the support they gave me during the negotiations with the Council .
I also want to point out that the majority of the suggestions in the amendments submitted for the plenary session by Mr Kohlíček and Mr Markov already feature in the compromise reached with the Council .

Commissioner , I would like to congratulate you on this success .
I hope that it will be ratified tomorrow by the vote in Parliament and by the Council vote at the end of this month .
I would like to thank the Commission 's team of experts which worked alongside us to produce this agreement .
I also thank the French Presidency and Czech Presidency for their efforts , especially Thierry Boutsen and Vera Zazvorkova .
The joint debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow ( Wednesday , 25 March 2009 ) .
Written statements ( Rule 142 )
in writing . - ( LT ) Although the current European air transport system is considered to be very safe , the rapid increase in the volume of transport will probably pose new challenges in the area of safety .
Therefore , we must take action at Community level so that the level of safety is maintained , or perhaps even raised , in the future .
The most important thing is to renew and make uniform standards in those segments which are not yet regulated by EU legislation ( and which for that reason are characterised by regulatory fragmentation and a lack of enforcement ) , in order to integrate them into the single approach .
This is especially characteristic of two elements of the air transport chain , which are considered very important from a safety point of view , as potentially they represent the area of highest risk .
in writing . - When creating aviation policy , safety must always be our primary concern .
I commend the aims of this report to make aviation safer and more efficient for all involved .
Though we must take all steps to improve safety , we must help airports and air traffic authorities to comply .
The development of a unified regulatory framework and the implementation of new technology will be expensive .
Regional airports may find it very hard to sustain the added costs of updating their systems .
Shannon Airport in the west of Ireland provides air traffic control for a large area of the North Atlantic .
However , as an airport which has lost many routes in the last decade , it may not have the funds for improvements .
In the present economic environment it will not be easy to borrow for new equipment and training .
To pass these costs on to the consumer may be a case of diminishing returns .
I would suggest that , in order to ensure we make this transition to safer air travel , the Commission ring fence funds to assist the process .
( The sitting was suspended at 20.00 and resumed at 21.00 )

Composition of Parliament : see Minutes
Interoperability of mobile chargers ( debate )
The next item is the debate on the oral question to the Commission ( B6-0225 / 2009 ) by Mr Cappato , on behalf of the Group of the Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe , on the interoperability of mobile phone chargers .
author . - ( IT ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , the fact that we are discussing is very clear and straightforward : there are approximately 500 million mobile telephones in use in Europe and 30 different types of charger .
The technical reason for this difference : there is none .
There is no technical reason .
It is merely a source of unfair speculation on the part of producers , on the one hand , and a creator of obvious environmental damage , on the other , since , as a result of this inescapable trap that consumers are caught in , hundreds of millions of phone chargers are being dispersed into the environment every two to three years .
The European Commission - Commissioner Verheugen - has already responded very promptly to our question , which asked for action to be taken to standardise this equipment , and so today we are here to ask the Commissioner what point we are at .
One possible route is self-regulation , by which I mean that the producers of mobile phones and hence of chargers can agree very swiftly to impose a standard that puts an end to this truly ridiculous and damaging situation .
We would therefore say straight away , Commissioner Verheugen , that , whatever guarantee of self-regulation producers wish to give , we will have to make it very clear that we will intervene with regulation should this response be insufficient , and that this regulation should not relate solely to mobile phones and mobile phone chargers , but also to other digital devices for which the same problem exists .
In this way Europe could also - I have finished , Madam President - impose standards that could ultimately be imposed as international standards , too .
This is a great opportunity concerning a technical matter , but an important one for European consumers .
Vice-President of the Commission . - ( DE ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I am pleased to be able to inform the Members of the European Parliament that genuine progress has been made in harmonising mobile phone chargers in Europe .

However , I would first like to thank Mr Cappato and Mr Manders for the commitment which they have brought to this problem , which is a daily reality for the citizens of Europe .
I fully agree with them that we must put an end to the ever-growing number of chargers and that it must in future be possible to charge mobile phones using a single , standardised charger .
The hundreds of millions of useless chargers and adapters in Europe place a ridiculous burden on the environment and , at the same time , are an expensive irritation for consumers .
Nowadays , anyone who changes their mobile phone generally needs a completely different charger .
Even different models from the same manufacturer do not use a standardised charger .
This is not a new issue .
However , it is important to realise that charging a mobile phone is not like filling a car with petrol ; it is a technically more complex issue .
A few years ago , the technology had not yet reached a level where complete harmonisation was possible , in particular because of safety risks .
Mobile phones could overheat or even explode during the charging process .
In the meantime , these difficulties have been overcome and there are no technical reasons which would prevent harmonisation .
Therefore , I have taken specific steps to encourage the industry to bring a standard charger onto the market .
I am confident that the industry will act quickly .
However , in our role as a European institution we must stay on the ball .
We should under no circumstances exclude the possibility of introducing legal regulations .
As you perhaps already know , at their most recent congress in Barcelona the network operators announced that from 2012 onwards it will be possible to charge the majority of the new mobile phones that they sell with a single standardised charger .
This is good , but it does not go far enough .
The Commission would like to see complete harmonisation on the basis of a uniform standard and a binding undertaking from the industry to do this .
The Commission expects the industry to produce a binding agreement in the form of a memorandum by the end of April .
This memorandum should be signed by the major manufacturers of mobile phones and should ensure that every charger is capable of charging every mobile phone and that every mobile phone can be charged by every charger .
The Commission will not hesitate to make a legislative proposal if the industry does not introduce a voluntary agreement .
I expect that the problem will automatically be resolved for other devices , such as digital cameras and MP3 players , once we have made the breakthrough with mobile phones .
If that should not be the case , then legal intervention may also be required here .
The Commission continues to count on the valuable support of the European Parliament to resolve this irritating problem once and for all .
Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , today we can celebrate the European day of the mobile phone , because together with the Commission and the Council we have today adopted the ' Roaming Regulation II ' .
We have come to a good conclusion which will result in a reduction in the costs of using mobile phones .
This is a good thing in an economic crisis .
We are also planning a cost reduction programme for the chargers , which is very important for the citizens of Europe .
Chargers should have a label showing their efficiency class , in a similar way to fridges , so that you can see how much electricity they use .
It is also important for us to introduce a legal requirement for an automatic cut-off , so that the charger automatically switches off when the device is charged .
In addition , we should ask the standards institutes to produce proposals which will make this possible .
I believe that the schedule presented here by the Commission is a good one , as it requires the industry to come to a voluntary agreement by April or be subject to technical legislation .
Of course , this is not as easy as it seems .
On the one hand , we have the connection between the charger and the mobile phone .
It will be straightforward to establish a technical standard for this .
However , on the other hand the wall socket presents a problem that we are familiar with from European standards .
In this case we should also develop proposals to find a solution to this problem , which concerns not only Europe but also the rest of the world .
Perhaps we could involve the International Organisation for Standardisation ( ISO ) in order to find a worldwide solution .
The subject which we are discussing will actually affect a large number of consumers at European Union level .
I must also mention that 2009 , the year of creativity and innovation , is a year in which we can make a step forward towards this standardisation , if this agreement is signed among mobile phone manufacturers , albeit on a voluntary basis for the time being .
I think that we need above all a common technical standard .
I also believe that it is important for European institutions which deal with standardisation to also be involved so that proper research can be applied at market level .
I think that a consumer information campaign is important too because it is not sufficient for us just to have this labelling on mobile phones about their energy efficiency .
I also believe that it is important for a customer information campaign to be launched about the type of chargers for mobile phones .
2012 is not far away .
I think that if manufacturers really invest in this new type of unique charger there will be sufficient time to meet the 2012 deadline .
However , I want to mention that the research has actually resulted in some applications already appearing on the market : there are chargers available which can be used from close proximity to charge two or three sets .
Even if the sets are different makes and models , they can be charged simultaneously .
This is why we need to invest more in research , especially , in my view , in research dedicated to the information and communications technologies sector .
Progress is being made .
In the Seventh Framework Programme for Research we have large sums of money allocated .
It appears , however , that for a fairly narrow field such as mobile phone chargers , enough has not been done .
This is why I think that the agreement between manufacturers is a step forward , but it must also be accompanied by some common standards .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - ( NL ) Madam President , we are today discussing a subject that is of special interest to consumers , namely the standard connection for mobile phone chargers .
As a Liberal , I am , of course , in favour of allowing the internal market to work and of the minimum possible amount of government intervention in the market .
That said , consumers must also have choices .
At the moment , consumers buying a new phone have no choice at all .
The charger must automatically be bought with the phone , and this frequently gives rise to great annoyance amongst consumers .
What is more , research shows that consumers spend EUR 300 million a year on new chargers because they are automatically included with the purchase of new phones .
The result of this is that there , too , the environment is also burdened to the tune of EUR 300 million a year , and that is without mentioning the waste of energy that these cheap chargers cause , as they are often left in the socket even after the phone itself has been disconnected , where they continue to consume energy .
My colleague , Mr Cappato , and I have been calling for years for the introduction of a European standard and I would very much like to compliment the Commissioner for the manner in which he has regulated this by flirting a little with the industry whilst also threatening it , saying to it , ' You come up with a solution or , if not , we will introduce binding legislation ' .
I would like to congratulate him even more on that approach , as , being a Liberal , I am against mandatory regulation where coaxing can be used instead .
Coaxing means that people prefer to do something because they see the benefit of it and I think that the Commissioner has achieved exceptional success in this .
I have told the following little joke a few times before : when I met my wife 35 years ago , I coaxed her into going out with me .
If I had forced her , she would probably not have seen the added value we have now and the idea would therefore not have lasted this long .
I believe that this example also applies to the industry , as , if the industry has to resolve the issue itself , it will make a better job of it than if the solution is laid down by politicians .
I therefore think that this is an excellent solution .
I hope that , in time , you will manage not only to bring in a standard for phone chargers but also for more items of electrical equipment , as the same irritation applies to those other electrical appliances .
If a family goes away for a weekend , it might take 30 chargers with it .
There are always people , including in this House today , for instance , who have to ask whether anyone has a charger they can borrow as they have forgotten their own .
You then need to find a specific charger of a specific make and model .
My compliments , again , Commissioner .
I hope that this really happens in 2012 and I hope that you act strongly if the industry does not live up to its commitments , as that is very important .
You have to keep the big stick in reserve , but preferably reach a solution through coaxing and self-regulation .
You have succeeded in that , and you have my congratulations .
( DE ) Madam President , I have a further question for Commissioner Verheugen .
USB 2 ports can transfer not only energy but also data .
Would this not be an alternative solution ?
Vice-President of the Commission . - ( DE ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I had already noted that , Mr Rübig .
I wanted to say to you that that is why I am so relaxed about this issue , because I do not believe that we are making life unnecessarily difficult for the industry , as the USB standard is already in place .
All my experts tell me that the existing standard can be used for all hand-held devices .
You cannot use it at the same time for desktop PCs and mobile phones , but it is possible for all hand-held devices .
This is also my answer to Mrs Ţicău .
The standard you are asking about is in fact already in existence .
In addition , I should tell you , Mrs Ţicău , that intensive work is already underway into the issue of energy consumption and the effect of chargers of this kind on the environment .
We will look into this question at the latest when we start work on implementing the directive concerning products that use energy , for which we have presented you with a new proposal .
My final remark is directed once again at Mr Rübig .
I think the idea of an automatic cut-off is a very good one and it applies not only to chargers .
I think this is a subject which could be taken much further .
The Commission is already working on it and will report back to you on the results .
The debate is closed .
Common consular instructions : biometric identifiers and visa applications ( debate )
The next item is the recommendation for second reading on behalf of the Committee on Civil Liberties , Justice and Home Affairs , on Common Consular Instructions : biometric identifiers and visa applications ( 05329 / 1 / 2009 - C6-0088 / 2009 - Rapporteur : Baroness Ludford .
rapporteur . - Madam President , this Commission proposal , on which I am Parliament 's rapporteur , is the fourth element of the Visa Information System ( VIS ) package , coming after the VIS regulation , the VIS access decision and the measure on the use of the VIS under the Schengen Borders Code .
In modifying the existing common consular instructions , it provides firstly for the obligation to supply biometrics which will be stored in the VIS and the standards for doing so , but secondly it includes provisions on the organisation of receiving visa applications .
A complete revision of the visa rules is foreseen with the visa code on which my ALDE Group colleague , Henrik Lax , is rapporteur .
Once adopted , this piece of legislation which we are now discussing will become an integral part of the visa code .
The underlying rationale for separating the proposals was that the Commission expected the adoption of the visa code to take longer than the present proposal , and they did not want the adoption of the visa code to hold up the launch of the VIS .
It is my understanding that the central system for the VIS will be ready by December this year and could start operating in the first region , North Africa , in early 2010 .
I have been negotiating with the Council for quite a long time .
The Committee on Civil Liberties , Justice and Home Affairs adopted my report in November 2007 .
Unfortunately we could not get a first-reading agreement , so in July 2008 I asked Parliament to endorse my report ; however , during the French Presidency we were able to make sufficient progress for me to be able to recommend adopting this compromise at second reading .
We had four outstanding issues : the age limit for fingerprinting ; encouraging Member States to cooperate while permitting contracts with external providers as a last resort ; data protection and security ; and a service fee for external providers .
On fingerprinting the Commission proposed to start fingerprinting children at six years old .
In fact fingerprints of young children are subject to rapid change , and I have not been persuaded that enough is yet known about the reliability in later years of prints taken so young .
Despite many requests , I was never provided with credible substantive evidence about how fingerprints taken between six and twelve years of age could be the basis for verification or identification many years later without the risk of mistakes .
The Council 's reaction at one stage was to propose fingerprinting young children every two years instead of five years , as is the case with adults , but that would be hugely inconvenient for families .
So I insisted on a prudent and practical approach , taking a higher minimum age of twelve years , and the Council did agree to exempt children under twelve , with a review of this age limit after three years following a detailed study under the responsibility of the Commission .
I now turn to the issue of encouraging Member State cooperation while permitting external providers .
I do not have any problems with the general concept of outsourcing , but there must be secure conditions to ensure the integrity of the visa-issuing process , to ensure that outsourcing is only a last resort and that data protection and security are guaranteed .
We therefore succeeded in writing into the text a hierarchy whereby cooperation by means of limited representation , co-location or common application centres is the first choice , and only where those solutions are not appropriate to cope with a high number of applicants or secure a good geographical coverage does outsourcing come into play .
The compromise makes clear that Member States remain responsible for compliance with data protection rules and for any breaches of national law .
An important element is that , in third states that prohibit encryption , special rules apply : electronic transfer of data between consulates or between an external service provider and the Member State would be banned , and Member States would have to ensure that the electronic data is transferred physically in fully encrypted form on a CD which has special conditions attached to it .
Lastly , on the visa fee , we have successfully insisted , as a condition for the external provider 's imposing a service fee on top of the visa fee , that visa applicants should always have the possibility of direct access to the consulate offices .
I think that is very important .
Overall we have a reasonable deal .
Compromises were hard-fought , and I think we have made a step forward on the common visa policy .
Member of the Commission . - Madam President , first of all I would like to convey the regrets of Vice-President Barrot for being unable to be with you tonight .
I am pleased to note that Parliament has accepted the Council 's common position and thus given shape to the political agreement which it and the Council reached on this proposal during the trialogue on 2 December 2008 .
I would thank both Parliament and the Member States for the spirit of compromise they showed in achieving the formal adoption of this instrument , and in particular I should like to thank the rapporteur , Baroness Ludford , and the co-rapporteurs for their support and cooperation .
This agreement will allow preparations to continue for the launch of the Visa Information System scheduled for the end of this year .
At Parliament 's suggestion , the Commission has asked the Joint Research Centre to study the important question of fingerprinting children under the age of 12 .
The technical specifications have now been drafted and will be sent to Parliament and the Council in the very near future .
This change to the common consular instructions will also provide a transparent and harmonised legal framework for the practice of outsourcing , including the question of the extra fee .
The Commission considers that the text agreed upon is balanced and , as set out in the Commission 's statement to Parliament , attracts the Commission 's full support .
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - ( DE ) Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , in order to fulfil the European Union 's claim to be an area of freedom , security and justice , our task is to control the allocation of entry visas for people travelling to the EU from outside Europe .
The newly created rules require EU embassies and representations to take fingerprints and photos of applicants in future .
This meets four objectives .
Firstly , it will simplify the process of combating fraud and abuse , as biometric identifiers make forging visas more difficult .
Secondly , it will prevent so-called visa shopping .
Thirdly , the process of applying for a visa will be speeded up .
Fourthly , at the same time border controls will be made easier , because biometric identifiers will allow border staff to determine quickly whether the person in front of them is the person for whom the visa was issued .
We would have been happy to support the Commission proposal to take the fingerprints of children from the age of six years upwards , in order to prevent the risk of people trafficking .
Unfortunately there was not a majority in favour of this in the House .
The Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats supports with a broad majority the compromise that a Member State which is responsible for accepting and processing applications must also be able as a last resort to work with external service providers .
A decisive factor in our agreement to cooperation of this kind is that the Member States remain responsible for data protection and data security in these cases .
This means that the electronic data sent by the external service providers to the authorities of the relevant Member State must always be fully encrypted .
I would like to thank the rapporteur and my fellow Members from the other groups , who have worked as shadow rapporteurs on this project for three years .
Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , Madam President , you are in the chair for this sitting , so I am therefore speaking in your place on this matter that you have followed as draftsman .
I would like first of all to offer my heartfelt congratulations to Baroness Ludford for the energy she has put into and the results she has obtained from the difficult negotiation of this matter .
I believe that Parliament can be proud of the results obtained , because the task was far from easy , as we have observed .
I would stress in particular two points which seem to me to be essential and with which we can be particularly satisfied : first , the increase in the age limit for taking the fingerprints of minors , from six to twelve years .
Second , the establishment of the principle according to which the collection of biometric data by the consulates of Member States can be subcontracted to private bodies only as a last resort and within a strict framework of certain very specific guarantees .
I know that some people believe that the adopted solution does not entirely fit in with the options that we had proposed , particularly regarding collection by a service provider , in a diplomatic office , and data transfer via encrypted electronic mail , or even via encrypted electronic data carriers transported in a diplomatic bag .
We would reply , however , that collection by private bodies may be carried out only in accordance with European legislation and that the data must be fully encoded by the service provider and transmitted to the authorities of the Member State .
Moreover , we have obtained the reference to the need for agreements to be negotiated with third countries that prohibit the encoding of data transmitted via electronic means .
The examination of applications , any potential interviews , the authorisation procedure and the printing and insertion of visa stickers will be carried out only by diplomatic or consular representatives .
The same conditions apply for the transmission of collected data from one Member State to another in the case of co-locations ; in other words the representation of a Member State by another in a third country .
Finally , if the detailed conditions for the activities of service providers are described in an annex to the text , they must be defined as a whole by a binding legal instrument .
In the light of these results , we can only be delighted with the guarantees obtained in terms of introducing a better visa policy in Europe .
The latter will certainly benefit the European public and will enable us to improve our relations with third countries .
on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - Madam President , first of all , on behalf of my group , I would like to thank Baroness Ludford for her good cooperation .
She is one of the few rapporteurs for whom nothing is impossible .
You know that my group strongly opposes the extensive introduction of biometrics .
Nevertheless , the decision has been already adopted .
The legal basis for the collection of fingerprints when issuing visas is provided for by the Visa Information System Regulation which , in our opinion , would be a more appropriate place to include provisions specifying both general rules and exceptions .
Now , for us , it is crucial to obtain as many safeguards as possible .
Here Baroness Ludford has done an excellent job .
For us the change of the minimum age for fingerprinting from 6 to 12 is very important - but 14 would have been even better .
We also welcome explicit references to fundamental rights , such as the possibility of copying data from the previous application if the last entry is not older than 59 months instead of 48 , as well as guarantees for secure data protection .
However , we have many concerns .
My group does not like outsourcing the collection of biometric identifiers , especially on premises without diplomatic and consular protection .
We also oppose the charging of an additional service fee .
To sum up , we believe that the introduction of biometrics in visas has crucial implications for data security and for fundamental rights without demonstrating any significant gains .
Therefore , we cannot support Parliament 's position at second reading .
However , this does not prejudice our position on the Lax report on the visa code .
on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group . - ( DE ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I value the commitment of the rapporteur very highly and would like to thank her and everyone involved very warmly for their excellent work over recent years .
Nevertheless , I will be abstaining from voting , mainly because I do believe that taking fingerprints and the entire process of using biometric identifiers is out of proportion to the size of the problem .
I think that the desire of home affairs ministers and security authorities to collect as much personal data as possible is deeply questionable .
I know how difficult it was to extract the compromise from the Council which exempts children under the age of 12 from the obligation to provide fingerprints .
However , we all know that this will only apply provided that there are no comprehensive studies in place which prove that children 's fingerprints are reliable .
The political discussion about whether babies ' and small children 's fingerprints are really needed is not yet over .
The regulations on outsourcing also cause me some concern .
Strict , standardised regulations are certainly needed , as some Member States are already using external service providers .
It is understandable that in many strictly limited cases it can be useful to transfer the processing of visa applications to external service providers .
However , this must not be done at the expense of the applicants and of data security .
I do not believe that the compromise agreed with the Council in this respect is adequate .
Both the Legal Service of the Parliament and the European Data Protection Supervisor have indicated the risks involved in outsourcing , when the external service provider is not in an area under diplomatic protection .
Unfortunately , the Council has ignored these concerns .
A further problem is the service charge involved in outsourcing .
I believe it is wrong to pass this charge on to the applicants .
The visa fee of EUR 60 is already too high and very difficult for people from third countries to afford .
If a charge of up to EUR 30 is added , this does not correspond with my idea of an open and hospitable Europe .
Undoubtedly it can make things easier in the case of very large countries not to have to travel halfway across the country to a consulate to apply for a visa , but instead to be able to submit the application to an external service provider .
However , in my opinion , the higher charges would immediately cancel out this benefit .
I would like to thank everyone for their work on this dossier over recent years .
on behalf of the IND / DEM Group . - Madam President , it comes as no surprise to hear Baroness Ludford of the Euro-fanatic Liberal Democrat party wanting to harmonise yet another area of what should be sovereign national policy .
Why on earth would any EU Member State want a common system for the application and processing of visas for third-party nationals ?
Deciding who can and cannot enter a nation state should be the sole concern of the nation state - except that , in the minds of the Euro-fanatics , European nation states no longer exist , having been replaced by the great EU borderless state .
Since 1997 , about 6 million migrants have entered the UK .
About 4 million have left , leaving a net population increase of over 2 million .
The current immigration rate to Britain now results in a net population gain of over 200 000 people per year - or a net population gain of over 1 million people every five years .
This is equivalent to a new city the size of Birmingham .
Most of these migrants enter legally , because they are EU citizens .
In addition to that , we probably have one million illegal immigrants .
England is one of the most densely populated countries in the world - more densely populated than India , China or Japan .
On current trends , our population of 61 million is set to rise to 75 million by 2051 , and is projected to rise to 85 million by 2081 .
What we need is to leave the European Union and regain control of our borders .
Having done that , we need to decide which countries ' citizens we allow in , with or without a visa .
There are many Member States in the EU whose citizens should not be allowed into Britain without a visa .
What Britain needs is a strict visa system so that we can decide who we allow into our country and who we do not .
What we do not need is a system devised by the European Union .
I expect that its advocates would justify it as merely introducing common criteria and processes to make everything run more smoothly .
However , it might have some unintended consequences .
Look at another example of EU legislation championed by the Liberal Democrats .
The European arrest warrant means that British citizens accused of a crime by other EU Member States cannot now be protected by British courts or even the Home Secretary , even when it is obvious that a grave injustice is being done .
Any corrupt legal system may now demand the surrender of a British citizen , and we have to comply .
We have surrendered the right to protect our own citizens .
Soon we will have trials in absentia and the common recognition of fines and confiscation orders .
All this was voted for and welcomed by the Liberal Democrats .
These measures overturn the most basic freedoms enjoyed by the English for centuries , as enshrined in Magna Carta and the 1689 Bill of Rights .
This afternoon , Graham Watson , leader of the Liberal Democrats , urged Gordon Brown to take Britain into the European single currency , which is something that anyone in touch with the real world would know is economic suicide .
Now the Liberal Democrat fanatics want us to embrace a common system for the application of visas .
When the London voters become aware of Baroness Ludford 's position on these issues , hopefully they will grant her a one-way visa out of the European Parliament in the European elections on 4 June 2009 .
( PT ) Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I agree that the Visa Information System or VIS urgently needs to be brought into operation , and that we need a Community code on visas .
I acknowledge the work done by Baroness Ludford , but , in all conscience , I cannot support the compromise for several reasons .
Firstly , I disagree with the use of external service providers .
When we adopted the second version of the Schengen Information System , SIS II , with the agreement of all the political groups , this Parliament refused to allow private companies to have access to the data , even though at the time this merely involved car registrations .
What justifies Parliament 's radical change in position in allowing private companies to gather these data , which are sensitive personal data , such as fingerprints ?
These companies will be able to retain these data for one week , according to the terms laid down in the compromise .
Secondly , there should have been better data protection .
Diplomatic protection is vital to ensure effective protection of the personal rights of individuals .
How can the protection of data gathered by private companies be guaranteed , given that this diplomatic protection has not been assured ?
Are we already forgetting the SWIFT case , involving the transmission of data gathered by the US authorities ?
If this type of situation can happen in a country like the United States , just imagine what could happen in less developed countries with less protection of fundamental rights .
Thirdly , the cost of visas will rise and will vary from country to country .
The Commission proposal aimed to prevent visa shopping .
By allowing private companies to charge a fee which will be added to the visa price , this will create a difference in the cost of visas from one Member State to another .
We will therefore be encouraging exactly what we wanted to combat , namely visa shopping .
If the cost of a visa in one Member State is EUR 60 and in another it is EUR 90 , where will most of the applications be made ?
This will particularly apply in the case of families with several members .
This is without even mentioning the need to review the visa facilitation agreements , which were so firmly supported by this Parliament , such as those with the Ukraine and Serbia .
As a result of all this , Madam President , I cannot accept this compromise .
( RO ) I would first of all like to congratulate the rapporteur for her efforts to create a legal framework which will provide the basis for implementing the biometric identification system .
Some aspects of this report have stirred up heated debates in numerous European Union Member States , especially those relating to biometric identification .
Such disputes have also arisen recently in Romania , which is the penultimate country in the European Union to introduce biometric passports , but the first to implement a new biometrics standard including fingerprints from both hands and facial expression .
The concern over adopting the biometric identification system is based on the natural anxiety about guaranteeing personal security , just as it is also natural to be concerned about how the data obtained is being used and protected .
One of the Member States ' most important duties is to ensure the security of their citizens , but without jeopardising fundamental human rights .
This is why I think that it is our duty to find a balance between two fundamental aspects of our life : liberty and security .
The report which we are debating today is more of a technical report , intended to harmonise measures at European level on biometric identification .
It is necessary for us to do this , bearing in mind that a number of Member States are already using this method , without the existence of a legislative framework in this area .
The fact that , for instance , children under the age of 12 and people who cannot physically have their fingerprints taken will be exempted from fingerprinting for biometric visas is proof of moderation and pragmatism which must be extended to all Member States .
( DE ) Madam President , Commissioner , I believe that the regulation will allow us to achieve two main objectives : security on the one hand and a more citizen-friendly approach on the other .
The introduction of fingerprints and photographs will ensure that the new visas cannot be forged or misused .
In my opinion , the new visas are more citizen-friendly because the proposal will introduce a one-stop process in which all the necessary data is recorded at once .
In addition , applicants do not need to visit the visa office every time as the data can be stored for up to five years .
I believe it is also more citizen-friendly if the process can be made shorter by calling for the cooperation of the Member States or bringing in external service providers , if the data protection regulations are followed .
We will guarantee that they will be followed , because the necessary precautions have been taken .
I would like to reassure everyone who is concerned that there will be abuse of the system or the regulations will not be adhered to as a result of using external service providers .
In my country we have had very positive experiences in this respect .
For this reason , I am supporting this more citizen-friendly approach .
Up to this point I also support the rapporteur and I would like to congratulate her .
In the course of our work together , this has not always been the case , Baroness Ludford .
However , I am not as pleased about the fact that we cannot take fingerprints from children from the age of six upwards .
I object simply because this would result in a safer situation for children , because their identity could be determined without doubt and because we could prevent child trafficking and other criminal activities .
I regret this .
However , I hope that after a study has been completed and after three years at the latest everyone will be sensible enough to decide that it is possible to take fingerprints from the age of six in order to provide better protection for children .
( RO ) Council Decision 2004 / 512 / EC of 8 June 2004 created the legal framework for capturing biometric data for personal identification .
The European regulation which we are discussing defines common standards for collecting biometric data for personal identification and is based on the relevant provisions from the International Civil Aviation Organization .
Great Britain and Ireland will not be applying the provisions of the current regulation because the Schengen acquis does not apply to them .
I think that observing the protection of personal data in particular is important for this regulation .
In practical terms , this data must be stored and processed in accordance with the specific European legislation .
In addition , the fact that Member States are responsible for organising how visa applications are received and processed lays a huge responsibility on them with regard to respecting personal rights .
I just want to mention that it is vitally important for this data to be processed and collected by authorised staff and not to be used , in any circumstances , for other purposes .
( BG ) Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the compromise which has been reached on the introduction of biometrics when European Union Member States issue entry visas undeniably ensures a higher degree of security .
At the same time , it also guarantees sufficient opportunities for protecting travellers ' personal data and human integrity .
I would also like to highlight that , in every case , improving technical requirements will support the battle against cross-border crime , illegal immigration and human trafficking .
For border countries like mine , Bulgaria , which are exposed to intense pressure from immigration flows and the activities of international organised crime , the rapid , successful introduction of the new standards will be vitally important in terms of protecting the EU 's external borders .
Furthermore , the amendments being suggested offer Member States the chance to improve and speed up the process for issuing visas , which will undoubtedly help strengthen ties with third countries .
It will also result in an overall improvement in the EU 's image .
When it comes to applying the new legislation , the possible financial consequences for visa applicants will obviously have to be taken into consideration as well .
Levying charges in addition to already existing ones may lead to the creation of new barriers blocking bona fide travellers ' freedom of movement .
Finally , I want to emphasise that ensuring proper protection when exchanging data as part of issuing visas for travel in the European Union will be crucially important .
Parliament has always protected the personal data of the EU 's citizens and I believe that it is fair and moral for us to apply the same high standards when protecting our visitors ' data too .
Member of the Commission . - Madam President , I would just like to thank , once again , Baroness Ludford and all the honourable Members for their contributions and their comments .
I shall convey to my colleague Mr Barrot all that they have said today .
rapporteur . - Madam President , I would like to thank all the shadow rapporteurs who have worked with me .
I have been ' Mrs VIS ' for over four years and , together with the shadows , we have formed quite a close club and I will miss you all .
I will particularly miss you , if I may say so , Madam President , as we may not see each other after June .
We have been an all-female club , which has been delightful , but I would also like to thank all the staff involved , who have not all been female .
They have been excellent .
I respect the positions of Ms Kaufmann and Ms Ždanoka .
I understand their positions and I thank them very much for taking a full part in the negotiations and in the discussions even though , as they pointed out , they cannot support the outcome .
I am very sad that Mr Coelho is not able to support this compromise .
I hope he understands how hard I fought for some of the elements that he also wanted .
After all they were in my original report .
If he thinks I could have achieved more , that might cause some spluttering in the Council and Commission because I think they saw me as quite a tough customer to deal with .
Mr Batten has left the Chamber .
I think that was part of the UKIP election campaign .
As Mrs Ţicău pointed out , the UK is not party to the Visa Information System as the country is not in Schengen , so the UK has full control of its own borders .
I think Mr Batten , as usual , was somewhat muddled in his thinking .
I thank all the other speakers who made constructive contributions .
I am glad that we are putting this to bed as I personally feel that I wish to resign from being ' Mrs VIS ' after this .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place on Wednesday .
Written statements ( Rule 142 )
The introduction of biometric identification data as part of VIS marks an important step in establishing a reliable link between the visa holder and the passport , thereby preventing the use of a false identity .
However , this regulation has indicated right from first reading a number of disagreements between the Council and Parliament on the following aspects : fingerprinting of children up to the age of six with the risk of ignoring details of the costs and inconvenience which parents would face every time their children 's fingerprints change ; new challenges on how to organise the collection of biometric data ; and last but not least , the lack of experience which Member States have with regard to managing the storage of personal data and technical errors .
In this situation we must ensure that Member States apply standard rules with regard to issuing Schengen visas and that the Common Consular Instructions are redefined and adapted .
Furthermore , we need to focus particular attention on protecting the biometric data of those who have supplied it .
We must be aware that , although this biometric data collection system is intended to combat crime and terrorism through the provision of access and the exchange of information between Member States ' police authorities , it could equally be accessed by different interest groups , if high-level security measures are not devised and implemented .
The regulation amending the Common Consular Instructions on visas defines the legal framework required to introduce biometric identifiers into the Visa Information System , VIS , as well as the arrangements for receiving and processing visa applications .
This regulation offers the possibility of cooperation with an external service provider for collecting visa applications .
I think that the reasons why a free rein has been given to cooperate with external suppliers are unjustified and create the risk of visa trafficking .
Although the regulation stipulates that Member States remain as operators and external service providers are people empowered by the operator , I believe that a question mark has been raised over the protection of private individuals in terms of processing and circulating their biometric data .
The right to levy a service charge , apart from the normal visa charge , will create differences between Member States regarding the cost of a visa .
I am absolutely convinced that this will also create differences between Member States in terms of the number of visa applications .
I would like to draw the attention of Member States which use ' outsourcing ' as a way to arrange the receipt and processing of visa applications to bear in mind this danger and review the legal framework so that it minimises the possibility of external suppliers collecting visa applications .
Novel foods ( debate )
The next item is the report by Mrs Liotard , on behalf of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety , on the proposal for a regulation of the European Parliament and of the Council on novel foods and amending Regulation ( EC ) No xxx / xxxx ( common procedure ) - C6-0027 / 2008 - .
rapporteur . - ( NL ) Madam President , first of all , I would like to thank the shadow rapporteurs , as they helped me a great deal in improving the Commission report .
I must also mention the cooperation with the Czech Presidency .
They , too , had a good deal of positive input to offer and we were only a couple of small unresolved issues away from reaching an agreement at first reading , although it is , in any case , that bit more democratic to have a vote in the House first .
When I first heard that the Commission was putting forward a proposal for a regulation on novel foods , I did wonder what was meant by ' novel foods ' .
I was also surprised that the Commission proposal took the internal market as its starting point .
I will begin with that point .
Like so many topics in this Parliament , this topic , too , can be approached from the perspective of the internal market , the producer or the economy .
It can also be approached , however , from the point of view of food safety , consumers , health and the environment : in other words , on the basis of the welfare of the European citizen .
In the EU , there is much talk about the environment and animal welfare and my thought was that this report should be more than just words : we should have action too .
So when there was a choice to be made in my report on novel foods , in the first instance I opted for food safety , consumer welfare , the environment and animal welfare .
I sincerely hope , and indeed the shadow rapporteurs have already informed me that it will be the case , that they support me on this point in the vote .
Innovation is , of course , tremendously important .
That brings me on to my second point , namely what are ' novel foods ' , actually ?
That was never really made clear in the Commission proposal .
The Commission informed me that what we were talking about was , for instance , nanotechnology and meat from cloned animals .
Let me deal with nanotechnology first .
I had absolutely no idea what it was .
I think that lots of consumers are in the same position , but it appears that it already occurs in our food more than we might think : in energy drinks , in packaging materials for fruit and vegetables , but also in the likes of certain oils and teas .
Regulation is therefore needed very urgently , as technology is all well and good , and can be a boon for the consumer , but we do need to know for sure that the food on our tables is safe .
It therefore needs to come within the scope of the regulation .
Turning to meat from cloned animals , Parliament has already stated in a resolution to the Commission that it did not want meat from cloned animals on the market as food .
If meat from cloned animals were to come within the scope of this regulation , we , as Parliament , would be admitting indirectly that we would , in fact , approve of meat of this nature coming onto our market .
That is not acceptable , and meat from cloned animals must therefore be left outside the scope of this regulation .
This is not really a safety issue .
Cloning for meat is usually associated with a great deal of animal suffering , and many of these cloned animals do not even live for long .
It therefore has no added value for food supply at this point in time .
Member of the Commission . - Madam President , on 15 January 2008 , the Commission submitted its proposal on novel foods to the Council and the European Parliament , with the aim of simplifying the administrative burden for food-business operators when requesting pre-market approval for innovative food products .
The current proposal maintains the principle of the need for pre-market authorisation for innovative products , to reassure consumers that new breeding or new production techniques are safe for humans and animals and respect the environment and consumers ' interests .
The proposal streamlines and speeds up the authorisation process through a centralised food safety evaluation by EFSA and sets precise deadlines at every stage of the procedure .
It also includes an improved safety assessment , tailor-made to different types of foods , thereby allowing safe traditional food from third countries to enter the EU more easily .
I would like to welcome the work of Parliament , whose report addresses major issues concerning the development of a safe food sector .
I would particularly like to confirm my support for the following principles : the need for a definition of engineered nanomaterials and the clarification that all such products require a case-by-case authorisation by the EU institutions ; and the confirmation of the fact that food products from cloned animals are novel foods and therefore cannot be placed on the market without having been assessed by EFSA and authorised through a regulatory procedure .
I look forward to hearing your opinions on these sensitive issues and would like to thank the rapporteur , Ms Liotard , and the shadow rapporteurs for their valuable work on this important report .
rapporteur of the Committee on Internal Market and Consumer Protection . - ( CS ) Mr President , I would like to thank my fellow Members for supporting the proposals I set out as rapporteur .
These include , for example , the submission of disputed cases to the European Group on Ethics in Science and Technology and also a reduction in the data protection period to 5 years , which will speed up innovation .
I fully agree that it is essential to uphold the precautionary principle .
However , I would also like to point out that in 12 years only 86 applications have been submitted , 28 new food products have been licensed and 3 rejected .
The legislation which has applied to date is not very transparent and therefore we are now integrating the procedure for all Member States in this area , thereby simplifying the approval and placing of novel foods onto the market .
However , I do not consider the draft report to be very satisfactory .
I am sorry that my fellow Members are unfamiliar with the link to the regulation on genetically modified food products and animal feed .
Genetically modified food products were exempted from the effects of this regulation because at the present time they fall under a separate regulation and there is no reason for duplication here .
I am therefore opposed to the proposals concerning the protection of animals and the environment , animal feeds and genetically modified food products .
They simply do not belong in this regulation and tend to complicate the proposal , even though they represent a very important area .
On the other hand I am in favour of a regulation which sets out the rules for food produced using nanotechnology and which will ensure definite food safety for the people of Europe .
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - Madam President , this is a complicated dossier on which there are many differing views , so I would like to start by thanking the rapporteur for going along with some views in the spirit of compromise , when she may have personally preferred otherwise .
There is , however , general recognition amongst all political groups that there needs to be clear regulation for novel foods , both to protect the consumer and give legal certainty to producers .
I would now like to thank the Commissioner for not just her work but her introduction , making it so very clear that the aim is to simplify and streamline this whole process .
Indeed , one of the important principles for our group is that such regulation should help to facilitate the development of such foods and not put so many restrictions in the way that they never see the light of day .
For this reason we have asked for a roll-call vote on Amendment 30 to confirm support for this key objective .
We also believe that any regulation should be proportionate and practical .
For this reason we are against the suggestion that any product made with the aid of nanomaterials should have this separately stated on the label .
We are also against the suggestion that a novel food cannot be approved if ' it has a negative impact on the environment after being consumed or becoming waste ' .
That may sound reasonable , but who is to establish such a fact and based upon what evidence ?
Would not some existing products also be banned under such an edict ?
We agree with the need for the Commission to present a legislative proposal on cloning .
We also agree with the need to strengthen data protection for a certain period .
We are grateful that a number of our amendments have been accepted in committee and hope that those of our amendments which narrowly lost in committee will finally be passed in the full plenary tomorrow .
But I can confirm that , as a sign of our general support , we will propose to vote in favour of the report at the end and to get the show on the road .
on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( SV ) Madam President , I would like to thank the Commission very much for this proposal .
I would also like to thank Mrs Liotard for an extremely good report , which , compared to the Commission 's proposal , has substantially enhanced the parts that I think are particularly important , those being public health and consumer protection .
I also recognise many of the questions that we have worked on together on a previous occasion with regard to food additives .
It relates to questions regarding nanoparticles and nanomaterial .
They are dealt with extremely well in the rapporteur 's proposal , but also in an amendment by Mrs Breyer , which I recognise from the work on the Cosmetics Directive .
In that connection we submitted almost the same proposal , which has now been taken up in the directive and which , of course , should also be included here .
It relates to the labelling of nanomaterials and the fact that the contents must always be evident to the consumer so that anyone who wishes to do so is able to choose to avoid foodstuffs containing nanoparticles or nanomaterials .
Other aspects that I recognise and welcome include the fact that we must be able to take account of how the food affects the environment .
This is an extremely important issue and its importance is growing .
There are also ethical aspects to this , for example with regard to cloning , which has now been included in the report in a constructive and clear manner .
It is not about how consumers are affected by eating cloned meat , but above all it is about ethical aspects that we really must take into account when taking decisions on this sort of legislation .
I would also like to say that I agree with the rapporteur that approval must also be required in respect of nanomaterials in packaging that comes into contact with food .
The Socialist Group in the European Parliament is of the opinion that the rapporteur 's proposal is an extremely good one .
We will also support some of the amendments .
We hope that we can still reach an agreement with the Commission fairly soon .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - Madam President , novel food regulations should provide for the diversification of food products on the European market , while ensuring that these new products are safe for the consumer .
However , under the current regulation very few novel foods are approved on the EU market due to highly complex application and assessment procedures .
If we had applied the current procedures to the authorisation of the potato or the kiwi fruit we might not have them on our table today .
The revision of the current regulation should aim to set up a more efficient and practicable system for the authorisation of novel foods .
I understand some of my colleagues ' concerns about allowing on the market new products that might present a danger or mislead the consumer .
However , we should not fall into the trap of safety hysteria and kill innovation , and we should not discriminate against novel food , placing it a less favourable position than products already on the market that do not necessarily have a nutritional advantage for consumers ; nevertheless , consumers have freedom of choice .
My group is generally satisfied with the outcome of the vote in the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety .
However , there are certain issues that go far beyond the scope of this regulation , and consequently we will not be able to support it .
For example , we cannot demand that a novel food has no negative impact on the environment .
Whether we like it or not , all human activities have an impact on the environment , and such a provision is disproportionate in this context .
Instead , my group believes we need to strike the right balance between encouraging innovation and applying the precautionary principle concerning food safety , consumer and environmental protection and animal welfare .
Our approach was to ease the long and bureaucratic procedures for putting novel foods on the market and protecting the industry 's investments by means of reinforced data protection .
To that end , for the plenary vote we have retabled a set of amendments to facilitate the procedure for products that are similar to foods or ingredients already existing on the market and where the authorisation procedure has already started under the old Regulation .
Applications pending under the old Regulation should be completed according to the rules in force at the time of the submission of the dossier .
Reintroducing the application under the revised Regulation would only mean further delays and costs for the industry .
At the same time , we also tried to promote the interests of consumers by reinforcing implementing measures on , for example , marketing and monitoring , supporting the exclusion of cloned animals from the food chain , and specific labelling provisions .
On the issue of cloning , I strongly support the exclusion of foods from cloned animals and their descendants from the scope of this Regulation , and call on the Commission to ban cloned animals in the food chain .
In September 2008 the European Parliament adopted by a large majority a resolution asking for a ban on cloned animals from the food supply .
We must be consistent in the political message we send to the Commission and to citizens .
There are still fundamental questions to be addressed regarding the ethical implications of cloning animals for food supply , and even the implication of animal cloning on human health and animal welfare .
Therefore , the novel food regulation is not an appropriate framework for such a complex issue .
If , in the future , food products derived from cloned animals are to be introduced on the European market , it should be done by means of a specific regulation submitted for public consultation and then democratically adopted .
I believe Parliament needs to take a strong stand and , by means of a majority vote , put pressure on the Commission to find solutions that echo the will of the citizens .
We will also support labelling of nano-ingredients .
People have the right to know what they eat and make their choices accordingly .
If some people are concerned about nanotechnology , then they should be able to make a different choice .
However , we believe that labelling of foods produced from animals fed with genetically modified feedingstuffs is simply not realistic and feasible .
I personally am strongly against GMOs , but I cannot imagine how we could trace efficiently which animals were fed with GMOs and which were not .

on behalf of the UEN Group . - ( PL ) Madam President , Regulation ( EC ) No 258 / 97 on novel foods is good occasion for clarifying what we are actually dealing with .
Are we really promoting healthy , safe food products and protecting the health of consumers , or are we protecting the interests of certain pressure groups and persons for whom not people and human health , but money , is paramount ?
If we are concerned about people and their health , we need to make sure that there is honest information for consumers about the origins and ingredients of food products .
The information labels must include , amongst others : the ingredients and the quantities ; whether the food is environmentally sound or based on GMO products ; the additives it contains , if any , such as food enzymes and flavourings ; the country of origin and whether it comes from cloned livestock , which in my opinion should be completely forbidden .
Essentially , the necessity of implementing appropriate procedures for issuing permits for the production and marketing of novel foods is something that should not require discussion .
The procedures must protect consumers from the danger of unhealthy food and from being misled .
The rapporteur , Mrs Liotard , agreed with the Commission 's report on the need for transparent authorisation procedures for new food products , even though she has submitted numerous amendments , which shows her engagement with the work on the report , and which must definitely be commended .
on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - ( DE ) Madam President , Mrs Liotard , ladies and gentlemen , we need new regulations for novel foods .
In particular in the case of nanotechnologies , our requirements for foodstuffs should not be less strict than those for cosmetics .
We need a definition of nanomaterials and clear labelling .
However , nanofoods must not be approved until specific risk analysis methods have been put in place , otherwise we will be turning consumers into guinea pigs , which I hope no one wants to do .
In the case of gene technology , we must close the labelling loophole as quickly as possible .
Foods which come from animals that have been fed GMO feedstuffs must be labelled .
We have traceability on paper , so it will be possible .
We will see tomorrow how the Members from Germany have voted , because there is a labelling loophole here .
We do not want to take away the consumers ' right to choose for themselves .
They should have freedom of choice and the opportunity to make their own decisions .
We must be quite clear about the fact that we do not want cloned meat to be approved in Europe , for both animal welfare and ethical reasons .
We should make this very clear in this regulation .
My final point is that animals should not be subjected to unnecessary suffering .
For this reason , we are calling for a ban on duplicating animal testing . Thank you .
( DE ) Madam President , it would be good if you could allow me the additional half a minute which Mrs Breyer from the Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance has just had .
The Commission has submitted a good proposal for updating the regulation on novel foods .
Unfortunately , some amendments have been tabled with the aim of adding objectives to this proposal which are not compatible with the goals of the regulation or which even interfere with existing case law .
The obligation on food suppliers to monitor novel foods in terms of the health and welfare of animals would impose too great a burden on retailers .
Once again an attempt is being made to undermine existing GMO legislation , in this case the call for special labelling for novel foods which come from animals that have been fed genetically modified feedstuffs .
We have already heard about all of this .
Anything which involves GMO legislation should not be included in the regulation on novel foods .
I say this , but I myself tabled an amendment to distinguish between new plant types and the definition of novel foods .
However , interested parties in this House must not be allowed to misuse the regulation on novel foods for electioneering purposes .
Amendments 62 and 90 , for which the Greens have requested a vote by roll call , are obviously an attempt of this kind .
Who are you aiming to pillory for this ?
My group has always supported the right of the consumer to know what foods contain .
Why should there not be a reference to nanosubstances in the list of ingredients ?
Although amendment 62 makes a rather clumsy attempt to anticipate my report on food labelling , I must say that I believe that the labelling of novel foods is fully compatible with my report .
Therefore I recommend that my group votes in favour of the amendments .
In my report on food labelling regulations , I will refer to the part of the regulation on novel foods which concerns labelling .
This will be possible because the first reading on the labelling of foods has been postponed to the next parliamentary term , against the Greens ' wishes .
However , it has now become clear how beneficial this postponement was for them .
A brief remark on cloning .
It is animal cruelty and we are opposed to it .
Nevertheless foods must be included in this regulation , because otherwise ...
( The President cut off the speaker )
( HU ) It is very reassuring to European consumers that they can have every confidence in the EU foodstuffs on their plates .
In the medium and long terms , this is one of the most important reasons for maintaining the common agricultural policy .
We have to compensate European producers for the fact that we impose stricter food safety and environmental protection rules than our competitors outside the European Union .
It would be good if we were to succeed , at the WTO negotiations , in asserting our rightful demand that our global competitors should observe equally strict norms and standards for stringent food safety , animal and plant health and environmental protection .
The regulation on novel foods and the amendment presented in this report are also intended to serve increased food safety .
At the same time , the challenges presented by the current global food crisis and the steady increase in population heighten the importance of , and indeed render essential , the search for new solutions .
In order for the earth to be able to feed 9 billion people in 2050 , the opportunities presented by technological advances , and primarily the use of biotechnologies , are indispensable .
To avoid misunderstanding , this report does not address genetically modified foods .
In accordance with the Commission 's intentions , however , foods prepared with nanotechnologies do fall within the scope of novel foods .
Some of my fellow Members have concerns , which I understand up to a point , but it is important for us to recognise that nanotechnology is one of the keys to the future .
Europe would suffer a serious competitive disadvantage if it were left out of developments in this area .
The key is the scientific , comprehensive testing that accompanies the licensing process , guaranteed by the proposed regulation .
A major consideration is the strict regulatory system of labelling .
We must not allow the foods in question to be open to misleading consumers .
There is also a significant debate concerning cloned animals .
It would be more appropriate to regulate cloning in a separate regulation .
Following the opinion of the European Food Safety Authority , we should not consider the offspring of cloned animals to be clones , but the regulation should nonetheless refer to the offspring of cloned animals as well .
We need to make this absolutely clear to consumers .
Madam President , last year we voted with a persuasive majority in favour of the resolution proposing to ban the cloning of animals for food and the sale of any products from cloned animals and their offspring .
Ahead of voting on the legislation on novel foods we should recall the reasons for having been prudent and aware of risks for the health and welfare of animals .
We know , from our past experience with similar issues that tackle both food safety and ethical relations between humans , as the dominant species , and nature , that public perception depends very much on specific knowledge of the matter .
Consumers are increasingly sensitive about suffering and injuries to farm animals and therefore they have the right to be informed about the potential of cloning to cause pain and to waste natural resources .
Yet the development of animal cloning as a method of food production is being pursued without public awareness .
The problems with cloning do not concern just the welfare of animals , but also consumer confidence in food since it is believed that in Europe food is produced to a very high standard .
The Eurobarometer study from last October documented serious public concerns with regard to hypothetical future use of food products from clones .
This is linked to the sale of imported food , which could eventually be sold in Europe without being labelled as a product from cloned animals .
I therefore agree with the rapporteur 's approach urging the Commission to come up with a separate piece of legislation on clones .
Among other problems which have been covered by the amendments tabled by my political group , I wish particularly to support the sharing of information from animal testing so as to avoid the need for new tests involving animals .
Finally , many thanks to the rapporteur for her thorough work on this important piece of European legislation tackling food safety , as well as consumer protection , and animal health and welfare .
( FI ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , my many thanks go to Mrs Liotard for her fine work and excellent report .
I am especially pleased that the committee took the risks of nanomaterials seriously and wants to ban the use of meat from cloned animals .
After all , cloning causes great distress to animals .
I also regard Amendment 60 as important .
The intention is that products from animals that have been fed with genetically modified feeding stuffs , that is to say milk , eggs and meat , must be labelled , and I hope this receives the support of Parliament as a whole .
European consumers shun genetically modified food , and plant-derived genetically modified food that has to be labelled is hardly found in the shops at all .
With feed , however , there is a gaping loophole , which makes it possible to bring genetically modified feed to our dining tables .
A good deal of European feed is imported from elsewhere in the world , and mainly from Brazil and Argentina , where the share of genetically modified feeding stuffs is huge .
It is time we extended the principle of transparency to feed and the idea of genetically modified labelling to animal products .
The Prime Minister in my country supported this idea two years ago , and I hope that Finland will also support it in the Council of Ministers .
Madam President , I welcome the revision of the Novel Food Regulation , which must stimulate innovation in the food and drink industry .
It must protect the functioning of the internal market and public health and , at the same time , facilitate market access for novel foods .
However , I have some concerns generally about what I will call the scientific antipathy and distrust of this European Parliament - and , indeed , of our national parliaments - which has become a matter of serious concern on a whole range of areas at this stage .
We do not do justice to ourselves with emotive , hysterical or populist responses to the latest peer-reviewed scientific developments , and we do not do justice to our democratic mandate .
When GM products , cloning and nanotechnology are mentioned in this House , then it is belt-and-braces and the answer is ' no ' ; then , we slowly open up and delay authorisation .
I am concerned with EFSA , Madam Commissioner , and whether it has the resource capacity to process dossiers under this regulation in a timely but thorough way .
If our embarrassing experience with the GM food and feed authorisations and rate of progress thereon are anything to go by , the answer must be ' no ' .
Why do we respond as if we are scientific illiterates on any new aspect of this area ?
Why do we distrust peer-reviewed science to such an extent ?
Have none of us , or very few of us , scientific backgrounds in this Parliament at all ?
The same question can be asked of national parliaments .
We must base legislation on thorough , serious science and accept that .
If not , our credibility as legislators is in question .
( PL ) Madam President , guided by what is good for consumers , and taking into account the great extent to which the food we consume affects our health , I agree with the rapporteur 's view that we need to clearly define the purpose of the regulations on novel foods .
We should make all efforts to ensure that the transparency and effectiveness of the system of issuing permits for novel foods will ensure consumer safety and improve the functioning of the internal market .
In my opinion , the current definition of novel food must be refined , taking into account the general principles and requirements of food legislation .
I believe that a food product should only be marketed when it does not mislead the consumer , it is completely safe and the nutritional value of the product has not been impaired .
As the substances or compounds thereof have not yet been used for human consumption , particular care should be taken in making any decisions relating to their legal regulation .
I support all activities that will help maintain a high level of food safety , and those who talk about ...
Member of the Commission . - Madam President , I would like to elaborate on a few very important points which were made by honourable Members .
Concerning nanotechnologies , I have taken note of recent scientific opinions and I am convinced by the related documents in Mrs Liotard 's report .
The European Union will be first in the world to have a regulatory definition of engineered nanomaterials and a coherent and flexible approach to this technology .
In order to clarify the Commission 's position on the definition of nanotechnologies , I would like to make the following statement on behalf of the Commission .
The Commission notes that work towards a common definition of nanomaterials is still evolving .
The Commission therefore confirms that , in future Community legislation , progress on the common definition should be taken into account , and notes that the comitology procedures included in this proposal also enable the definition in this proposal to be updated .
Regarding the mandatory labelling of all food produced with the aid of nanotechnology , I would like to note that the Commission is indeed in favour of consumer information about the presence of nanomaterials in food .
However , under the Novel Food Regulation we have a case-by-case authorisation which also lays down conditions for use of such products , including the labelling requirements .
Labelling will thus be examined on a case-by-case basis .
Let me now clarify my position on the important issue of cloning .
I have already stated that I consider that the Novel Food Regulation is not the most suitable instrument for managing all the issues of cloning .
Novel Food only deals with food safety and market authorisation .
Therefore the use of clones in breeding programmes - semen , embryos and ova - cannot be regulated under the Novel Food Regulation , nor can issues linked to animal health and welfare be addressed here .
On 13 January , the College of Commissioners held an orientation debate on the cloning of farm animals for food production .
The Commission agreed that there remain a number of unanswered questions .
In this respect the Commission is working closely with EFSA and ensuring that related scientific research is conducted .
At the same time , I launched discussions with our main trading partners : the United States , Canada , Japan , Australia and New Zealand .
Yes , we need more information and data on cloning techniques and the way in which progenies of cloned animals should be handled from a regulatory perspective .
As some of you have mentioned , in July last year the European Food Safety Authority delivered its opinion covering the scientific aspects of cloning for food in the EU .
The general conclusion of the opinion is that the risk assessment is insufficient due to the limited data available .
With regard to the health and welfare of animals , the opinion makes it clear that a significant proportion of clones have been found to be adversely affected , often severely , and with a fatal outcome both for cloned animals and for the surrogate animal .
The opinion of the European Group on Ethics also highlights a number of scientific questions that need to be answered , and research that needs to be carried out , on food safety , animal health and welfare , traceability and labelling .
In conclusion , I wish to acknowledge that , with regard to cloning , there is certainly an issue to be addressed , but the Novel Food Regulation is not the right place to regulate all the questions surrounding this sensitive matter .
Nevertheless , I would like to make a commitment , on behalf of the Commission , to produce , as soon as possible , a comprehensive report on all aspects of cloning techniques with a view to the production of foodstuffs , including animal health and welfare in relation to clones and their offspring , accompanied , if appropriate , by legislative proposals .
Let me stress that I believe that a solution can be found on the issue and , in this respect , I thank Parliament for its understanding and cooperation .
Liotard report
The Commission can accept Amendments 7 , 12 , 34 , 35 , 41 , 42 , 44 , 45 , 53 and 63 .
Amendments 3 , 8 , 15 , 20 , 58 , 64 , 65 , 76 , 87 , 88 and 89 can be accepted in principle .
Amendments 1 , 6 , 10 , 25 , 30 , 31 , 36 , 40 , 66 , 67 , 69 , 77 , 82 , 84 , 85 and 93 are acceptable subject to rewording .
The Commission cannot accept Amendments 2 , 4 , 5 , 9 , 11 , 13 , 14 , 16 , 17 , 18 , 19 , 21 , 22 , 23 , 24 , 26 , 27 , 28 , 29 , 31 , 32 , 33 , 37 , 38 , 39 , 43 , 46 , 47 , 48 , 49 , 50 , 51 , 52 , 54 , 55 , 56 , 57 , 59 , 60 , 61 , 62 , 68 , 70 , 71 , 72 , 73 , 74 , 75 , 78 , 79 , 80 , 81 , 83 , 86 , 90 , 91 and 92 .
rapporteur . - ( NL ) Madam President , I would like to express my sincere thanks to my fellow Members for their input into the debate and for the support I have received for various points in my report .
There were some critical comments too , of course .
That , too , I am happy with , as it can only be good for the debate .
Our aim is to guarantee to consumers that food produced on the back of new technologies or new food coming onto the market is safe .
Through our input and our proposals , we will succeed in achieving this aim .
This will also provide certainty for those producers looking to innovate , in that they will now know what is allowed and what is not .
The report also covers data protection in relation to those producers , something that also promotes innovation in the field of food safety .
I would , in addition , like to offer my heartfelt thanks to the Commissioner for what she said about nanotechnology .
In this field it is true that there is still much change to come , and if we lay down a definition now , at the beginning , it must be possible to revise it as the science moves on .
I would also like to thank the Commissioner for what she said about animal cloning .
I would , however , like to point out to you that Parliament has already adopted a resolution in which we make clear that we do not want meat from cloned animals on the market as a foodstuff .
This point , too , comes up again in this report , and I would urge that the cloning of animals be excluded from the regulation on novel foods .
The report calls for that to happen and , as you have just heard , this House is strongly behind the idea .
Finally , I would like to take this opportunity to offer my sincere thanks to my staff , Thomas , Vivian and Jan-Jaap , who worked very hard alongside us in order to produce this report .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place on Wednesday .
Substances that deplete the ozone layer ( recast ) ( debate )
The next item is the report by Mr Blokland , on behalf of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety , on the proposal for a regulation of the European Parliament and of the Council on substances that deplete the ozone layer ( recast ) - C6-0297 / 2008 - .
rapporteur . - ( NL ) Madam President , closing the hole in the ozone layer is important for the environment and for the public health of the population of the whole world .
Our atmosphere is formed in such a way that there are two different layers that protect us .
The CO2 in the tropospheric layer holds in the warmth so that we do not get too cold .
The ozone in the stratospheric layer protects us from harmful UV radiation from the sun .
The regulation on substances that deplete the ozone layer is primarily aimed at protecting the stratospheric ozone layer , but also at preventing climate change .
Thus , those substances that are being prohibited act both to deplete the ozone and to increase global warming .
The predominant substances that deplete the ozone layer are found in aerosol propellants , refrigerators , insulating materials and certain specific solvents and cleaning agents .
The CFCs and halons that have the strongest ozone-depleting effect have been completely eliminated , save for a limited number of exceptions .
It is already prohibited to produce HCFCs , and their use will be banned from 2020 .
The preamble to the new regulation states that the production and use of ozone-depleting substances is to be ended or minimised as far as possible .
This is an important policy basis .
Sixty-four amendments were adopted in the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety .
There were then two trialogues , which resulted in an agreement between the Council and Parliament .
This meant that the 64 amendments were replaced by a single , consolidated text .
I would like to briefly mention nine important results of that agreement .
First of all , the legal basis for the regulation has been changed to the environment .
That allows the Member States the possibility of adopting more far-reaching measures to protect the environment .
Secondly , the use of the pesticide methyl bromide will be prohibited as of 18 March 2010 .
This also applies to the gassing of containers to control vermin .
The only remaining exception will be for emergencies , such as where a large-scale epidemic occurs .
The third point is that , in the phasing-out programme for HCFCs , the percentage with respect to 1997 has been cut back to 7 % for the final years .
Fourthly , HCFCs may only be used in government-designated businesses .
Fifthly , some new substances have been added to the list of substances that are nominated for restrictive measures .
The European Commission has undertaken to investigate these substances further .
Point six is that , for the necessary exceptions , such as for use as reagents and for laboratory use , labelling is being laid down as a mandatory requirement .
It has also been agreed , in this regard , that there must be no increase in laboratory use .
Point seven is that the reuse and recycling of ozone-depleting substances for existing apparatus may only take place within one business .
In addition , a log must be kept of the quantities present in order to prevent fraud and illegal trade .
The eighth point is that attention is being given to enforcement by means of inspections .
In that way , Member States are obliged to work together to tackle illegal trade .
The final point is that , in order to prevent leaks of ozone-depleting substances , the monitoring and enforcement system is to be tightened up .
There is , however , more to be done in order to tackle the problem of stored ozone-depleting substances .
The Commission has an important job here .
I would like to urge it once again to develop the directive on construction and demolition waste along the lines we agreed seven years ago in the Sixth Environmental Action Programme .
All in all , we have achieved a satisfactory result .
The ozone layer will get a better chance to recover so as to reduce the harmful effects , such as skin cancer and damage to plants and trees .

Member of the Commission . - ( EL ) Madam President , I should like first of all to thank and congratulate the rapporteur , Mr Blokland , and all the shadow rapporteurs on their exceptional work on this proposal to recast the regulation on the protection of the ozone layer .
I am particularly delighted that agreement has been reached at first reading , thanks in large part to the positive and constructive contribution made by Parliament .
The policy on the protection of the ozone layer in the stratosphere has been acknowledged as a very great success and the European Union has played a decisive role here .
Thanks to the innovative measures which we adopted in the European Union , we have succeeded in getting 99 % of substances that deplete the ozone layer withdrawn .
Apart from protecting the ozone layer , limiting these substances has extremely positive repercussions on the climate .
That is because these substances have a global warming potential up to 14 000 times greater than that of CO2 .
Without the Montreal Protocol and without the even more ambitious Community regulation , emissions of greenhouse gases at global level would perhaps be up to 50 % higher than they are at present .
Thanks to these international efforts , scientists now estimate that the ozone layer can be fully restored between 2050 and 2075 .
However , in order to make this possible , a number of persistent problems need to be overcome .
The Commission proposal is designed both to simplify the Community regulation and reduce bureaucratic obstacles and to bring the regulation into line with new scientific developments and future challenges , in order to guarantee the restoration of the ozone layer .
The compromise agreement achieved retains the architecture of the Commission proposal but , at the same time , it includes the specific measures needed in order to address outstanding issues in terms of the full abolition or limitation on the use of substances which deplete the ozone layer .
More importantly , it contains stricter provisions for substances which are ' stored ' in products , such as , for example , refrigeration equipment or plastic insulating foam .
It strengthens commercial measures against the illegal use of and illegal trade in substances that deplete the ozone layer in the European Union and will help to prevent environmental dumping in developing countries .
Finally , it bans all uses of methyl bromide except in specific instances in order to deal with emergencies .
This will put Community legislation on methyl bromide at the vanguard at global level .
The benefits , both in terms of restoring the ozone layer and reducing greenhouse gases , will be considerable .
The European Commission is in a position to accept in full the compromise package of amendments .
I should like to thank the European Parliament once again for its significant contribution in keeping the environmental objective of the proposal intact and achieving agreement at first reading .
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - ( FI ) Madam President , the regulation before us is the natural continuation and an important part of the Montreal Protocol , which obliges its 191 signatory states actively to abandon the use of substances that deplete the ozone layer .
The Montreal Protocol is considered to be one of the most successful of all international environmental agreements .
The results speak for themselves .
There has been a 95 % reduction in consumption of ODS compared with the baselines set .
Furthermore , greenhouse gas emissions will have been avoided over a 20-year period that are equivalent to more than 100 billion tonnes of CO2 .
That is why the regulation we are now considering will not just promote the recovery of the ozone layer : it is also an important part of the fight against climate change .
The previous regulation , drafted nine years ago , was hopelessly behind the times , and it was necessary to bring it up to date .
The simplification of the current regulation 's structure , the deletion of obsolete provisions and extending the obligation to file reports to cover new substances are reforms that were sorely needed .
I would like to congratulate my colleague , Mr Blokland , very warmly on his work as Parliament 's rapporteur .
The compromise at first reading , though challenging democratically , is a sensible solution for an update such as this one , and reaching it was in itself an environmental accomplishment .
The now acceptable regulation will bring current Community regulations more appropriately in line with the original provisions of the Montreal Protocol .
For example , bringing forward the deadline for ending the production of HCFCs by five years to 2020 is sensible and justified , as is reducing the number of exemptions to the ban on export trade .
As the aims of this regulation cannot be satisfactorily achieved in our Community just through action on the part of the Member States , we need to address the problem globally , in the context of the global economy .
If there were too many exceptions to the exports ban , it would be too difficult to show they were justifiable .
The Montreal Protocol itself has had additions made to it no less than four times .
The 20-year-old treaty was amended in this way in London , Copenhagen , Montreal and Beijing .
It is not just a success story : it is also a story of the necessity to correct mistaken trends as understanding increases .
It is this same wisdom that we now need in the case of the Kyoto Protocol .
The original Montreal Protocol focused on the protection of the ozone layer , mainly by restricting CFCs , and that goal was quickly tightened up almost to zero .
So CFCs started to be replaced with HCFCs , for example , which were a lot less harmful to the ozone layer .
As is often the way with solutions to environmental problems , however , another aspect to the problem emerged .
HCFCs , or fluorinated gases , proved to be particularly harmful on account of their huge Global Warming Potential or GWP .
Some of them are more than a thousand times more intense as global warmers than carbon dioxide .
It thus became necessary to amend the weak points in the treaty .
We need to be able to learn a lesson in the same way in the case of the Kyoto Treaty .
It has to be admitted that it is not at all effective as it stands .
It will not cut global emissions and will not even reduce carbon intensiveness .
Perhaps the problem lies in the fact that those who were responsible for drafting the Kyoto Treaty assumed that the problem of carbon dioxide could be solved in the same way that applies to freons .
Climate change is an environmental problem on a totally different scale from earlier problems .
Whereas ozone depletion concerned problems that were generated by the by-products of industrial or energy production , the cause of climate change lies in something that sustains the entire global economy and global production .
The world still runs on carbon .
That is why climate change must be seen above all as a problem of industrial engineering .
The focus of decisions needs to switch from restricting emissions to a comprehensive reorganisation of energy and material production systems .
Let us learn a lesson from Montreal .
on behalf of the UEN Group . - ( PL ) Madam President , Mr Blokland 's report on the regulation of the European Parliament and of the Council on substances that deplete the ozone layer is an important document for further action to protect the ozone layer .
I would like to stress that one of the successes of the European Parliament and the Council has been to eliminate the production of and trade in gases containing CFCs , halons , bromides and methyls which deplete the ozone layer and influence the greenhouse effect .
A good example of working ahead would be to undertake work in the country situated beneath the hole in the ozone layer , New Zealand .
There , in addition to the activities undertaken in the European Union , work has been started to reduce emissions of methane , one cubic metre of which has a greenhouse effect of the order of 30 cubic metres of CO2 and which depletes the ozone layer .
Methane is a gas produced in processes of decay , by animals , released underground in mines , and through various chemical processes .
Due to the quantity of methane released into the atmosphere , it should also be included in further work .
The UEN supports this regulation .
I thank Mr Blokland for his labour-intensive and relevant report .
on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - ( FI ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , my congratulations go to Mr Blokland for an excellent result .
Parliament has succeeded in bringing forward the deadline for abolishing the use of methyl bromide by four years , and , furthermore , the schedule for cutting HCFCs has been made tighter .
It is important that the EU continues to be a pioneer in abolishing the use of substances that deplete the ozone layer , despite the fact that this subject no longer makes the headlines .
Many of these substances are powerful greenhouse gases , but they have nonetheless been excluded from the Kyoto Treaty .
That was because it was thought that they would be regulated under the Montreal Protocol .
It is important that we also remember to attend to this issue and continue to abolish powerful greenhouse gases in the future .
It is also important that we set an example to other countries in this matter , including the developing countries .
In the case of substances whose use has been banned in the EU , my group would have liked to restrict their export in a clearer way than has now been agreed .
I hope that this principle will be incorporated into legislation when the next steps are taken .
Madam President , on a point of order before I commence , as there does not appear to be anybody asking to speak under the ' catch-the-eye ' procedure - I am subject to correction by you , but I have looked around and assessed the situation - could I add one minute of ' catch-the-eye ' speaking time to my one-minute contribution , please ?
That is fine , Mrs Doyle , please do so .
Madam President , additional measures for the protection of the ozone layer were adopted by the parties to the Montreal Protocol at their Conference of the Parties ( COP ) meeting in September 2007 .
These will now be incorporated in this recast regulation to accelerate the phase-out of ozone-depleting substances ( ODS ) and to further limit exempted uses of these substances .
This recast regulation is essentially about bans and restrictions on the production , import , export , placing on the market , use , recovery , recycling , reclamation and destruction of these ozone-depleting substances .
The Montreal Protocol has been one of the most successful international environmental initiatives to date , with the result that the 1980s level of the depletion of the ozone layer has been largely reversed .
Due to the phase-outs on the use of these ozone-depleting gases - CFCs , HCFCs , halons , methyl bromide , with very few time-limited exceptions for certain ' critical uses ' , for example halons in fire-protection equipment in aeroplanes - there has been a 95 % reduction in the consumption of ODS compared to the 1980s .
These substances , we must remind ourselves , also have a global-warming potential .
The ozone layer is one of the two layers of the atmosphere that protect life on earth .
Specifically , the ozone layer provides protection from harmful ultraviolet radiation from the sun , which causes multiple illnesses and problems including skin cancer and cataracts .
Mrs Doyle , you were as good as your word .
Thank you .
Member of the Commission . - ( EL ) Madam President , I am sorry that there is not a bigger audience in Parliament today , because we are debating what is in fact a very , very successful protocol , which has brought about very positive results both for the environment and for health , and in progress with restoring the ozone layer , which has now returned to its pre-1980 levels .
I should like to thank all those who took part in this evening 's debate for their very constructive comments , and to remark that the Commission is committed to exercising the powers vested in it and examining whether the preconditions apply for the inclusion of a further three substances by mid-2010 .
A statement on this will be submitted to the Secretariat of the European Parliament for inclusion in the Minutes of today 's debate .
I should also like to remark that I believe we shall reach an agreement on combating climate change in Copenhagen at the end of this year which is at least as ambitious and successful as the Montreal Protocol .
I trust that it will be even more effective and we must all work in this direction .
To close , I should like to say that the Commission is particularly satisfied with the outcome of the negotiations and is in a position to accept in full the proposed compromise amendments .
Commission statement
Blokland report
The Commission confirms its intention to consider by 30 June 2010 the inclusion of additional substances in Part B of Annex II to the Regulation , in particular evaluating whether the conditions for their inclusion set out in Article 24 ( 3 ) are fulfilled .
This accelerated examination will focus on the following substances :
Hexachlorobutadiene ,
2-Bromopropane ( iso-propyl bromide ) ,
Iodomethane ( methyl iodide ) .
rapporteur . - ( NL ) Madam President , I would like to extend my sincere thanks to Commissioner Dimas for his commitment to accept the idea put forward by Mrs Hassi , namely that further substances should be investigated for their effects .
As far as that is concerned , I would just like to bring methyl bromide to the Commissioner 's attention .
We still know little about this substance , and its production , for that matter .
Happily , it has now been decided to ask the suppliers , during consultation , to report how this substance is produced .
In that way we will be obtaining precise information about this substance .
I would also like to convey my sincere thanks to my fellow Members , especially the shadow rapporteurs and those who have spoken this evening , for the support that I have received .
Our mutual cooperation has been excellent , in committee and in the negotiations .
I would also like to thank the Czech Presidency for the sound agreements we were able to reach , both before and during the negotiations .
In every case , the result was satisfactory .
I also very much appreciate the support received from the officials of the Commission and of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety and from my own staff .
We have truly managed to work as a team , which also made it possible for us to conclude this far-reaching amendment of the law within six months .
I have one more comment to make , in conclusion .
I am not very happy with the recasting system .
It is not easy to know on what basis you can or cannot make amendments .
Luckily , there were lawyers to advise me that the legal basis had been changed in the recast so that we were able to make changes on that basis , otherwise it would have almost escaped our scrutiny .
Fortunately , the Council was of the same opinion and at the last minute we were able to put this right in the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety .
Recasting remains a difficult issue for the work of this Parliament .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place on Wednesday .
Written statements ( Rule 142 )
This proposal follows the structure of Regulation ( EC ) No 2037 / 2000 , but adds a new chapter about derogations from the bans on producing , placing on the market and using the substances in question , initially dispersed in several provisions about the stages of elimination of the regulated substances and products .
The key challenges are as follows :
the reduction of ' banked ' ozone-depleting substance ( ODS ) / greenhouse gas emissions into the atmosphere is necessary as according to estimates , by 2015 these global banks will add up to 2 million ozone-depleting potential tonnes or 13.4 billion tonnes of CO2eq .
exempted uses of ODS where no technically or economically viable alternatives are yet available , for example , methyl bromide for quarantine and pre-shipment purposes .
new ozone-depleting substances : new scientific evidence shows that the ozone-depleting potential of certain chemical substances not currently controlled by the Protocol is substantially higher , while marketing of these substances is growing rapidly .
The amendment makes the text clearer and simplifies the regulatory framework , while also reducing the administrative burden , thereby facilitating the application of the legislation to ensure the regeneration of the ozone layer by 2050 and prevent the adverse effects on human health and ecosystems .
In my view , we must all be concerned about the health of both the current generation and future generations .
Our health is maintained through a clean environment and the atmosphere around us .
All scientific studies highlight the fact that the ozone layer is extremely important not only for the population 's health , but also for sustaining life on earth .
Unfortunately , there are a number of substances which , when emitted into the atmosphere , destroy the ozone layer , thereby contributing to the increase in the greenhouse effect .
Although signs of ozone layer recovery have been observed as a result of the measures taken , it is considered that the level of ozone in the atmosphere prior to 1980 will only be achieved in the second half of the 21st century .
Consequently , I totally agree with additional measures being taken to limit or even ban ozone-depleting substances .
I believe that by taking this kind of action we are fulfilling our duty not only to the current generation but to future generations as well .
Agenda for next sitting : see Minutes
Closure of the sitting
( The sitting was closed at 11 p.m. )
Opening of the sitting
( The sitting was opened at 9.10 a.m. )
Conclusions of the European Council ( 19-20 March 2009 ) ( debate )
- Ladies and gentlemen , we have noted the internal political situation in the Czech Republic .
I should like on behalf of all of you to state that this should not affect the work of the Czech Presidency and that we must have the will to ensure that work continues .
We support the Czech Prime Minister , the President of the European Council , in his work to make a success of the Czech Presidency .
I should like - and I trust that I can say this on behalf of all of you - to encourage the President of the European Council to pursue the ratification process for the Treaty of Lisbon in his country and in other countries where things still need to be done .
We have been working on this treaty for the reform of the European Union for 10 years since the decisions were taken in Nice and we want to be able to take the final difficult steps so that this Treaty can hopefully enter into force in early 2010 .
We need the Treaty of Lisbon for greater democracy , so that the European Union has more freedom of action and for greater transparency .
( Applause )
The next item is the statements by the Council and the Commission on the conclusions of the European Council on 19-20 March 2009 .
Ladies and gentlemen , I would like to welcome you all on the occasion of the regular report from the European Council President following the Council 's Spring Summit .
First of all I must apologise for not being able to stay through to the end of the debate as usual .
The Deputy Prime Minister , Mr Vondra , will stand in for me in the second part , following the speeches of party representatives .
The reason I must return to Prague , as already stated by Mr Hans-Gert Pöttering , is the unprecedented obstruction from the socialists which we have been confronting throughout the Presidency and about which I have been quite open .
If the government falls it will definitely not threaten the Presidency and the fact that the socialists did not care that the Czech Republic was presiding over the European Council and refused even the most basic cooperation will be damaging mainly to social democracy .
The Presidency should not suffer through this because I am certain that what I said here in my opening speech in the European Parliament about how we would try to moderate the discussion and achieve a compromise is something that we have undoubtedly managed .
The Spring Council provides proof of that .
In my country it is customary when someone is speaking for others not to interrupt but it seems habits are rather different here .
Allow me to proceed - keeping strictly to the conclusions of the European Council - to the issue of why I am actually here today and why we took certain steps at the European Council .
Before that , however , I would like to comment on the Tripartite Summit with the social partners which preceded the Council meeting .
There was a relatively strong turn-out .
Apart from myself and European Commission President José Manuel Barroso the next two prime ministers also participated , in other words Mr Reinfeldt of Sweden and Mr Zapatero of Spain , and following the meeting I was very buoyed up and very surprised at the consensus between the social partners not only over the aims of the Presidency but generally over solutions to the developing unemployment situation resulting from the global financial crisis .
If anyone is interested I will speak more about the Tripartite , but we agreed on three basic principles , which are to enable much greater flexibility in the labour market along with labour mobility and to put much greater efforts into boosting levels of education and skills among the workforce in such a way that they can be brought to bear on the labour market , etc .
The Spring European Council was actually the second meeting of Heads of State or Government that we have organised but it was nevertheless the first properly formal summit .
The topic attracting the greatest attention was of course the question of how to resolve the current economic crisis .
I completely reject assertions that we are doing little in the way of more profound measures .
I will quote one figure : EUR 400 billion .
This EUR 400 billion amounts to 3.3 % of EU GDP and represents an unprecedented step and together with the automatic stabilisers which the EU has and the US , for example , does not have , I believe that the example quoted today by José Manuel Barroso is highly informative .
A worker dismissed from Saab in Sweden enjoys social standards that are completely different to those of a worker dismissed from General Motors somewhere in Chicago and the governments in these two cases have completely different approaches , as the automatic stabilisers multiply the EUR 400 billion to something substantially higher and give us an undisputed advantage over the US in this regard .
The fundamental support for the agreement from all 27 Member States confirms the validity of the Lisbon Strategy , as it is one of the four pillars upon which the entire Strategy actually rests .
Gordon Brown was here yesterday and he had an opportunity to explain clearly the approach of the 27 Member States , the mandate for the G20 summit and the three other de facto pillars to this Strategy .
We agreed that all of the short-term measures must be temporary and that is how we view them .
The medium and long-term priorities and the Lisbon Strategy objectives were confirmed and the short-term ones must follow the same line .
I would like to say openly that the European Council was more or less horrified by what US Finance Secretary Timothy Geithner had to say about permanent measures .
Not only is America repeating the errors of the 1930s in the form of massive stimulus packages , protectionist tendencies and calls for protectionism , the ' Buy American ' campaign and so on .
The combination of these steps and - what is worse - the initiative to make them permanent measures , amount to a road to hell .
We should take a look at the history books , which have clearly been gathering dust .
I consider the greatest success of the Spring Council debates to be a clear rejection of this route and this short-sighted approach .
I categorically reject the claims of European Socialist Party Chairman Poul Nyrup Rasmussen that the European Council has done little to combat the crisis and that we are waiting for the US to rescue us .
Not only is the path taken by the US itself discredited by history but also , as I said earlier , social security levels and the general provision of social needs to ordinary people are strikingly different in the US and at a far lower level .
The US path is dangerous because the Americans will need cash to finance their social stimulus packages and they will obtain it easily since there is always someone willing to purchase US bonds .
However , this puts market liquidity at risk , taking liquidity out of the global financial market so that the sale of other bonds , possibly European ones and definitely Polish , Czech and perhaps other ones too , will be put at risk as there will be no cash in the system .
This approach is causing concern and in my opinion it will be a topic of discussion at the G20 summit .
The G20 summit will provide just one of the opportunities for us to talk about this .
The discussion may continue later at the informal summit of the 27 Member States with the US administration and Barack Obama in Prague .
I firmly believe that we will find a common approach with the US because we definitely do not want a confrontation between the US and Europe .
In today 's world - and the crisis has demonstrated this to us once again - no economy exists in isolation and the level of interconnectedness is very high , which means that in times of crisis we all share the problem and we can solve it only by acting together .
The second pillar of the agreement , in terms of seeking a solution to the current crisis , is preparation for the G20 summit .
The documents drawn up by Gordon Brown and his administration are excellent and you had an opportunity to familiarise yourselves with them yesterday .
The three-pillar approach involves a solution for the financial sector and fiscal stimulus packages , regulating and - I would say - correcting the defects within the system and regenerating global trade , which means pressing for renewed discussions with Doha within a WTO framework .
This approach coincides precisely with the specific make-up of the solution put forward by the European Council which has won unanimous consent .
I would also like to applaud the agreement for the fact that we finally provided a concrete number in respect of increasing the disposable resources of the International Monetary Fund and we set this specific obligation at EUR 75 billion .
The 27 Member States share a unified position , a single voice and a common aim ahead of the G20 .
I regard this as the greatest success of all , because the entire European Council meeting was a test of European unity , European solidarity , European values and the unified European internal market .
If any of these were undercut , then we would emerge from this crisis in a weaker state .
On the contrary , I believe that if we respect these fundamental attributes we will emerge in a stronger state .
There is no reason for pessimism ahead of the G20 discussions , as Mr Rasmussen fears .
I believe that we have all understood the need to act in solidarity and to cooperate , as Graham Watson from the Group of the Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe confirms .
The current crisis , as we all know , is a crisis of confidence .
The third key area for resolving the crisis is therefore the restoration of confidence .
It is not enough simply to pour money into the system .
We tried that and the banks are still not lending .
The banks must start lending money but they will not if they do not have confidence .
The liquidity that is available to them has not solved the problem .
Confidence can neither be decreed nor purchased .
Within the framework of restoring confidence we have therefore taken a further step towards strengthening confidence by doubling the guarantee framework for countries outside the euro zone to EUR 50 billion just in case it is needed .
We have agreed even on this .
We even agreed that it was necessary to avoid a blanket approach and to proceed on a case-by-case basis for each bank and each country and we considered the one-size-fits-all approach to be dangerous at this point in time .
Markets are nervous , reacting immediately , excessively and negatively to every signal .
We therefore need better regulation .
I would emphasise that ' better ' might mean the introduction of regulation where none has existed so far .
This is where you step in , ladies and gentlemen of the European Parliament .
We would like to reach agreement - and there are signs that this is possible - over legislative acts which in essence would fulfil our vision and our ideas on better regulation of rating agencies , insurance company solvency , capital requirements of banks , cross-border payments , electronic money and so on .
I would be delighted if you could approve these regulations during your session and if they could take effect and be implemented immediately .
I warmly welcome , as we all do , the Larosière report , which has a brilliant analytical section and a very instructive implementation section , and in this sense the European Council has reached clear conclusions .
Perhaps the most important task of the Spring European Council was to assess progress to date on the implementation of the renewal plan as set out by the Council in December .
It is precisely here that most of the noise and criticism is centred - in my view undeservedly .
The plan is allegedly deficient , slow and unambitious .
I would like to set the record straight .
I have already mentioned the EUR 400 billion or 3.3 % of GDP , not including funds for recapitalising banks and guarantees amounting to more than 10 % of GDP , which is all the EU can afford at the moment .
This will still make a very significant impact on the Stability and Growth Pact and a very significant impact on public debt and on how matters are settled in the ' day after ' period , in other words after the crisis has passed , to put it in simple terms .
I believe that even the EUR 5 billion which was finally approved , and which forms only a small part of the enormous sum of EUR 400 billion , is the result of very difficult negotiations affecting many countries .
This is firstly because a sum of money does not constitute an anti-crisis measure if it is not drawn down in 2009-2010 .
It is also true that there is no transparent system for assessing projects , no proper list of these projects and that there are some things missing and others of which we have too much .
We finally reached agreement after very complex negotiations and here the Czech Presidency clearly played a dominant role in that it brought about the agreement to approve the EUR 5 billion and to send the money to you in the European Parliament , so that you could deal with it .

The renewal plan has a Community aspect of course , in respect of which about EUR 30 billion is available today , as well as a national aspect , in respect of which every Member State within the framework of the plan is implementing its own fiscal stimulus .
In my opinion the key issue agreed on by the European Council is the validity of the Stability and Growth Pact .
If we want to come through this crisis with a Union that is intact , undamaged and reinvigorated then we must respect our own rules .
In my opinion it would be a great error to create new packages without ensuring that all of the national and Community procedures had been initiated , that we knew what their impact would be and whether or not there was a need for further fiscal stimulus measures and the European Council even agreed to this .
If it is absolutely necessary the European Council will take further measures , but at this point we do not know whether or not we must take them as nobody knows when the crisis will bottom out or when it will end .
It would be completely absurd for us to take further measures without knowing the effect of the steps taken so far with the EUR 400 billion fiscal stimulus .
The plan is ambitious , diversified and comprehensive and it will solve the problems of growth and employment differently according to the situation in each country as well as problems linked to the economic situation of course .
The second major theme of the European Council was the climate and energy question .
We made significant progress both in energy security and climate protection .
Apart from anything else energy security is one of the main priorities of our Presidency and the need for it was demonstrated in January .
The gas crisis has not been resolved .
A gas crisis might be sparked off tomorrow , the day after tomorrow , in a month , next year , whenever .
The proof of what I am saying lies in the fact that even the anti-crisis package of EUR 5 billion is targeted mainly , if not exclusively , at the interconnections between European countries and includes a very wide range of mechanisms and projects aimed at reducing the dependence on one supply route .
We have agreed that an anti-crisis mechanism for handling a collapse in supplies must be ready by next winter in order to respond to any problems that might arise .
It is more than clear that we need this .
It became apparent in January , particularly in Slovakia and Bulgaria , but also in a number of other countries .
The climate debate : discussions and preparations are already beginning for the Copenhagen Conference .
Both Denmark , as the host country and Sweden in the course of its Presidency will handle this matter and the Czech Presidency is already working on it intensively .
We are trying to find a joint position at the European level .
We are beginning to negotiate with the major players without whom the success of the Copenhagen Conference cannot be assured .
These include the US and of course Japan , China and India as well as other big countries and large-scale polluters .
The biggest discussion - and I would like to touch on this only briefly - revolved around whether we should now establish not only the mechanisms but also the shares of the individual EU countries in the funding package that we are providing to help developing countries - third countries - to fulfil their obligations within the framework of the climate protection fight .
The decision we took was the right one .
In a situation where we are negotiating with all of the major players , who for now are acting more in word than in deed , it would be very poor tactics and very bad if we ourselves established barriers and limits which the others would not respect .
The negotiating position is far better if we have a free hand and this was agreed by the countries which actually tabled the last proposal , i.e. Sweden , Denmark , the Netherlands , the UK and Poland .
As far as the Polish approach is concerned , of course , we respected the interests of countries that are rather wary of this mechanism as well as the interests of countries which play a leading role in matters of climate change .
All countries , even those that view this as an absolute priority , agreed that we have yet to find the actual mechanism , the key and its wording , far enough in advance of the Copenhagen Conference .
The third area concerns external relations .
The European Council formally approved the Eastern Partnership initiative as an addition to our foreign policy or immediate neighbourhood policy .
Given that there are icebergs to the north and the Atlantic Ocean to the west , then it is in the south and east that our neighbours live and it is there that the countries which could potentially threaten both our economy and our social and security situation are situated .
The Eastern Partnership was an objective of the Czech Presidency and I am delighted that it has been approved with a firm commitment of EUR 600 million .
I would like to pre-empt questions about the participation of Belarus .
We are considering this .
Belarus has made some progress and the suspension of the ban on granting visas to members of the regime is being extended .
At this moment we are holding the door open to Belarus but no decision has been taken .
If the Member States do not agree to this and there is no decision from all of the 27 Member States then President Lukashenko will simply not be invited , although both the opposition and the neighbouring states are recommending that we do invite him .
I feel that this is a question I cannot respond to if you ask me at this point in time , and that is why I am pre-empting it .
I informed the European Council about the meeting and the informal summit with President Obama on 5 April in connection with the fulfilment of other priorities , specifically the transatlantic relationship .
The organisational details have still not been finalised but you will all be informed in detail .
The summit will be arranged around three main thematic areas : discussions uon the G20 summit , cooperation over energy and the climate where the EU wants to remain a key player just as the US does , and external relations and the geostrategic area from the Mediterranean Sea to the Caspian Sea , which means Afghanistan , Pakistan , the situation in Iran and of course the Middle East .
The summit with the US is important but we should clearly avoid inflated expectations as there is no coming of the Messiah .
The US has a host of domestic problems that must be resolved and that is precisely why it is a good thing that Barack Obama will speak in Prague about his fundamental view of this year , in which he will of course want to send a message to EU citizens about the main positions and the main aims of the new US administration .
There were many other issues at the European Council about which I am ready to respond .
If I have left something out I will add it in the discussion following the speeches of the party leaders .
We will probably not meet again like this because you are leaving to launch an election campaign , but I would be very pleased if you could resist launching it here and now .
I hope that the struggle for seats in the European Parliament will be fair and that you will meet again after the elections and continue your work .
- Thank you , Mr President-in-Office of the European Council , for your determination to continue the work of the Presidency despite the difficult situation in your country .
Mr President , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , ladies and gentlemen , the last European Council was a Council of practical results .
I should like to pay tribute to the Czech Presidency and in particular to Prime Minister Topolánek , who kept a tight grip on the framework of discussions by focusing them on concrete objectives .
The outcome is there to be seen : a series of important decisions in themselves , but also decisions that speak volumes about Europe 's determination today .
The reality of our decisions shows the reality of our unity and confounds pessimistic expectations which , once again , have proven to be inaccurate .
I am going to concentrate on economic aspects ; Prime Minister Topolánek has mentioned most of the issues , so there is no need to go back over them all .
Firstly , the Council has endorsed the Commission 's proposal to devote EUR 5 billion to strategic energy projects and to broadband Internet .
The agreement reached at the European Council clearly reflects the EU 's determination to use all the tools at its disposal and to do its best to prevent the crisis from jeopardising our long-term objectives , particularly in terms of energy security and the fight against climate change .
The second major decision was to double the maximum amount of support granted for the Member States ' balances of payments : EUR 50 billion is a very strong commitment .
It proves that , even when times are tough , solidarity is not a hollow word in Europe .
Indeed , the best way for Europeans to curb the crisis and to re-establish growth conditions is to coordinate their positions , take action together and support one another .
The third major decision shows that the Union is fully contributing to the effort to be made to tackle the crisis worldwide .
The budgetary stimulus given to the European economy , if we include the automatic stabilisers in this , is now approaching 4 % of European GDP .
However , to this we added - during the European Council - the commitment to support the IMF with a maximum of EUR 75 billion .
The Union is playing its part to the full , both by forcefully combating the crisis and by introducing a programme of ambitious and forward-looking regulatory reforms .
Indeed , the European Union has set an example of unity and leadership which , if followed , will pave the way for more wide-ranging solutions at international level .
The debate that we held yesterday with the UK Prime Minister , Gordon Brown , clearly demonstrated this .
The European Union is approaching the London Summit with a solid and consistent agenda , based on four pillars : a substantial and coordinated budgetary stimulus , an ambitious regulatory agenda , a strong message against all forms of protectionism , and a sustained commitment to the Millennium Development Goals , particularly for the most underprivileged in the world .
This is a leadership agenda , and I believe that it is nonetheless important to point out - since it was not obvious at the start - that the position of the Member States , which are going to take part in the London Summit , and of the Commission , is in fact the message of the entire Union of 27 Member States , which want to maintain this leadership position so as to introduce a new approach at international level .
This is not a technocratic agenda .
The challenge is to re-introduce into the economic system , and especially into the global financial system , ethical values without which the market economy cannot function .
People must be re-installed at the heart of the global economy .
We are in favour of open and competitive economies , but economies in which the markets serve the citizens .
That is , moreover , why I support Mrs Merkel 's ambitious proposal to create a charter for a sustainable economy .
It points out that we are in favour of a social market economy .
However , the European Council also looked beyond the crisis .
In the area of external relations , I welcome the support given by the 27 to the Commission 's proposals to develop the Eastern Partnership , which we will have the opportunity to examine in more detail during the Eastern Partnership Summit on 7 May .
Working with the Union for the Mediterranean , we now have a consistent framework for our neighbourhood policy , which is without doubt one of the main priorities of the Union 's external relations .
Mr President , we now need to keep up the momentum on the work of economic recovery ; on the EUR 5 billion there is a real urgency .
This investment is critical in these difficult times .
We all know that the credit crunch has had a direct impact on strategic projects .
There are some challenges , particularly the possibility of a freeze on oil and gas connections .
It has put the brakes on investment in renewable energy .
It has also put research on clean technology on hold .
Therefore , we need to have a clear European response .
I know that this Parliament is committed to moving this dossier forward with speed , and hope that your own examination of the proposals will allow you to enter into swift negotiations with the Council , so that they can pass into law by May .
The same is true of the package of existing and forthcoming measures on the financial system .
For Parliament and the Council to secure first-reading agreement on these measures before the election recess would send out a powerful message that the EU knows what it has to do to restore order to the financial system .
This is a key building-block in restoring confidence , and this is why the Commission will continue to adopt the proposals as set out in its communication of 4 March 2009 on hedge funds and private equity , on executive pay and on how to follow up on the ideas set out in the report of the high-level group I have established under the leadership of Mr de Larosière .
In fact , this report received a warm welcome at the European Council and it was considered unanimously the basis for further work .
I am very happy with that result .
We also need to continue to deepen the work of coordination .
Coordination is key - coordination and implementation .
The guidelines we have set out on impaired assets and on support to the car sector are already being used to direct Member States ' action most effectively .
Now we are in the implementation phase of the recovery plan , the Commission will be stepping up its work to monitor how national stimulus announcements are being carried through into action .
We have some instruments .
We also have the instruments of the Lisbon Strategy that remain in force .
We will also look closely at the various national measures being taken to address the crisis and stimulate demand , to see what can be learned and how we can help .
The same spirit should inspire us as we prepare for the Employment Summit .
I have said it before in this Parliament : this crisis is causing real hardship , and this is nowhere more visible than the impact on the jobs market .
Unemployment is rising and most likely will go on rising .
This is my number one concern , and I think it should be the number one concern in Europe .
Workers all over Europe must know that European leaders care .
That is why the special summit devoted to employment in early May is so important : to take stock of the impact of the recovery measures so far , to see what is working and what is not working , and to exchange best practices and agree on further steps necessary .
We need to make sure that all levers are mobilised at local , regional , national and European level to cushion the impact of the crisis and prepare people for the jobs of the future .
We must , in particular , make the most of what we can do to complete the Member States ' action through the European Social Fund and the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund .
As you will know , the European Council decided that the summit should take place in a troika format .
To be open and frank with you - as I always am - I was disappointed with this decision .
I would have preferred all 27 Member States to devote the time necessary to discuss together the best way forward on what is after all the key issue for European citizens in this crisis : the employment situation .
Of course , we know that most of the instruments are at national level , but that should not be a reason for European leaders not to discuss at European level the way in which they can coordinate their actions .
We also know that , when we take decisions regarding the financial sector , or when we adopt a recovery plan , these are also measures for employment .
But I think the subject of employment deserves attention to itself , on its own merits , from European leaders .
Be that as it may , the Commission is fully mobilised and set to deliver a strong message on 7 May 2009 .
I personally believe that this summit , which it was decided to hold in a troika format , should be kept open so that all prime ministers who want to participate should have the opportunity to do so .
I would like to tell you , as Prime Minister Topolánek did , that just before the European Council we had a very important discussion with the social partners , together with the Prime Minister of Sweden , Mr Reinfeldt , and the Prime Minister of Spain , Mr Zapatero .
I think we saw the willingness of the social partners to engage with us .
It is important to send that message to all Europeans , and specifically to all workers in Europe , that we at European level also care about a social dialogue .
We have invited the social partners to come to the Commission .
We have organised a meeting in the College of Commissioners , and I am determined to go on working with the social partners , the European Parliament , the governments of Europe , the Presidency , of course , and also with the Committee of Regions , and the Social and Economic Committee because I really believe that , in facing this problem of employment , we need a European mobilisation not only of governments and the European institutions but also of the social partners and all our societies .
I am determined that we should have all the possible options on the table .
That is why the Commission will be devoting special efforts over the coming weeks to working with all our partners , and I would very much welcome the full participation of Members of the European Parliament and of this Parliament as an institution .
You have a wealth of knowledge about action on the ground .
In short , this was a European Council that took very important decisions on economic and financial matters - these are very concrete results .
But it was in no sense the end of a process .
We need to keep up the momentum of the process .
We need to be open to everything we have to do in face of a crisis that will have , specifically , more impact on social matters .
It is important that we retain this determination and that , through coordination and implementation , Europe will be able not only to respond to the challenge internally but also to make an important contribution to the global response to this crisis of very great dimensions .
( Applause )


on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - ( FR ) Mr President , Mr Topolánek , Mr Barroso , ladies and gentlemen , after leading our US partners and the rest of the world from the start of the crisis in an ambitious , but truly necessary , reform of the financial markets , last Friday Europe established a road map for the G20 of 2 April .
During yesterday 's debate on the G20 , some Members said that this was not enough ; others said that it was too much .
The reality is that , in the successive crises that we have just experienced , Europe has been there , has coordinated itself , has worked as a team .
I repeat : in the crisis situation that we are experiencing , as with all the global issues - energy , climate change , foreign affairs , security and defence - national solutions are no longer suitable .
If even the UK Prime Minister , whom we heard yesterday , extols the virtues of the European Union , declaring himself , I quote , ' proud to be British and proud to be European ' , I feel secure in my belief .
The decision taken by the European Council last week to put in place a EUR 50 billion fund to help Member States outside the euro zone in this difficult period is a good thing , since what affects one of us affects us all .
This is the meaning of European integration .
When added to the EUR 400 billion of the European economic recovery plan , these appropriations will help to re-establish growth conditions and to create wealth and , ultimately , jobs .
The same is true of the EUR 5 billion package that we have decided to invest in order to support projects in the area of energy and measures linked to the Internet and other issues .
I call on the Council to do its utmost to ensure that an agreement is reached by the end of this parliamentary term on the three major issues currently on the table : credit rating agencies , directives on regulatory capital requirements and the Solvency II Directive .
On this last text , the Council must step up a gear to ensure that it can be adopted at first reading , in April .
Ladies and gentlemen , we do not need any more socialist economic measures .
We need more jobs , and this package of measures will allow this .
Furthermore , I note with interest that not one European leader on the left or on the right backed socialist measures in Brussels last week .
That also confirms my feeling that there is not always a great deal of consistency between what is being said currently by the Chairman of the Socialist Group in the European Parliament and what is being done by socialist-led governments , and , Mr Schulz , you still have a lot of work to do to convince your political friend , Mr Steinbrück , to become more social .

I should also like to mention the preparation for the Copenhagen Conference in December and to ask the Czech Presidency to draft some proposals on international finance mechanisms by June .
With regard to the energy and climate change package , Europe has set the tone and must not lose its advantage .
Climate change will not wait for the end of the crisis .
It is therefore our responsibility to convince our partners to take our lead in combating climate change and to adopt the objective of a 30 % reduction in CO2 emissions .
Barack Obama seems to have decided to accept the helping hand we were offering him by deciding to implement an emissions quota exchange system in the United States .
To conclude , I wish to express my satisfaction that Europe is finally taking our neighbours in the East seriously by adopting a strategic partnership with Armenia , Azerbaijan , Belarus , Georgia , the Republic of Moldova and Ukraine .
This partnership will be a useful addition to the work of the EURONEST Assembly , the initiative for which came from my group and which will come into existence with the agreement of all the parliamentary groups , from the next parliamentary term .
On the other hand , it is high time the Union for the Mediterranean , which was set up last summer , got its secretariat moving in Barcelona and worked on concrete projects .
The 27 requested this last week ; we expect to have a road map in June .
on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , Mr Topolánek , I find it remarkable that you are here .
It does you honour in your difficult circumstances .
That you are here this morning shows that you are a fighter , but you have yet to understand the remit of the President-in-Office of the European Union .
If you come here to engage in Czech domestic policy , then you should not be surprised if we discuss Czech domestic policy .
In my opinion , however , you are here as the President-in-Office of the European Council , which is why I fail to understand your comment about obstruction by the social democrats .
( Applause )
In any case , you were toppled by two Civil Democratic Party votes and two Green votes .
So what about obstruction by your own people ?
Yesterday we heard a speech by a leading European head of government who , as the host of the G20 summit next week , said the opposite of what you said here as President-in-Office of the Council .
What Gordon Brown said yesterday was the opposite of what you said here .
You said that the path that the US is taking is historically the wrong path .
That is what you said here a few moments ago .
You said that Geithner 's way is the wrong way and leads to hell .
That is not the level at which the European Union can work with the US .
You are not representing the Council of the European Union , you are representing yourself .
That is the big mistake that you are making here .
( Applause )
Now I also understand why people told us at the beginning that it is hard to engage in dialogue with this man .
No , Mr President-in-Office , that is the way to take the European Union back up a blind alley .
The President of the Commission said something very important today .
He said that it would be a serious mistake to deny the social summit , the employment summit .
At a time when millions of people in Europe are worried about their jobs , at a time when bankrupt banks and insurance companies , including in the US , are being bailed out by public funds to the tune of billions or even trillions , which you describe as the path to hell , in a situation in which people know that ultimately they must pay out of their taxes , be they euros or crowns ; in this sort of situation the European Council is saying to these people , we have no interest in your employment problems .
We have no time for that .
That is a fatal signal .
That is the wrong signal .
That is why I say , Mr President of the Commission , that your advice to the Council Presidency is not enough .
We do not want a troika ; we want a discussion open to everyone .
He should re-convene the summit , so that the Heads of State and Government can assume their responsibility of discussing the employment situation in Europe at the beginning of May .
( Applause )

Mr Topolánek , I want to give you three recommendations from our point of view to take with you over the next few days : if you force the governments of the European Union to mobilise 1.5 % of their gross domestic product in 2009 and 1 % in 2010 as a package to address the short-term economic situation and so far four countries , if I have followed this correctly , meet these specifications , then that is not enough and it is your job as President-in-Office of the Council to ensure that the states honour their self-imposed commitments .
Secondly , please re-convene the social summit .
Show the European public that employment policy and initiatives to protect jobs are at the centre of government action .
Thirdly , please ensure in the Council that clarity finally reigns as to what is to happen on institutional issues after the elections .
I personally feel very sorry for you .
I know that you have advocated the ratification of the Treaty of Lisbon , but I also know that your own president is on your case and that everything is being done there to stop you getting it through the Senate .
We are here to help you .
Where we can , we are talking to your ODS senators , trying to get them to agree to the ratification process .
No problem , we are by your side and will do whatever we can .
There is still a very separate issue , however : you must ultimately tell us on what basis you wish to proceed .
On the basis of the Treaty of Nice , which is in force , or on the basis of the Treaty of Lisbon , which is not in force ?
To say , we will start with Nice and then we will add a bit of Lisbon , that is just not on .
That is why I also say , as far as we are concerned : consultation after the European elections , absolutely , but only once the European Parliament has been convened .
I am not prepared to be consulted after 7 June until this Parliament has been formally convened for its first sitting .
We must still be able to demand a minimum of institutional respect .
So these three points , Mr Topolánek , and then you will regain some prestige with us .
( Applause )
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - Mr President , for all the real suffering there is a light-hearted definition of recession .
It is when you go to your bank machine to withdraw money and a sign flashes saying : ' Insufficient funds available ' - and you are not sure if it means yours or theirs !
( Laughter )
For all the dark warnings about splits and strife , this European Council has produced a positive package and I congratulate the Czech Presidency on that achievement .
We have a pledge of more money from the IMF , a promise of more support for Europe 's most troubled economies and an agreement on moving ahead with European supervision of the financial system .
All these are welcome .
And I was particularly pleased to see that the Council has saved Mr Barroso 's bacon by transferring five billion unspent euros into the recovery plan .
Investment in transport , infrastructure and broadband connections will create jobs now and prepare Europe for the future .
Meanwhile , money going to the Nabucco pipeline will ease our troubling energy reliance on Russia .
We need a clear assurance from the President-in-Office that funds from the EUR 5 billion will actually reach that project , but also that investment in gas supply infrastructure will not be a substitute for renewables research .
Green growth remains essential for our citizens ' security now and in the future , and so do the principles embodied in the Lisbon Strategy : flexicurity , the knowledge-based economy , employment regulations that are fit for purpose - these are key to a competitive economy and a successful single market .
It is to the Council 's great credit that the protectionist language of the past cast no shadow over its conclusions .
But for all the apparent agreement , a niggling nuance remains over Member States ' priorities .
On the one hand , we have those who focus on robust regulation at international level , and on the other , those who lay stress on a strong stimulus package .
This is a false choice .
Of course we need supervisory structures with real regulatory bite , but so too do we need counter-cyclical measures to deal with the realities of recession .
The long term and the short term : both must be addressed .
Our leaders must be clear about that at the G20 Summit .
If we cannot agree on our common cause then we cannot hope to punch at our collective weight .
America will come to the G20 with her own agenda .
We must arrive with ours and together reach a deal that delivers for all .
President-in-Office , last week at the Council you barely discussed the legal basis on which the next Commission will be formed , but it is no longer only Ireland which is unlikely to ratify Lisbon .
I therefore urge you to convene the leaders of Council , Commission and Parliament before this House rises in May to agree on how to compose Parliament and Commission with legal certainty .
There is a moment , President-in-Office , in the famed melody in Smetana 's Má Vlast , where cello and bassoon rise in crescendo from lugubrious depths to reach a seemingly impossible high note .
That moment has passed for your Government .
For Europe it is yet to come .
See to it that domestic difficulties do not sap your stride .
( Applause )
Mr President , I shall begin by congratulating Prime Minister Topolánek on the excellent preparation of the European Summit and on what has so far been a very good presidency .
Several months ago many politicians doubted whether a small country in Central and Eastern Europe would be able to carry the burden of leadership of the European Union .
Mr Topolánek and his entire cabinet have proved that it is possible .
Once again I congratulate you , and at what is a difficult moment for you because of domestic problems , I hope that you will be able to solve those problems and that you will also prepare the next summit in three months ' time .
However , because we are among friends , we must speak sincerely .
I would like to talk about several matters concerning the summit which I view critically , although my criticism is not directed at Mr Topolánek personally .
I will start with support for the Eastern Partnership .
A sum of EUR 600 million has been made available for this over five years , but we know that of this only EUR 350 million is new money .
Together this means barely EUR 20 million annually for each country which is part of the project .
Is that really sufficient for the EU to build its influence in the region ?
While talking about our Eastern partners , I would like to ask what has been decided on the question of visas for them ?
It seems to me that absolutely nothing has been decided .
In fact a decision has been made to refuse any kind of cooperation in this area .
We must ask ourselves if we want to deter our Eastern neighbours or to encourage them to work with us ?
It looks as if some Member States , in order not to make themselves unpopular with Russia , are trying to weaken the idea of the Eastern Partnership .
We can see obstruction for the same reason when we consider construction of the Nabucco gas pipeline .
The allocation of EUR 200 million to the project , which has an estimated cost of construction of EUR 8 billion , only brings a smile of pity to the faces of our partners .
We should remember that for reasons of our own energy security we should be the ones most interested in building a channel for transporting fuel from the Caspian Sea Basin region to Europe , and that the channel should not be dependent on the will of the Kremlin .
At the summit EUR 5 billion was also allocated to the anti-crisis package .
Part of this money will go to large energy projects , including EUR 330 million to my country , Poland .
Unfortunately , a condition was adopted which is very hard to meet , namely that the money must be spent by the end of next year .
That sum has become virtual money , because knowing the tempo of absorption of EU funds by the Polish Government , the money may not be spent and then will no longer be available .
Therefore I propose extending the time frame of availability for these funds .
While I am talking about the summit , I would also like to sum up the earlier informal anti-crisis summit held in Brussels , which was an initiative of Mr Topolánek .
The participants of that summit unanimously opposed economic protectionism .
Meanwhile , several days ago we were given proof that the resolutions made at the summit have little meaning , when the French motor concern Renault announced that it is moving production from Slovenia back to France .
Unfortunately , this shows that at a time of economic crisis the EU 's fundamental principle of solidarity is giving way to economic egoism .
I appeal to Mr Topolánek to put an end to this .
on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - Mr President , I think that only history will judge whether the summit last week was a great summit .
This morning I would like a wake-up call .
We are in a system crisis , and this system crisis can quickly develop into a societal crisis .
Roosevelt in the 1930s won the political battle against the Fascists ; Europe lost it .
So , why did Roosevelt win ?
He won because he had the trust even of those US citizens who lost a lot of economic income in the economic crisis of the 1930s .
What are the four elements of trust which Roosevelt won ?
The first was reregulation .
Roosevelt heavily attacked the oligopolies , the big companies in the US , and reregulated the economy .
This is exactly what we have to do at the G20 in London .
Even if Gordon Brown were the champion of deregulation , maybe this shows that change can happen .
Secondly , strengthen the social fabric .
Roosevelt 's programme was : firstly , redistribution of wealth as well as taxing the rich and giving money to the poor ; and , secondly , a huge programme for young people in the US .
What are we offering young people at European level , so that they do not give their votes to the Fascists in the European elections ?
Thirdly - and Martin has raised this - the biggest error of your summit was the downgrading of the social summit in May .
The only way society stays together is if the multipliers in society function , so we need an upgrading of the May meeting and we need a broadening .
You also have to call to the table all the environmental NGOs , the development NGOs and the social NGOs which are preparing , with society and with citizens , the changes we need in society .
Roosevelt 's fourth issue was his economic investment .
That was the one he essentially lost , because it was only during the Second World War that the economic motor ran again in the US .
We do not want to go to war .
The war we have to win today is the war against the planet .
Our war is green investment - that is where we have to win the war .
Therefore , there are two issues .
One is that we need green Eurobonds .
Out of the EUR 5 billion we need to park a maximum of money with the European Investment Bank , so as to have leverage for renewables and efficiency .
Second , we have to bring the cities of Europe into the game .
European citizens do not live in the North Sea , in the dumping areas of CO2 , you cannot win votes there .
We have to win in European cities - and the citizens in these cities - through a smart city programme .
That is winning the economy and it is winning the hearts of citizens for Europe .
on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group . - Ladies and gentlemen , it is generally obvious that we need to find a way to resolve the crisis afflicting Europe and other parts of the world at the present time .
It is beyond dispute that our efforts must include confidence building and support for financial stability , as the European Council has also said .
However , the problem is one of who can restore confidence and how it can be restored .
If we leave it mostly to those who contributed to the current crisis through their insatiable greed and if we do not try to support those who create values but who are unable to influence either the actions of firms or entire economies , then the outlook will be bleak .
The Council discussion points which talk of the need to tackle the social impacts of the crisis are therefore extremely important , in my opinion .
The sharp rise in unemployment is a problem and measures for stimulating employment and preventing job losses are extremely important for employees .
If support is provided only to the largest firms and their managers , then we could not feel enthusiastic about the plan .
I applaud the effort to focus on boosting energy security and linking up Europe 's energy grids and the overall emphasis on infrastructure development in this area .
Apart from anything else , this is one way to support employment and jobs and to secure benefits in the future .
We are certainly going to face further critical moments and the current crisis gives us an opportunity to prepare for them as well .
In my opinion the renewed support for the irreplaceable role of nuclear energy is a good thing , despite the diametrically opposing views on this form of energy even within the political group to which I belong .
I would like to comment again on the Eastern Partnership .
Generally speaking I am of course in favour of the broadest possible international cooperation , but here we can see a clear attempt - and one which is , moreover , explicitly formulated as such - to draw the states of the former Soviet Union closer to the EU and to distance them from Russia .
We are therefore establishing a sphere of influence and thus doing something ourselves which we sharply criticise in others .
Mr President , last week it was stated in the EU Observer that Jacques Delors had a pessimistic view of the future of the euro zone .
So , here we have one of the champions of the euro expressing his concern for the EU and the euro in the run-up to the recent summit .
He said , amongst other things , that he was concerned about the lack of willingness to clean up the financial sector and to introduce new rules to regulate it .
I have not previously had reason to agree with Mr Delors , but in this case I must say that , unfortunately , he is right to be concerned .
The conclusions of the summit in this regard are very vague .
Throughout the crisis I have repeatedly questioned the Commission about its desire to regulate and control the financial sector .
It has no desire to do so .
It continually refers to the right of the internal market to govern what happens .
Mr Delors also said something else that , for a eurosceptic such as myself , almost gives me a sense of déjà vu in relation to arguments that I put forward on a previous occasion .
He said that the economies of Europe are too different for the euro .
Bingo , Mr Delors !
That is precisely what they are .
The single currency is part of the problem , not part of the solution .
Europe needs a strong common regulation of the financial sector , but a large degree of flexibility when it comes to what economic policy will best tackle the crisis in the individual countries .
- ( CS ) Ladies and gentlemen , I welcome the fact that the Council last week postponed a revision of the unrealistic Lisbon Strategy .
I also welcome the postponement of a decision over financing climate moves .
In this context I would like to applaud the statement of Commission President José Manuel Barroso , who declared that the EU should not make any commitments on climate matters unless other countries , particularly the US and China , do the same .
I would like to point out that these entirely rational conclusions were reached by the heads of the 27 Member States and the Commission in a situation where the EU is facing a sharp rise in unemployment and a decline in the economy and the Lisbon Treaty has not been approved .
All of this clearly shows that the Lisbon Treaty is completely unnecessary for the adoption of the sort of fundamental decisions that are clearly good for Member State citizens .
It is totally superfluous , and this is proven by the current rational steps taken by the European Council based on the present framework of treaties and under Czech leadership .
Yesterday the government of the Czech Prime Minister and EU Council President Mirek Topolánek lost a vote of confidence . I would like to point out to all of you who have had the arrogance here in this Parliament to criticise the Czech Parliament 's action as irresponsible that this was a democratic decision by the democratically elected parliament of a sovereign Member State .
It is not the government of the Czech Republic which presides over the EU but the Czech Republic itself , whose citizens I have the honour to represent here .
I know that my country has administrative and democratic systems that are strong enough for it to fulfil its duties at the EU level unequivocally .
Following the collapse of the Topolánek government President Václav Klaus has the strongest political mandate in the Czech Republic .
As you have been able to confirm in this Parliament , he is a statesman with strong democratic sentiments who understands European integration not as the one-way street controlled by the politico-bureaucratic elites but as a complex process which will succeed only if it arises from the will of the people .
Ladies and gentlemen , a few weeks ago President Klaus told us clearly that he saw no alternative to EU membership for the Czech Republic .
What is more , the majority of Czech citizens consider their country 's membership of the EU to be beneficial .
All concerns about the irresponsibility of the Czech Republic are therefore completely unnecessary .
In conclusion I would like to point out to the head of the Sudeten German Landsmannschaft , Mr Posselt , who has publicly deplored the downfall of ministers Vondra and Schwarzenberg and who has called on the Czech Republic to set up a strong pro-European government , that the Czech Republic is not the Protectorate of Bohemia and Moravia but a sovereign state where ministers are appointed by the President of the Czech Republic and the government derives its authority from a parliament elected by Czech citizens .
- Mrs Bobošíková , democracy also means that all democrats can express themselves on procedures in all countries of the European Union and beyond .
That too is democracy .
President-in-Office of the Council . - ( CS ) To be serious , I suppose we are already succumbing to a touch of pre-election rhetoric .
Let us try to look at these matters seriously and find unity among the 27 countries , each of which has its own history and each of which is experiencing different symptoms from the ongoing financial crisis or different impacts on the real economy .
If we cannot agree on a joint approach then it will not matter who had what starting position at the beginning of this problem because we will all pay the price through a domino effect .
That is point number one .
I did not criticise the US approach for the sake of it , but rather because I wanted to point out the advantage possessed by the EU .
This advantage consists in an extensive social programme , making it possible for us to avoid investing such colossal sums in the social stabilisation of people who have got into problems .
The system quite simply works .
Our one major task is to keep the system in operation and to guarantee for EU citizens the same social standards as they had before the crisis .
In my opinion this is definitely not a minor task and it will cost a lot of money .
We have decided on some very concrete measures and the figures of EUR 5 , 50 or 75 billion demonstrate , in my opinion , the European Council 's clear commitment to respond in a concrete way to the situation in hand not just through general measures within this or that framework but through very concrete steps .
There is a great difference between proclaiming fine words on a street corner and putting them into practice .
Our common aim now is to implement all the steps we have been talking about , to put them into practice and to look for feedback .
No one has a precise idea - and I can state in all seriousness that not even the macro-economists have any idea - what the effects of these various steps might be .
However , we do know for sure that someone will have to pay for this rescue and for the party .
It would be highly irresponsible of us not to consider the aftermath , even though we do not know how long the situation will go on for , and not to consider who will pay for it all and what effect it will have on the euro zone and on the Stability and Growth Pact , and what chance it will give to countries such as my own to join and adopt the euro .
I will not be responding to the comments of party leader Mr Schulz .
Berlusconi did that before the last elections and I have no wish to repeat his mistake .
I think it is not necessary to respond to some attacks .
Nevertheless , it is impossible that banknote printers will be the only ones to profit from this crisis .
That would not be a good thing .
The job summit .
We proposed a full format to the European Council , of course .
José Manuel Barroso and I shared this idea because we feel the same need as you to draw the social partners into discussion at a higher level than the Tripartite and to discuss with them problems connected with employment , with implementing various national packages , with the effect on employment and with the next steps that we take in order to protect EU citizens from the impact of this crisis .
It was not our decision that this summit would be a troika .
I understand the fears expressed by many Heads of State or Government and I myself was wholly in favour of the full format .
On the other hand we should not forget that it was only an informal summit , the conclusions of which are not binding .
From this standpoint the reduced format might be an advantage , because it means that the recommendations of the informal summit can be presented at the regular June Council where they can perhaps be unequivocally approved .
In my opinion this is not such a grave error and there is no need to make a political problem out of it .
The important thing is that we found the courage to call this summit , that we invited the social partners to attend , that we will prepare it with them over the long term - ahead of the job summit there will be three round tables in Stockholm , Madrid and Prague - and that we are trying to reach conclusions that will be valuable for the June Council .
The Lisbon Treaty .
I will allow myself one joke today .
I think that the telephone number to call for questions about the future of the Lisbon Treaty is no longer that of the Government Office and Prime Minister Topolánek , but rather that of the Parliament and Jiří Paroubek .
I have to say that responsibility for moving the situation forwards really lies with those who created the situation .
I am doing everything , of course , to ensure that I keep to my commitment in order not to have to erase my signature from the stone in front of the monastery of Saint Geronimo in Lisbon .
The Commission .
The December summit of the Council made a clear decision and we are aware of the complexity of the situation .
I have to say that our ambition is to achieve political agreement at the June European Council .
We will of course consult with you : it is essential to have discussions with the European Parliament .
In this context we are even considering that if there is sufficient interest from the European Parliament then we could postpone the June Council by a week in order to extend our 10 days of debate into 17 days .
I think that 17 days would give us enough time for the debate .
These consultations are essential , but nevertheless before we take a formal decision it will of course be necessary to determine whether we are proceeding under the Treaty of Nice or under the Lisbon Treaty , as this will allow us to anticipate what form the agreement will take , whether the number of countries will be the same , whether all of them will have a commissioner , etc .
We must take the results of the European elections into account and all I can say is that we will proceed in accordance with the approved , standard procedure , because we are in a kind of legal vacuum and in a situation that must be dealt with politically and in practical terms .
Further discussions related to questions about regulation versus stimulus measures .
I have already said in my introduction that in my opinion the EU has adopted an entirely correct approach by not opting for one or the other but saying only that we have rescued the banking sector and now all that remains is to clean it up .
The Commission has drawn up a plan on assessing individual bad assets ( impact assessments ) and on dealing with the problem . In my opinion the only way to boost confidence in the banking sector and also the confidence of the banking sector is to clean up these banks .
The Czech Republic and Sweden know how to do this and the US treasury secretary has submitted his own plan for the US .
In my opinion this is the only option for tackling the situation .
I have already mentioned the stimulus packages .
The second pillar of this structure is regulation , which lies partially in your hands .
It is also partially mentioned in the Larosière report , which is a fine piece of work .
It will involve the regulation of hedge funds and private equity funds and it will of course sort out the offshore sector .
You must surely see the great progress over this matter and we are preparing in these matters for a potential next crisis .
We are not under time pressure from day to day to come up with the new regulation .
We are under time pressure to limit any possible future problems .
There was also discussion about the role of the IMF .
We agreed that the IMF should be the sponsor of these future solutions , but the problem is not that we would have a small number of institutions wielding little power .
The problem hinges on whether the largest players on the global financial market will respect these institutions as this was not the case in the past .
This is anyway a fundamental debate and it will also be an issue for the G20 : the acceptance of an enhanced role for the IMF , the World Bank and the OECD in the system of international global financial institutions and respect for these institutions and their findings .
I think it would be good to say something about the Eastern Partnership .
Yesterday I met President Yushchenko again and I welcome this agreement and the signing of the agreement between the European Commission and Ukraine .
It marks a significant step towards stabilising the situation .
I was recently in Azerbaijan where I spoke with President Aliyev .
The EU must remain a sort of lighthouse for these countries .
This is not a question of erecting new barriers , it is a question of the EU having a mission and its mission is to expand the area of security , the area of freedom , the area of prosperity and the area of solidarity .
There are no borders here , and by that we are not saying that these states will become EU members tomorrow , the day after tomorrow or any time at all .
If the light is extinguished in this lighthouse , development in these countries will not be under our control .
We must draw these countries into discussion , provide them with unrestricted travel opportunities , provide them with economic cooperation , provide exchanges between educational institutions and schools and provide better governance .
I think that this is our duty and in this sense the Eastern Partnership provides clear evidence that we are moving in the right direction .
In response to the words of Mr Bielan I would say that it was a major success to get the EUR 600 million approved at all .
We did not all agree on it , there was no unanimous agreement , but rather it was the maximum possible compromise to which the 27 Member States would agree .
In conclusion I would like to say something about social impacts .
Here I must return to the Tripartite and applaud the role of both social partners .
We did not talk about how much money we would give to people .
We talked about how to prepare people for this situation or for a potentially similar future situation by boosting skills , boosting education and supporting SMEs which create the bulk of jobs .
At the current time , of course , the cost of labour is falling because we want to keep people in employment for as long as possible , because getting them back into employment is several times more expensive than keeping them in employment .
Workforce mobility .
I am really looking forward to the debates in the various national parliaments , and especially my own , over how we want to amend labour law in order to achieve a more flexible and more mobile workforce .
This is the barrier to a solution .
It is necessary to ensure rapid growth in jobs and a rapid solution to the predicament of people who have got into this situation through no fault of their own .
I would like to say in conclusion something about the EU-US summit .
I am enormously appreciative of the fact that after the G20 in London and after the summit in Strasbourg-Kehl the US administration headed by Barack Obama will coming to Prague .
This has enormous symbolic value for us and we are also inviting the President of the European Parliament as I sense a certain disapproval over the failure of the US president to visit the European Parliament .
There will not be much time for discussion but in my opinion we need to know what the US wants , what we want and to reach an agreement .
We definitely do not want to erect new barriers - that is after all the main aim of Euro-Atlantic civilisation as a whole .
I would finally like to say something about the remarks of Mrs Bobošíková .
The Czech administration is managing the situation very well so far .
I simply do not agree that we might make some sort of organisational slip-up , that we might fail to manage one of the most demanding presidencies of recent years , because we have repeatedly been confronted with a wide range of problems that would have been difficult for anyone to predict .
Our level of flexibility , our level of creativity , our ability to respond , to act and to look for compromises surely do not merit such harsh criticism .
The current situation where the Czech Republic has lost a confidence motion also happened in Denmark and Italy , while in France there was a change of government , albeit as a result of elections .
I do not view the situation in such a poor light and I can assure you that the Czech Presidency will not suffer through this in any way and that all of us who have responsibility for managing the EU agenda will undoubtedly do just that .
- Thank you Mr President-in-Office of the European Council .
You take with you our good wishes that you will be able to discharge in full your duties as President-in-Office of the European Council and will do everything to achieve agreement on the Treaty of Lisbon in your country also .
With these good wishes we thank you for your presence here this morning .
- Mr President , I want to express my support for the impressive way in which the Czech Presidency has dealt with some of the crucial issues facing Europe .
From the economic and financial crisis to energy security and climate change , the Presidency has been steadfast and clear in its objectives and it has offered Europe clear leadership in testing times .
In particular , Prime Minister Topolánek has demonstrated clear leadership , above all in warning of the dangers of protectionism .
When others flirted with erecting damaging barriers to trade , the Czech Presidency has spoken clearly and consistently for open trade and , crucially , for the vital need to uphold the single market .
Earlier this month Mr Topolánek said that protectionism is always harmful and , in the case of the EU , it is illogical .
We must learn a lesson from the crisis and say ' no ' to isolation , ' no ' to protectionism and ' yes ' to cooperation .
He was so right to remind us all of the fundamental principle that underlines the EU .
This honesty stands in marked contrast to the disingenuous and self-serving speech delivered by the British Prime Minister in this Chamber yesterday .
Mr Brown 's speech was long on hyperbole but singularly failed to mention the central fact that the United Kingdom will , under his leadership , have the longest and deepest recession of any industrialised nation .
He ignored his role in putting in place and operating a fundamentally flawed financial regulatory framework .
He ignored the enormous debt burden he has placed on the British people .
Europe needs no lectures from the British Government about what must be done to get out of this crisis .
Europe and the international community now need to move quickly to restore confidence in our financial systems , to ensure a properly functioning banking system in which individuals , Mr Schulz , and businesses can place their trust and get banks lending again to boost confidence .
We must hold firm to the principles of free trade and the single market , and I have every confidence that the Presidency will continue to work hard to achieve these vital goals .
- Mr President , just a week before the European Council , we asked the Council , here in the European Parliament , to agree on clear guidelines and concrete measures towards safeguarding employment and creating new job opportunities .
The Council here today is a Council of silence and a Council of illusions .
I am sorry , but I have not seen any concrete measures .
Yes , EUR 5 billion , but what is that ?
That is 0.04 % of this Union 's gross national product .
Investing in broadband is OK , but do not tell me that this is having any real effect on bringing down the free fall in jobs that we have right now .
You have not understood that this crisis is a very deep , serious recession .
Business is demanding , workers are demanding , we are demanding : do more !
The IMF has proposed that you invest 2 % of GDP this year and next year .
Mr Barroso , you said that we are doing well ; we are investing 3.3 % .
That was what you said two weeks ago , but now it has increased to 4 % . I ask myself : how is that ?
Well , the calculation is simple .
Unemployment is increasing : when expenditure on unemployment benefits increases , the financial stimulus will increase .
I guess that , when the number of the unemployed reaches 25 million in Europe , you will proudly stand here and say that our stimulus is now 5 % of GDP .
Please , we cannot do it in this way .
You cannot do it in this way .
What we need is real investment .
Mr Barroso , Paul Krugman has said that Europe is providing less than half in terms of real stimulus compared to what the Americans are doing .
Can I appeal to you : please , each time that unemployment rises , do not tell people that you are doing more because the Member States are paying more in unemployment benefit .
What you must tell people is that you are committed to a new recovery plan .
I thank you for what you said today when you wished that this Employment Council on 7 May could be a true Employment Council .
We are on your side and will support you in getting that .
We should look at President Sarkozy of France and remember that there was no limit on how many extraordinary summits the President of France held during his Presidency .
Now it is proposed this summit on 7 May should be reduced to a troika .
This unemployment crisis will not disappear because we refuse to have more meetings .
It will still be there .
That is why I appeal to you : we have a recovery plan here ; it is well documented .
I know that the Commission President knows it and I am sure when we sit down together we can do more than we have done up to now .
This is about the destiny of the European Union 's economic , monetary and social efforts .
So , one more time : Commission President , let us hold a serious , broad-based , well-planned Employment Summit on 7 May .
If you can do that , we will be with you .
( Applause )
- ( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the European Union has proven to be a stroke of luck in the financial and economic crisis and the Czech Presidency has also done a proper job thus far .
The extent and the deeper causes of the global financial and economic crisis prove that global macroeconomic management of the financial markets and the legal frameworks which apply to it need to be revised - at national level , in the EU and worldwide .
Supervisory legislation must be amended and precautions for crisis management improved .
Legislation governing the financial sector should have the effect of blunting rather than exacerbating economic cycles .
However , more regulation does not necessarily mean better regulation ; what we need is the right regulation .
The dramatic crisis on the international financial markets and the shifts that it has caused are a challenge to the liberal economic order .
Erroneous decisions by governments in economic and financial policy and inadequate financial supervision by governments and the manifest collapse of a number of banks are reason to call for a reformed financial system , not a new economic system .
The independence of the European Central Bank and its approach to monetary stability are right and have proven their worth .
We also have proof of how important the common market is to prosperity and stability in Europe .
The internal market is playing a central role in shortening and dampening the recession in Europe .
The Member States need to take fast , targeted and temporary measures to support the real economy , because we know that the EU can create prosperity if it continues to develop the internal market , but not if it is distributing subsidies .
The European Union must therefore continue to work consistently to complete the internal market and offer a framework for competition that works .
However , it is also clear that the test has not yet been passed .
The European Union must hold fast to its principles .
There must be no relapse into outmoded thinking , into protectionism , into a policy of compartmentalisation or into a race for subsidies .
The Czech Presidency stands for this and I hope that we can continue to count on that .
- ( LV ) Ladies and gentlemen , I would like to thank the Czech Presidency for the fact that under its leadership the Council has taken a significant step towards awareness of the real problems and also their resolution .
I would like to highlight a few areas in which we need to continue to work .
Firstly , there is the creation and preservation of jobs , with the emphasis not so much on social assistance issues , but chiefly on investment in infrastructure and business recovery , so that these jobs may be created .
Secondly , the banks have received generous financial assistance in order to re-establish the stability of the financial system , but they are not in any hurry to take measures in the lending sphere .
Here , what is needed is both European guidelines and also proactive measures by national governments , to make the banks aware of their duties at this time and to ensure that they recommence lending to both businesses and individuals .
Thirdly , the Structural Funds are in fact the sole source of funds for businesses that will enable business activity to recover , and on the one hand we must increase both their accessibility and the scope of their activities , and on the other decrease bureaucratic obstacles , and increase the time allowed for the acquisition of funds . Thank you for your attention .
- Mr President , the UK Prime Minister , Gordon Brown , wants us to believe that he is now suddenly proud of European Union unity and that EU 's countries are stronger together and safer together .
He says now that banking regulation must be tightened up , tax havens tackled and the IMF reformed .
Mr Brown has not a shred of credibility now .
His own record of managing the UK economy is one of negligence and catastrophe .
He is an architect of the current economic crisis , not a saviour of the world .
He favoured the light-touch regulation that is a direct cause of the problems in banking .
The impact of the downturn is , of course , being felt around the world .
The devolved Government of Scotland is doing all that its limited powers make possible to stave off its worst effects , easing the tax burden on business through rates relief , speeding up investment in infrastructure projects , and prioritising training and skills development programmes to help people find work .
Scotland is rich in energy resources with tremendous potential to develop renewable sources such as offshore wind , wave and tidal power .
EU support for development of clean energy generation and distribution will help not just the Scottish economy , but will also benefit fellow Europeans , contributing to energy security and climate change mitigation .
I hope very much that it will not be long before Scotland can play an even more active and constructive role in the world as a normal , independent Member State of the European Union .
- ( DE ) Mr President , it surprises me that the President-in-Office of the Council , who lost a vote of confidence in his parliament yesterday , is being so harsh on the failed policy of the past .
He says that the path taken by the US has been historically discredited .
He clearly means that one should not rely on social stimuli in times of crisis and he has publicly stated that one should not push the managers of AIG into paying back their bonuses .
However , he has also publicly stated that the responsibility for the financial crisis , for the economic crisis , can be limited to past action by the US and that he does not need to engage in self-criticism and question whether the strategy of commercialisation and competitive pressure and unbridled globalisation by the EU itself contributed to it .
In my opinion , this is clear from the relevant passages in the conclusions of the summit , which state that , in the current crisis , the renewed Lisbon Strategy , including the current Integrated Guidelines , remains the effective framework for fostering growth and jobs .
However , it is then also very clearly noted in the reference documents that there must of course be a connection with the approach of sustainable public finances and , in this connection , with continuing pension reforms .
That surprises me .
It has therefore been worked out that continuing pension reforms is connected with continuing privatisation of the pension system , with an increase in the proportion of old-age care covered by capital .
This again strengthens two decisive causes of the current financial and economic crisis , namely reliance on the financial markets , despite the fact that the crisis was triggered by turbulence on the financial markets , and further sharpening of social divisions in particular .
However , it was precisely the explosion of liquid money capital that led to this social division , to a division by income distribution .
This is where the corrections should apply .
I therefore fail to comprehend why the Commission and the Council failed to adopt the corresponding corrections during their summit talks .
If one talks of the Lisbon Strategy , one must also refer to the Commission 's White Paper on Financial Services Policy ( 2005-2010 ) , which relies on the integration of the European financial services market into the global financial services market and on the corresponding articles of the Treaties of Nice and Lisbon which , on the one hand , prohibit any form of restriction on the free flow of capital and , on the other hand , are pushing the financial institutions into putting an unobstructed flow of financial services in place .
That stands in pertinent contradiction to any form of fight against the causes of crises .
- ( NL ) Mr President , with the Lisbon Strategy we are ensuring that Europe is able to continue to compete with the rest of the world economically .
Clearly , that is only possible if everyone really does participate and if we ensure a good living environment , including in developing countries .
The agreement at the EU summit last week is not strong enough to instigate a new , sustainably-oriented economy .
The economic crisis , the climate crisis and the energy crisis demand a new approach and that approach demands the necessary investment .
The European Union must take a lead in that regard .
We had expected an agreement on the funding of the Bali and Poznań climate deals .
It is worrying that no such agreement was reached at the EU summit after protracted negotiations by the Ministers for the Environment and for Finance .
Where is the EU 's leadership when it comes to tangible funding ?
Kicking the funding of the climate plans for developing countries into the long grass represents a serious undermining of the climate agreements .
That is not the leadership that is needed in the run-up to Copenhagen .
- ( DE ) Mr President , the big European vision has unfortunately made Brussels deaf and blind to numerous undesirable developments in the EU .
As the crisis unfolds , the citizens are now paying the price for this ; for neoliberal wrong turnings taken in previous years or for less than solid preparations for enlargement to the east , for which they now appear to be locked into a mortgage .
Nor will the accession of Turkey , which is obviously a done deal , bring the required energy security ; on the contrary it will only bring political instability , Islamism and a hole of billions in our finances .
The EU needs to emancipate itself at the forthcoming G20 financial summit from the role of vassal which it has played hitherto towards US policy and to implement strict rules and rigorous controls .
It was Washington 's long-standing refusal to engage in any form of regulation of highly-explosive financial paper that laid the cornerstone for the current financial dilemma .
Cuts need to be made during the crisis .
There is sufficient margin for savings , for example in the uncontrolled growth of EU agencies .
Increasing the crisis fund can only be a first step ; we need far more plans in case a country goes bust and we need concepts for the massive social problems which will arrive as surely as an amen at the end of a prayer .
- ( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I should like to congratulate the Czech Presidency .
Despite considerable domestic problems , it has managed to advance the European agenda during the worst economic and financial crisis for decades .
These congratulations come with a request that the Czech Presidency complete its mandate in as good and targeted a manner as before .
When I listen to the Chairman of the Socialist Group , I think I am on another planet .
He praises Mr Brown , who , before becoming prime minister , was Chancellor of the Exchequer and hence responsible for the financial policy and framework conditions of the European Union and the United Kingdom .
It has been said here on numerous occasions that only a change in attitude on the part of the United Kingdom will allow us to introduce the necessary regulatory measures .
How can someone who has obstructed that for a decade today be declared our saviour ?
I do not understand that .
The Czech Prime Minister 's criticism of the US policy of increasing the money supply is justified from every point of view .
You cannot resolve the problems with the very means that caused the crisis , namely an excessive increase in the money supply and too much living on credit .
Living on credit is the problem .
The first priority , therefore , is to bring the crisis on the financial market under control , change the global imbalances , jointly address the tasks before us in terms of climate protection and the fight against poverty and implement a new morality in the world based on a social market economy .
If we manage to do this in this crisis , then the Czech Presidency will have met all our expectations in full , regardless of what happens with the Treaty of Lisbon and the internal situation in the Czech Republic .
- ( CS ) Ladies and gentlemen , the President-in-office of the European Council , Mirek Topolánek , opened his speech today in the European Parliament with an attack on social democracy .
I would like to say how typical and characteristic that is for this government .
Instead of seeking agreement , cooperation and compromise in matters relating to managing the EU , Prime Minister Topolánek has sought and continues to seek dispute and conflict .
These characteristics and this inability to cooperate are the real cause for the collapse of his government .
I would like to remind you that it was not the opposition which deposed the government ; it was MPs from the government 's own party and from its coalition partner , the Green Party .
However , I do not want to focus on Czech domestic politics .
I would like only to remind the Czech Republic of its responsibilities to the Union and to EU citizens as the country holding the Presidency .
Ahead of us lie many tasks .
The economic and financial crisis has of course already been mentioned .
A Europe-US summit will be organised in Prague .
We have an ideal historic opportunity with our partners in the US to cooperate on all of the issues of today 's globalised world , from the economy and the environment to the resolution of conflicts in the Middle East , Afghanistan and so on .
In conclusion I would like to comment once again on the Lisbon Treaty .
The Czech social democrats have always supported the European Constitution and have always supported ratification of the Lisbon Treaty .
This was the case in the Czech Parliament and it will be the case in the Czech Senate once the vote is taken .
I firmly believe that the Civic Democratic Party , whatever position it is in , will continue to be just as constructive and just as pro-European and that it will support this document .
- ( LT ) Every time we discuss yet another summit of Heads of State or Government to solve economic problems , we recognise that the results achieved are good , but , unfortunately , we lag behind events and the implementation mechanism for these decisions is unclear .
What must we do to avoid these problems ?
Firstly , countries must evaluate the effect of integration on their own national economic policy .
Now decisions are often taken on the basis of past history , how we behaved in situations of crisis .
Unfortunately , we live in an integrated European Union with a common market and most often all those decisions fail to have the sort of effect they once had .
Secondly , some sort of temporary institutional framework must be created for the decision implementation mechanism .
Wait until the Lisbon Agreement is ratified ?
People 's lives do not wait , we have to take decisions today .
It is obvious that there must be greater coordination between the countries in the Eurozone and non-Eurozone countries .
How can this be achieved ?
I believe that a mechanism for closer cooperation could be based on the so-called exchange-rate mechanism , or in English the ERM II .
This would help bring both Europes , new Europe and old Europe , closer together and find a consensus .
- ( PL ) Mr President , during the recent European Summit many subjects were raised .
One of these was the question of the Eastern Partnership and alternative routes of gas supply .
It was decided for the moment to allocate small amounts to these objectives , but it is without doubt a step in the right direction .
Europe is facing a huge economic crisis and must look for effective ways out of it .
However , we must not depart from our guiding principle of solidarity .
We should be especially sensitive to the problems of new Member States .
Although matters related to climate change were discussed at the summit , it can be seen in practice that the crisis which has hit us is marginalising that extremely expensive pseudo-scientific project .
Financial means designated for that purpose should be diverted to an effective , united fight with the effects of the crisis .
The domestic situation in the Czech Republic should not in any way interfere with this .

- ( DE ) Mr President , I was delighted to see Mr Vondra here in plenary this morning and I am delighted about the signal from the Presidency that it will continue working .
In my opinion , we shall be doing Europe a disservice , precisely in these times of crisis , if we do not all pull together and help the Czech Presidency to function .
From what I have heard from the Czech Republic , the government will remain in office and at the helm , because the majority which teamed up together yesterday does not suffice to support a new government .
I believe that , in the crisis , this type of stability , by which I mean solidarity with the Czech Presidency , is indispensable .
I also call on many western Europeans , such as the French , to rein in their malice towards the east , as it was with the referendum in France that the European crisis ultimately started .
I would like to see more courageous leadership as far as the question of climate is concerned and inclusion in what is needed now .
We need to dare to try something new if we are to make headway in this crisis .
My honourable friend was right ; we are living on credit .
However , we are also living on credit as far as the environment and climate are concerned .
We have endlessly squandered resources .
We are not managing the economy in a sustainable manner .
The UN , Ban Ki-moon , the World Bank , everyone is telling us that what is happening now in China , what is happening in South Korea , with more than half the national short-term economic programme being dedicated to climate protection and sustainable development , is the right thing and that this is where the future lies .
Unfortunately , the European Council is not currently mustering up that much courage .
Unfortunately , I do not believe that the Czech Republic alone is to blame .
- Thank you , Mrs Harms .
You are quite right .
We are all sinners - some more than others .
- Mr President , in the midst of this economic crisis , a crisis conceived and driven by failed policy at Member State and EU level , the protection of jobs and creation of new employment must be the absolute priority .
The haemorrhage of jobs must be stopped .
This will require proactive interventions by Member State governments .
Free-market theology must not stand in the way of doing right by workers .
The light-touch regulation of the financial markets was always a road to rip-off and corruption .
Obsessive deregulation and privatisation of public services will equally end in tears .
So , is the common refrain that we must learn the lessons of this economic crisis genuine ?
That is the question .
If it is , then the case for fundamental change in EU policy , and indeed EU Treaties , is now unanswerable and should be the stuff of EU Council deliberations .
The Lisbon Treaty is old hat .
It is a charter for the policies of failure .
We need a new treaty for a new time .
- ( FR ) Mr President , the Presidency conclusions from the last Council make for amusing reading .
They resemble a victory statement of routed armies everywhere .
They have the pathetic quality of such statements , up to and including where they repeatedly affirm that , with the crisis coming to an end , the EU will build a stronger economy for the future , and where they reaffirm the Lisbon Strategy , while in fact it is going completely off the rails .
It follows that , as they shut themselves away in their glass towers , Eurocrats , Europhiles and ultra-Europeans of all kinds end up no longer having a grip on matters .
Everyone is well aware that the euro zone was the first to enter into recession because it had the lowest growth rate in the world for eight years .
However , it was also the one that had the greatest difficulties in terms of its competitiveness and employment situation .
Above all , it is the euro zone that , due to the general trend of stripping nations of their natural defences , is the worst equipped to react .
In reality , the only virtue of the crisis is that it will wake up populations lulled by financial expectation facilities and anti-national propaganda .
Only the Member States will have the legitimate instruments needed for any far-reaching action , and they will have to remove the shackles of the EU and the euro if such action is to be achieved .
For the people of France , at least , it is becoming increasingly clear that there will be no safety without France , no France without French policy , and no French policy without national and popular sovereignty .
- ( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , it seems to me that at the centre of this debate there remains the dogma that the banks should be central to the economy and that the process of globalisation should also be a fundamental part of our economic future .
That dogma is completely wrong .
We should return to our society 's traditional economic vision of social justice and genuine production .
Since we all eat , go to sleep at night and dress ourselves , we should concentrate our activities and our efforts on enhancing agriculture , on building houses and on the manufacturing and craft industries .
Without this new vision we will fall into perpetual crises where usury by the banks will continue to control people and injustice will be central to our lives .
- ( CS ) Mr President , I do not even know to whom I am talking , since the Czech Presidency is not even trying to attend .
My congratulations on the results of the summit .
The increase in IMF resources , the doubling of the crisis fund , the Eastern Partnership , the support for strategic infrastructure and the support for Nabucco all amount to a fulfilment of the ' Three Es ' of the Czech Presidency .
It is a pity that preparations for Copenhagen are lagging behind and the Czech Presidency has not made use of our work on the energy-climate package .
However , we are not dealing with any of that today .
Your Presidency , just like your government , represents the politics of double standards .
When in Europe you pose as sympathetic Europeans and great integrators but at home you talk about how you are going to walk all over them and you talk about the Lisbon Treaty as if it were no more than a scrap of paper .
You have failed to integrate your own government .
The election of Václav Klaus as President also belongs to the politics of double standards .
It is the aim of millions of Czechs and Moravians to cement our ties to Western Europe , which will help us to overcome the worst crises .
This aim cannot be achieved without ratifying the Lisbon Treaty .
The Treaty is now under serious threat and this is partly also your responsibility .
If you continue to govern in any form , you should make a clear stand for ratification .
There are social and political elites in the Czech Republic who want ratification and who are ready to support whomever will follow it through .
My own party , the European Democratic Party , will do all it can for ratification .
The second serious omission is the euro .
You can participate in the G20 summit and represent Europe at the summit .
It is important for Europe to defend its regulatory measures against the US and not just to submit to a policy of excessive stimulation packages which can lead to hyperinflation .
It is important to have a European Securities Commission and to maintain the stability pact .
However , this also applies to us back home and it is your party that has kept us out of the euro zone for many years .
Mr Topolánek , the proposed measures are excellent .
At present they are only proposals .
As Mrs Merkel has said , what matters is implementation .
What is needed is the political will and unity which will make it possible to translate this into reality .
You were talking about a crisis of confidence .
That is what we have here .
Get the Lisbon Treaty completed , change your position on the euro and facilitate the rapid drawdown of structural resources .
Otherwise you will find it difficult to represent the 60 to 70 % of Czechs and Moravians who do not want to deal on unequal terms with Europe , but who do want to live in Europe in a normal way .
- ( SV ) Mr President , there is an issue that concerns a large number of European citizens today .
It is increased unemployment and the wider gaps that it entails .
They must have been extremely disappointed with the results of the most recent summit .
Absolutely no strategy for dealing with rising unemployment was established at that summit .
They say that they have already done what needs to be done .
They also say that the summit that should have taken place at the beginning of May will no longer be a summit .
It will now be a troika meeting .
This is a clear signal to citizens that the EU 's leaders do not see employment and combating unemployment as a priority .
The European Parliament is not involved at all - one month before the European Parliament elections .
Mr Barroso has called for discussions today , but the Council 's conclusions do not even mention the European Parliament .
I would like to say something briefly about automatic stabilisers .
GM , the United States and Sweden have been mentioned in the debate today .
It is true that we , in Sweden , have better social insurance systems , but the reimbursement rates have fallen from 80 % .
Car workers who become unemployed will currently receive a pay-out of something in the region of between 50 % and 60 % of their pay .
Thus , it is not quite so wonderful any more .
Finally , I would like to say a few words about mobility .
Mobility is important within the EU and so is the fight against protectionism .
However , the Commission and the Council need to take responsibility and ensure that equal pay for equal work applies throughout the EU .
Then we can also work to promote increased mobility and to combat protectionism .
- ( NL ) Mr President , a lot has been said about how much money we actually need to set aside in order to combat this economic crisis .
We could discuss that for many hours .
I believe that it is also necessary to take account of future generations and not to leave all the problems to them to sort out .
Alongside that though , the issue of what we spend that money on is perhaps even more important .
It does worry me when I see the reflex reaction of throwing money at the old industries and old technologies yet again , in an attempt to prop up ailing industries .
It is also striking that , in the Council 's conclusions , the sections on the economic crisis and on energy and sustainability are just treated as two separate issues , when the time is actually ripe for these two issues to be tethered together .
I would not want to be as pessimistic as Mr Turmes was earlier on , but now really is the time to invest in new technologies and in knowledge .
It is intolerable that billions are being poured into the car industry while savings will have to be found when it comes to education .
We have definitely got things the wrong way round there .
Another point is the solutions for Eastern European countries and countries that are not in the single currency .
These countries are being let down somewhat , with a sum of EUR 50 billion being mentioned .
I wonder whether the Council and the Commission are also considering the option of accelerated accession to the eurozone for those countries that are not yet members , given that the stability and the strength of those countries are in the interests of Europe as a whole .
Finally , I am very concerned by the use of nationalistic language and the tendency of all the national leaders to lean towards ' our country first ' solutions .
We all need to take the rise of the far right seriously and we all need to ensure that we tackle it before the elections .
- ( GA ) Mr President , I would like to give my support and congratulations to the group of European leaders that met last week .
As regards Ireland , it is now very clear that the bottom line is that we want to get support from the European Union in Ireland .
Our economy was strong but has been weakened , just like economies all over the world at present .
It is clear to us that we will emerge from this crisis by working together and that the biggest challenge that Europe currently faces is to cooperate and to strengthen the economic unit that we have , so that we will be able to support each other - rather than weakening the Union as is suggested .
It is also clear that the fundamental rules laid down in the Lisbon Treaty are needed now more than ever .
As an old saying in Ireland goes : ' there is no strength without unity ' .
- ( NL ) Mr President , at every European summit we really can complain that the European dimension does not come through strongly enough in the decision-making process .
I , too , had expected a truer European dimension in the approach to the crisis .
That said , however , in the current times it is more important to implement what we have decided , rather than to harp on about additional plans whilst managing to forget to implement what we have decided .
For that reason , I think that we , in Parliament , together with the Council and the Commission , must now give priority to actually implementing what we have already decided .
In that regard I am entirely behind the Commission 's approach .
We must also show that we really are united around the global approach to the crisis , and I do hope that it will be the case , both in Copenhagen and at the G20 , that Europe is able to speak effectively with one voice .
In order to be able to speak with one voice , however , we have to ensure that we do not jeopardise our achievements internally , that the internal market really does remain an internal market without internal protectionism and that we reinforce the single currency .
We must learn our lessons and increase the funding for the European Central Bank , as well as providing funding in order actually to be able to act with a European dimension .
We must also ensure that enlargement really does take place and that we also show solidarity with the new Member States in these difficult times .
That is what the European Union is for .
Solidarity with less-developed countries must also form part of the European Union 's global approach .
I will conclude with a quick word about the Treaty of Lisbon .
We , Parliament , must set out our position clearly .
We must know for certain what is going to happen straight after the European elections .
That , however , requires that Parliament really does adopt a single position and it is for that reason that I cannot really understand the Bureau 's view that there is no need for us to debate the reports on positions in this House .
I urge that we revise this view in order to enable us to negotiate with the Council on the basis of a position taken by this House .
- ( FI ) Mr President , the best way to improve energy security in Europe is to increase energy efficiency and the use of renewable energy sources .
All the Member States need to invest in these areas , and they need to do so right away , otherwise we will not reach the targets of our own climate package .
This sort of investment is furthermore especially suited to our times .
By investing in energy efficiency and renewable energy we create , as has already been said here more than once , new , sustainable jobs , but that way we also establish a basis for a low carbon economy .
Now we need real action .
Unfortunately , the summit was unable to convince people of this .
All in all , every cure for the economic crisis should have as its aim the prevention of global warming reaching a critical point .
This must also be the outcome of the meeting of the G20 countries .
When Europe speaks with one voice , the United States of America will also then adopt this same objective .
- ( SV ) Mr President , the Berlin Wall fell almost 20 years ago .
In the current difficult economic situation , we have once again been able to discern the construction of a new wall in Europe , this time an economic wall .
This must not be allowed to happen !
Even though extra resources have been granted to assist countries in difficulties , the level of commitment of the EU 's leaders seems to have been mixed .
It is worrying that Renault is moving it production from Slovenia to France .
We must not allow the spectre of protectionism to wreak havoc once again .
The cost of failing , once more , to keep Europe together is far too high .
History will punish those who fail in their responsibility .
It was therefore good , yesterday , to hear Gordon Brown 's clear message when he declared ' we will not walk away ! '
The same must also apply to President Sarkozy .
There is every reason to welcome the proposal by the de Larosière Group .
It is a balanced proposal that will mean that the EU will avoid over-regulation , but that the monitoring of the financial markets will be significantly strengthened .
The European Central Bank will have an even more important role .
The national supervisory authorities will also be given a better opportunity to coordinate themselves and exchange information .
Policy must be appropriate even in times of crisis .
Proposing regulations that hinder rather than help must not be our response in difficult times .
- Mr President , the Council 's declaration on the Eastern Partnership is most welcome .
As rapporteur on the eastern dimension of the European neighbourhood policy , I support closer relations with the six countries to the east .
The announcement of EUR 600 million for the Eastern Partnership is excellent and I welcome the proposed European Neighbourhood and Partnership Instrument spending on improving EU energy security through better storage facilities for oil and gas and building new pipelines .
The Council also rightly supports the newly conceived EURONEST parliamentary assembly , which will encourage the resolution of frozen conflicts , such as the Nagorno-Karabakh and Transnistrian disputes .
However , the Eastern Partnership must not be used to stall the EU membership ambitions of countries manifestly entitled to apply for such status , namely Ukraine and Moldova .
The Council has also rightly decided to double the assistance package for financially distressed non-eurozone countries in eastern Europe , from EUR 25 billion to EUR 50 billion .
This measure will help stabilise countries like Hungary and Latvia .
However , we must not forget Ukraine either , which is suffering severe financial turmoil .
A banking collapse in Ukraine could have catastrophic contagion consequences in countries elsewhere in eastern Europe , and also in Italy and Austria , whose banks are the most exposed to the Ukrainian market .
Finally , while I fully accept the right of Turkey and Russia to be observers in EURONEST , neither country should use this position for its own foreign policy ends .
The members of EURONEST are sovereign states with the right to decide their own Euro-Atlantic aspirations .
The suggestion by Russia 's Foreign Minister , Sergei Lavrov , that the Eastern Partnership is a means for the EU to expand its sphere of influence abroad is absurd .
Such language belongs to the Machtpolitik Cold War era , not to modern diplomacy .
If anyone seeks a sphere of influence , it is Russia , as underlined by last summer 's war against Georgia and the Kremlin 's intermittent political destabilisation of countries such as Ukraine and the Baltic States .
- Mr President , my congratulations on your pronunciation of my rather difficult name !
The Conservatives here and in Member States are like naughty children .
Having stamped their feet for years , demanding deregulation of banks and shadow banking , they are now prepared to swallow strong regulation - but only if we pretend that it was their idea all along .
However , they are still childishly demanding deregulation of the workplace , flexibility - meaning no protection , no security and cuts in social services .
That , my friends , is a recipe for fanning an uncontrollable forest fire .
President in-Office Topolánek chose Sweden as a comparison to America .
Why not the Czech Republic ?
Why not Ireland ?
Simple : the Irish Government is tearing the heart out of health services , education , childcare and training .
It is deepening the sense of insecurity in Ireland , creating more unemployment - when they should be keeping people in work - and failing to do anything to help small companies to survive .
I believe that there needs to be a change of government in Ireland and a change of attitude in the European Council .
Let us have an Employment Summit for all Member States on 7 May .
- ( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the irony of fate would have it that this stage of the debate is being held without the President-in-Office of the Council , who should have been with us ; Mr Topolánek is not here .
Yesterday , however , we had the debate on the strategy and future of Europe in view of the G20 with another president , who by contrast had to ask for and was given an invite , it is not clear on what grounds , aside from the obvious reason of the role being played by his national state .
Why do I begin with these perhaps unpleasant remarks ?
It is because the economic and financial crisis facing Europe is also an institutional crisis , shown clearly by the fact that the President-in-Office of the Council has to leave halfway through the debate due to his internal political problems .
The same thing can be seen with the economic crisis ; that is to say the response has been a national one only , there has been no response from Europe , no European response , even in terms of the budget .
It is all very well to cite EUR 400 billion , but we know that this money is almost all taken from national budgets .
President Barroso , I do not believe you have done enough in recent years to make governments and national states aware that there is another Europe , which does more than just coordinate states ; that the Union itself has a political function .

Since President Topolánek has spoken of extending the Eastern Partnership to include Belarus , I shall end by mentioning the name of Yana Paliakova , who was driven to suicide by the Belarusian authorities , to emphasise that these partnerships should be more interested in law , democracy and freedom and not only in doing business with dictatorships of the worst kind .
. - ( RO ) The conclusions drawn by the Council are consistent with the crisis which Member States are going through .
We must welcome as an extremely positive result the agreement on energy projects and broadband Internet .
The inclusion among these projects of the Nabucco gas pipeline and the interconnections between Member States , such as those between Romania , Hungary and Bulgaria , may help avoid a crisis similar to the one in January 2009 .
Using energy sources from the Caspian Sea region and making the most of the Black Sea 's strategic location are an essential condition for guaranteeing the European Union 's energy security .
The policies developed as part of the Eastern Partnership must include without fail the maximum possible use of these areas for the European Union 's benefit .
I was surprised that the recommendations made by the ECOFIN Council did not take into account the measures which the new Romanian Government announced through its government programme and has started to implement by adopting the 2009 budget .
Decentralisation with the aim of strengthening local autonomy and the channelling of resources into investments in priority areas like infrastructure or energy in order to preserve and create jobs are two of the measures already initiated by the Romanian Government .
The reduction of expenditure through budget allocations and the launch of education system reform as a priority are other measures which can be added to this .
The implementation of the proposals included in the Council 's economic recovery programme , particularly with regard to bringing forward the allocation of resources as part of the European programmes , and the approval of state aid , especially in the car industry , would provide real support for reducing to a minimum the effects of the crisis , not only in Romania but in very many other European Union Member States as well .
- Mr President , the crisis we are dealing with is not a crisis in the system but a crisis of the system ; an economic system crisis and a crisis of democracy as well .
Not only has financial credit contracted but also social credit .
We can already see in the streets of our European towns the signs that warn us of the mistrust and unrest at social level , which could lead towards political and social upheaval .
Therefore , a social European Union summit , leading towards a European pact on employment , is a must .
A social summit should agree , among other things , that those companies laying off employees should not distribute dividends , that transnational companies must negotiate not only with national trade unions but also with European trade unions , that there cannot be business profitability without social solidarity .
This global crisis is aggravated by a crisis of European integration .
There are Member States hosting mother-company economies and Member States with economies of subsidiaries .
The former are members of the euro area , the latter are not .
Programmes to facilitate the stabilisation and integration of the latter are crucial for the survival of the former .
The European Union cannot survive with new demarcation lines .
- ( PL ) Mr President , we can talk selectively about the summit from the point of view of two time scales .
The longer time scale includes strategic measures , in which I include the matter of our Eastern partners , including Belarus .
I think this is justified and will be good for the EU , for our Eastern neighbours and also for future relations with Russia .
Financial support is essential , and although this may meet with criticism at a time of crisis , I am convinced that it is worth investing in Eastern affairs .
If the Eastern strategy is successful the EU will show itself to be a serious player on the global political stage .
I am not thinking of the EU as an organisation , but rather that the effects of joint action will argue in favour of the expediency of further European integration .
The second dimension is limited to the present , and thus to the crisis , a symptom of which is , among other things , job losses and the financial helplessness of citizens .
There is no single panacea for this , but the broad strategy of governments and the EU should include attention to the needs of small and medium-sized businesses .
This is because , firstly , while in the crisis workers only lose their jobs , entrepreneurs who are in difficulty may lose their job , their workers and the whole business .
Owners of small businesses are the most flexible and will probably fare best in the current difficult situation , and because they constitute most of the economic strength of Europe they can influence the entire economy .
Mr Barroso , if financial collapse turns into psychological breakdown , then we will be in the midst of a real crisis .
As long as motivation and the will to be doing something is alive among the people there is always the chance that things will start to improve , and in this area EU measures are a very significant element , for which we are accountable .
I wish us all success in this matter .
- ( PT ) The summit 's response was not ambitious enough .
Where is the firm commitment to abolish tax havens and offshore financial centres ?
Where is the decision to moralise the salaries of banking executives ?
President Barroso , it is right to say the rich should pay for the crisis , because it was they who caused it .
With regard to the employment summit , this cannot be a mini-summit because employment is not a mini-problem ; it is a major problem affecting individuals and families .
This is not the way to restore people 's trust .
Lastly , I heard someone say that they do not need socialist proposals .
That is an arrogant statement .
If the defenders of neoliberal doctrine had listened to the warnings of the socialists , we would not now be embroiled in this crisis .
Will they never learn ?
If they have not grasped the gravity and depth of this crisis and if they have not grasped what caused it , then I fear the worst .
I fear that the crisis will continue for many years , which is not what we want .
- Mr President , I think the encouraging result achieved by the Council is that 27 Member States can now go to the G20 with a common position .
This is a major achievement , and it is only fair to congratulate Prime Minister Topolánek on his constructive role as a Council .
I can share his view that the success of the Council was the EU 's refusal to go down the easier route of massive bailouts and nationalisation .
The unfortunate Czech Government crisis now leaves the Commission and President Barroso with enhanced responsibility to steer the Community out of crisis , providing for coherence and stability .
At the same time , the Commission has to offer more flexible mechanisms for the timely use of additional money decided by the Council .
Implementation procedures can be too clumsy and time-consuming .
It is especially important to accommodate framework conditions for small businesses and for innovation .
Now it is really time to invest more in research , education and training .
However , economic depression is not a time for moral depression .
As usual a crisis provides opportunities for reform .
The financial crisis in fact originates in the crisis of values , so the recovery must start with strengthening our common values , starting with an enhanced commitment to solidarity .
And , most importantly , the crisis is no excuse for protectionism .
On the contrary , we are bound to act together with the understanding that , by supporting each other and committing ourselves to reforms in the spirit of the Lisbon Strategy , the crisis will make Europe stronger .
- ( HU ) Mr President , the European Commission and the Council have succeeded , in spite of the countervailing forces , in preserving the unity of the European Union .
This summit was rather successful : it protected the single market , spoke up against impending protectionism and , last but not least , offered new assistance to the Central and Eastern European Member States , which are struggling with increased difficulties .
I would like first to thank President Barroso , since the financial assistance to the region has been doubled , having been raised to EUR 50 billion .
The Prime Minister of Hungary suggested a year ago , and at this summit a decision in principle has at last been taken , to create a supervisory system for financial markets and banks .
Once again , the summit dealt with the point that parent banks are responsible for their subsidiaries , as my colleague Adrian Severin has also emphasised , and a very important step forward has also been taken with regard to energy security .

- ( LT ) First of all , I would like to pay my regards and thank Prime Minister Mirek Topolánek ; we all understand very well what it means to hold the Presidency of the European Union and what it means to hold the Presidency of the European Union faced with the global financial crisis and the economic recession .
Therefore , I sincerely wish the Czech Republic success meeting new challenges and leading the European Union up to the middle of this year .
The Brussels European Council : today many of us are repeating figures , reflecting agreements reached at the European Council like a mantra .
EUR 5 billion for strategic energy projects and broadband Internet .
EUR 50 billion for non-Eurozone European Union Member States for payments and to equilibrate the balance of payments .
EUR 75 billion for the International Monetary Fund .
EUR 600 million for the Eastern Partnership .
Of the EUR 5 billion mentioned , EUR 175 million would go to the energy bridge , linking Sweden with the Baltic States , which until now have been an island separated from the European Union 's energy market .
Is this a lot or too little ?
Is the glass half full or half empty ?
Under normal circumstances , I would judge the results and agreements achieved by the European Council as satisfactory .
Of course , we hoped for more , of course , we hoped that a better funding plan for European economic recovery would be agreed .
However , having considered all the manifestations , all the displays of nationalism and protectionism , I think that the agreement reached is undoubtedly a good expression of solidarity , and I would like this to be a starting point , a good beginning for further work .
- ( ES ) Mr President , Mr Barroso , only a united Europe that prioritises world growth and employment will be able to lead international action for economic recovery , strengthen crisis prevention and crisis management , improve the regulation of financial systems and support the most vulnerable countries in this first global crisis .
The G20 represents the majority of the population ( two in three people ) and 90 % of world economic activity .
Its responsibility is to provide a concerted , effective and sustained triple response to stimulate demand and the real economy with future investments , to re-establish lending and to promote robust international financial regulation and supervision that provides transparency , stability and appropriate incentives , that eliminates systemic risks and that ensures that we do not go back to square one .
We need a new economic order and a global system of governance for the 21st century that will correct the causes and imbalances at the root of the crisis and that will promote sustainable development through an open economy based on solidarity .
- ( HU ) I welcome the decision of the Council with regard to the position to be put forward at the G20 summit .
I am pleased that our political leaders have recognised that measures to address the global crisis and the fight against climate change are closely related .
The essence of the ' Green New Deal ' development plan put forward by Prime Minister Gordon Brown and President Barack Obama is to link economic stimulus with environmental investments and with support for increased energy efficiency and environmentally friendly technologies .
I do not , however , share the Council 's view that progress in the implementation of the European economic stimulus programme accepted last December is satisfactory .
Although it will be some time before its positive effects on the economy are felt , there is no doubt that the large-scale budgetary package , representing 3.3 % of the EU 's GDP - that is , more than EUR 400 billion - will generate new investments and create jobs .
However , the programme made only a very small contribution to transforming the EU into a low carbon dioxide-emitting economy .
Although we speak emphatically of improving energy efficiency and energy savings , yet more attention and funds are directed to the energy providers , to diversifying supply routes and to promoting the EU 's energy interests vis-à-vis third countries .
Undoubtedly we need to develop the energy infrastructure , but not at the expense of reducing consumption .
The European Union continues to be committed to playing a leading role in the Copenhagen global climate agreement .
In order to do so , however , we urgently need to agree on the development of a global carbon dioxide market , on financial compensation for developing countries , on technological support and on capacity building , as well as clarifying at last the principles of burden-sharing among Member States .
- Mr President , I wish to begin by thanking the Czech Presidency for the successful summit .
I think the summit has come up with a number of important decisions , but at the same time I am of the opinion that we need more , and we need to move faster .
When we go to the G20 meeting in London in a week 's time , I have the impression that we are still too integrated to act alone and too divided to act together .
I see three main priorities that we should focus on .
The first , of course , is jobs .
Millions of people in Europe are afraid of losing their jobs and , frankly , I do not understand the position of the French President in opposing the summit : a fully fledged summit is something we need at this moment .
Second , I am happy that we managed to eliminate - partly , at least - protectionist tendencies .
Nevertheless , they are still alive , and I think solidarity is the key .
The third point : the key is to restore confidence in the markets .
I am not even of the opinion that there is too little money in the market ; I think there is enough money .
The problem is to transform this money into effective demand , and for that to happen we need to restore confidence among households and enterprises .
- ( IT ) Mr President , President Barroso , ladies and gentlemen , the question of the combination of measures for support and stimulus and regulatory measures is one of the major questions on the international agenda .
The tensions that exist , reflecting the different strategies adopted by the large economies to tackle the crisis , will , it is hoped , reach some sort of resolution at the G20 summit .
It is no secret , in fact , that Washington insists on the need for a further collective commitment for the adoption of national measures to stimulate demand and revive the economy , while at the Commission in Brussels , the prevailing belief is that all useful and necessary moves in this regard have already been made and that it is now time to wait and see the results of the anti-recession measures brought in by the Member State governments .
In the same way , it is no secret that Europeans believe we now need to concentrate on the aim of restoring the credibility , stability and reliability of the financial markets , by adopting stricter regulatory provisions and more effective monitoring systems for the banking and credit sector , while in Washington , opinion favours an argument of prudence , based on the idea of incisive reform of the regulatory framework and surveillance mechanisms .
To be honest , I do not think it is helpful to pit these solutions against each other .
Instead , we should find a combination of the two , and in this sense , above all , the European vision must prevail , as the European method for which the Commission is guarantor , or prophet even .
I have no doubt , President Barroso , that you are the right man to give shape to our hopes and bring us out of the abyss .
- ( ET ) Several important matters were agreed upon in the Council .
Energy and broadband projects and the decision to increase the support fund for Eastern European countries are a good sign .
For me , however , one sign of what the European Council did or did not achieve is what our Prime Minister said when he returned to Estonia - namely , that Europe was returning to its fundamental values .
He was referring to the fact that Europe was beginning to lose interest in further stimulus packages , and there are signs of a return to conservative budget policies .
As a representative of an ultra-liberal party , his view is not surprising , but it reflects the more general problem that government leaders with certain ideological backgrounds are not prepared to take courageous steps that demand vision , and to implement measures that could conflict with their ideological beliefs .
A few days before the meeting of the European Council , we heard from Nobel Prize winner Paul Krugman that the European Union stimulus package is perhaps not enough .
We may need not 400 billion , but 500 billion this year , and a total of 3 trillion may be required .
Thus we need united action and a pro-active approach , not the invisible hand .
- ( ES ) Mr President , President of the Commission , I will begin by expressing my concern that the Summit on Employment , to be held in May , has been replaced by a troika meeting , however open this may be .
I believe that this decision takes us back to 1996 , when employment policies were considered to be policies solely for the Member States .
Secondly , with regard to monetary policy , I , along with the whole of my group , am an advocate of radical independence for the Central Bank , but independence does not equate to immunity from criticism .
I would like to say at this point that I would have liked the European Central Bank to have been more daring in reducing interest rates , given their impact on European exports , and for it to have been more generous in setting the deadlines for the repayment of the loans granted : the Federal Reserve makes three-year loans ; the Central Bank 's loans , however , are for only six months .
Once again , in relation to monetary policy , I would like to make a comment : I hope that the rescue plans for financial entities and the possible plans to purchase toxic or damaged assets do not translate into competitive advantages for the banks that receive aid as compared with those that have conducted themselves more prudently and do not need aid .
With regard to fiscal stimuli , during the course of the morning we have had a considerable debate .
Is it enough ?
Is it too little ?
Is the United States doing more than us ?
Whatever the conclusion of this debate , what is certain is that we are seeing the largest fiscal stimuli that our generation has experienced since 1929 .
This compels us to coordinate action taken on either side of the Atlantic , and this coordination must be much closer on two issues : completing the Doha Round , to send a signal against protectionism to the whole world and , secondly , a joint examination of world imbalances , which are at the root of this crisis .
With regard to the stability pact , I note certain contradictions in the Commission 's position .
Today 's debts are tomorrow 's taxes and the Commission ought to ensure that national measures are linked to the Lisbon Strategy and do not jeopardise the sustainability of finances .
In order to do this , it needs to monitor with the utmost attention the plans to regain the correct position of those countries - including my own , since I am Spanish - that have strayed into an excessive deficit situation .
Mr President , I would like to thank you for your generosity with the time , which I have certainly noticed .
- My dear sir , we are against monetary inflation and we are also against speaking time inflation .
- ( FR ) Mr President , in 22 pages of European Council conclusions , only one tiny phrase addresses the problem of the future of the automotive industry , of a European industrial policy .
Is this a practical response to the expectations of 12 million workers in the sector and to the concerns of 6 % of the European Union 's working population ?
Is it a match for what is at stake ?
There is no proposal for a European plan , no prospects for the automotive industry , and no will to coordinate national policies .
On 19 November 2008 , I took the floor in this House on behalf of the French socialist delegation to question all of the European stakeholders responsible .
I expressed my wish for a new car deal and for a solidarity-based , structured , swift and effective industrial policy in the short , medium and long term that would provide a coordinated response from the Member States and the Union .
Four months later , following a joint resolution by several groups , we are again laying emphasis on the future of the automotive industry .
What is stopping you from reacting , from acting , from rising to this challenge before it is too late ?
This is not rhetoric , Mr Topolánek , this is a call for action .
- ( FR ) Mr President , it is difficult not to hide one 's disappointment at the end of this summit .
If self-satisfaction and fiction were instruments of economic recovery , then we might call it a success .
I know that the economy is largely about psychology , and that we must try to restore confidence , but , ultimately , when the crisis worsens to the point where all the Member States are plunging further into recession and unemployment is dramatically rising , hearing the Council declare that it is confident about the EU economy 's medium- and long-term prospects and that it is determined to do everything it takes to revive employment and growth , is all the same rather astounding .
Determined to do what ?
The agenda for this Council has already been expurgated of any proposals that might have related to employment .
That was postponed until May .
In the end , the May employment summit has itself been transformed during this Council into nothing more than a meeting of the troika .
It appears that it was President Sarkozy who succeeded in convincing the other Member States that there was no need to draft proposals making employment a priority of the European Union 's operations .
This calls to mind an opt-out that had already been requested previously by other governments , by a UK conservative government , in relation to the entire employment strand of the European treaties .
So , today , Mr Sarkozy is calling for an opt-out from employment policies .
What would be worrying is if this approach were to rub off on all the Member States .
I am not overly surprised that your Commission , Mr Barroso , which has in some ways sidelined the European social agenda during its term of office , which has created an opt-out in relation to the European Union 's social and employment priorities and which has yielded by obeying that order given just now by a member of your majority , the conservative European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats , but I do believe that it is truly disgraceful and that , when it comes to coordinating not only recovery policies but also employment policies , it is the workers who are ultimately going to pay the price for this non-Europe .
A work of fiction , too , are these EUR 400 billion that you are adding up , as they are the sum not only of national recovery plans but above all of policies that are not even national recovery policies since they are just infamous economic stabilisers , that is , the increase in social expenditure linked to the increase in unemployment .
You have put a further EUR 5 billion on the table , but it has pained you to do so .
I therefore believe that , on the contrary , we now need a real recovery plan like the one being introduced by the United States , which has put more than USD 780 million on the table , and coordination of the efforts made to support workers coping with the crisis .
We also need demand , which is another factor that will prove far more effective than self-satisfaction when it comes to reviving growth , and to restoring confidence and the dynamism of our economy .
- ( DE ) Mr President , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , Mr President of the Commission , you will see that it was better that I sat over here .
Firstly , unlike Mr Schulz , I should like to say that the Czech Presidency under Prime Minister Topolánek has so far been an excellent Presidency .
( Applause )
I am proud that this was and is the first Presidency from a former Warsaw Pact country and it deserves all possible support in that it symbolises the unity of Europe .
The second point I should like to address is that we are now in a difficult situation in relation to the Treaty of Lisbon .
I should like to endorse the request that Prime Minister Topolánek and the opposition leader Mr Paroubek sit down together and negotiate responsibly , because domestic policy problems cannot influence the fate of the whole of Europe .
My final comment is to Mr Schulz : My final comment is to Mr Schulz : Gordon Brown obstructed regulation of the financial markets and Gordon Brown and German Minister of Employment Scholz from the SPD are obstructing a compromise in the Working Times Directive in keeping with the resolution by the European Parliament .
Mr Schulz should not try and tell us that he alone advocates social Europe .
Precisely the opposite is true .
- ( RO ) The economic crisis is taking a serious toll on Europe 's enterprises and citizens .
Member States ' economies are showing a significant downturn , SMEs are going under and employees are losing their jobs .
Along with other fellow Members , I gave a letter to President Barroso about the situation of employees in the metallurgy industry in Romania and France , who are becoming technically unemployed , while receiving 70 % of their salary .
We have requested a review of the terms for accessing the European Social Fund and the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund in order to support more employees who are seriously affected by the economic crisis and job losses .
The European Union needs economic development and Europe 's citizens need jobs and decent wages .
The European economic recovery plan introduced in November 2008 has remained just words .
Unfortunately , energy efficiency , which can create jobs , does not feature in January 's regulation .
- ( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I too should like to congratulate the Czech Presidency .
Yesterday 's deal on roaming was sensational and the citizens of Europe stand to gain from it .
The energy and gas package has been sorted out and numerous other points have been negotiated exceptionally well by the Czech Presidency in our opinion .
The same applies to the motivation of the European people , especially in times of crisis , to praise those who make a superhuman effort .
That is why we should also support Commissioner Kovács in tabling more proposals for progressive depreciation .
If we assume that more than a thousand billion euros are to be invested up to 2030 in order to build new power stations , then we need to make a start today .
That would trigger jobs and growth .
- ( SL ) I would first like to pay my sincere compliments to the President-in-Office of the Council for the success which the Czech Presidency has achieved , under extremely demanding circumstances .
We have heard some harsh words today , but I firmly believe that the citizens of the European Union are not as interested in how far we might turn to the left or the right , as in to what extent we are going to act in the European spirit , i.e. what we can achieve by working together efficiently .
We are faced with two tasks , in particular : expressing social sensitivity to , and solidarity for , those most affected , while at the same time investing in the vehicles that can best help pull us out of the crisis .
The crisis should be used as a catalyst for economic restructuring , and not just in the car industry .
The economic crisis has shown that what we badly need is better economic policy coordination and stronger Community institutions , as envisaged by the Lisbon Treaty .
In this spirit , I welcome the constructive proposals put forward in the de Larosièr report , as regards financial institutions .
- ( DA ) Mr President , I would like to say something regarding the large subsidies that are paid to undertakings that may not survive .
There is no point in asking a number of workers to remain in an undertaking or in paying their wages with public money if the undertaking closes down later .
They should have the opportunity to embark on further training or new training or to move to undertakings that have a chance of survival .
I think , with regard to the car industry , that we have placed far too little importance on the development of completely new types of car , cars that run on hydrogen , battery-powered cars and cars driven by fuel cells .
I believe that a large proportion of the workforce could be transferred over to such areas , where they would still have a job in 10 years ' time .
- Mr Vondra , many colleagues have thanked the Czech Presidency for its contribution .
I did so at the beginning , in the presence of Prime Minister Topolánek .
I would like to thank you for your very committed personal contribution .
We want to encourage you to continue as you have just said , so that the Czech Presidency will be as successful in its second half as it was in its first half .
Good luck for the continuation of your work .
President of the Commission . - Mr President , let me once again underline the excellent cooperation that we have had with the Czech Presidency .
The Czech Presidency is making a great effort for Europe in a very difficult situation and I think they deserve our full support .
Let me conclude .
Whenever I conclude , I see crowds coming in to listen !
( Laughter )
Let me conclude by welcoming the broad support for the results of the European Council .
There is not unanimity , but I think it is a fair assessment to say that by and large there was a recognition that it was an important set of conclusions , and I am encouraged by what I see as a shared sense of commitment by all three institutions - Parliament , the Council and the Commission - to join forces in order to pull Europe through the crisis .
We can be proud of what we have decided , but there should be no room for complacency .
More has to be done , and we should keep our focus , but we will gain , we will succeed in these efforts if we show our confidence .
Confidence has to be the key word : confidence in our capacity to deliver what we have promised ; confidence in action and implementation , and , as I said earlier , implementation , not gesticulation .
Frankly , I do not believe that confidence will improve by announcing a new plan every month or every week .
Confidence is improved if we concentrate on the implementation of what was collectively agreed and also on the effective coordination of these efforts .
Confidence is needed in our ability to push our regulatory agenda : without regulatory form we will not create the confidence that change will have a lasting effect .
Confidence is needed in the validity and the solidity of the euro area and our ability to mobilise the necessary support for every Member State in the euro area or outside the euro area which needs it .
There is also a need for confidence in our shared commitment to preserve our particular brand of social market economy , and in our long-term agenda for a low-carbon economy .
I really believe that it is not with self-defeating speeches and some kind of inferiority complex regarding the United States of America that we will succeed .
In fact , what I see today is that the Americans are coming closer to what have been traditionally European positions .
Americans are coming closer to our position regarding the fight against climate change , and we welcome that .
Americans are coming closer to the need to reinforce the welfare system .
Therefore , I really do not believe that the debate I sometimes hear - suggesting that Americans and Europeans are coming with very different approaches to the crisis - is a helpful debate .
On the contrary , what we are seeing is increased convergence between Europe and the United States and hopefully others - because it is not just for us and the Americans - and that is why I am confident about a positive result of the G20 Summit .
I think it is important to believe that it is with ourselves and not with others that we will solve the situation .
It is important to have confidence in what are the European instruments , and this enlarged Europe , with our coordinated action in fighting this recession , will be in a position to respond to the most important concerns of our citizens , including , of course , the one that is my first concern , i.e. rising unemployment .
To conclude , that is why I think we should build on what was already agreed and focus now on implementation , with strong coordination and a strong commitment to concrete results .
( Applause )
- The debate is closed .
Written statements ( Rule 142 )
I wish to express my support for the decisions adopted at the recent European Union summit held in Brussels .
What is particularly welcome is the necessary decision to increase the emergency fund from EUR 25 billion to EUR 50 billion .
This is a fund created specially for Member States in Central Europe which are faced with a balance of payments crisis .
Based on the measures adopted to protect states in the euro area against the global crisis , this decision provides concrete proof of the EU 's solidarity and its ability to help states outside the euro area to overcome the economic crisis .
After Hungary and Latvia , Romania has become the third EU Member State to resort to the emergency fund as it was affected by a significant current account imbalance and an inability to obtain new loans from foreign creditors .
EU institutions have a duty to meet the expectations of European citizens who are deeply affected by the crisis .
Only European solidarity , transatlantic cooperation and effective measures can help overcome the global crisis .
My country , Poland , is especially interested in good management of the new EU Eastern Partnership programme .
It concerns our neighbours , and includes our closest neighbours , like Belarus , Ukraine and Moldova , as well as more distant ones like Armenia , Azerbaijan and Georgia .
I think that the programme will strengthen the external policy of the EU , bring about true economic integration between the EU and its Eastern partners and ensure cooperation based not only on the principles of a market economy , but also based on respect for shared values , such as democracy , law and order , and respect for human rights .
After all , we have specific , joint objectives : to create free-trade areas , promote the mobility of citizens of partner countries , improve administrative abilities , and cooperate on energy security and especially on the long term supply and transit of energy .
We have , therefore , a clear vision of partnership on the part of the EU .
Now we are waiting for a response from the six countries which have a direct interest in the programme .
I would like to express the hope that on 7 May this year the Council will officially initiate this undertaking , which is as important for the EU as it is for the citizens of all the participating countries .
, in writing . - ( HU ) The fact that the European Union has set aside EUR 3.5 billion of its economic stimulus package for key energy investments is a welcome development .
I consider this an important step towards a common energy policy .
The final list of the funded projects clearly indicates that the European Commission and the Member States have , after the gas crisis in January , understood at last the advantages of joining up the networks .
Strengthening the connections is important first of all because it allows Member States to assist one another rapidly in the event of disruptions to supply .
I would at the same time like to draw attention to the fact that there are contradictions surrounding the final list of the investments receiving financing .
First and foremost , a crack has appeared in the principle of regional balance .
For it is precisely the Member States that were most affected by the gas crisis in January that will receive less funding .
Secondly , in proportion to the entire economic stimulus package , relatively little funding will be devoted to strengthening alternative supply routes .
I believe that the debates around the Nabucco issue were unseemly .
The gas pipeline in question would strengthen the energy security of the entire European Union , and thus its construction is a common interest .
Last but not least , investments relating to energy efficiency do not figure on the list of the investments receiving financing .
The EU is thus skirting the original aim of the package itself , namely job creation .
For the above reasons , the position of the European Parliament must give a greater role to the principle of regional balance , as well as to alternative supply routes and energy efficient investments .
The European Council 's decision on providing funding for Nabucco and its designation as a priority energy project are appropriate and timely solutions to this problem .
Before the Council meeting we submitted a proposal for a resolution so as to draw attention to the danger posed by reducing the financing for Nabucco .
We must be aware that the Nabucco gas pipeline project is of strategic importance to the security of Europe 's gas supply as it is the only project guaranteeing diversification of both suppliers and distribution routes .
in writing . - ( FI ) The decisions of the EU summit included altering the nature of the extraordinary summit this spring on social dialogue , so that EU leaders would just be represented by the Presidency Troika , instead of the leaders of all the Member States .
I believe the decision indicates the apathy that is felt towards the future of a social Europe in a way that cannot be acceptable to the labour market organisations that have prepared for the meeting .
It is to be hoped that as many Heads of State or Government as possible will attend the meeting .
in writing . - ( EL ) The debate in the European Parliament confirms that the political forces of capital and of the European one-way street support faster capitalist restructurings and more flexible contracts of employment within the framework of the Lisbon Strategy and the completion of the internal market .
They are promoting the strategic choice of capital and of the EU to shift the burden of the crisis on to the workers ' shoulders .
The Treaty of Maastricht and the Stability Pact are the springboard for an all-out attack on labour rights and on the income of working-class families , on the pretext of reducing deficits .
The recent decisions by the Commission on permanent spending cuts will have painful consequences on public health and care and workers ' insurance rights and pensions which , in conjunction with the demand for higher taxes , will drastically reduce the standard of living of the grassroots classes .
The aim of the proposed way out of the crisis into a green economy , namely energy , broadband networks and innovation , is to extend big business into new profitable sectors , not to protect the environment and satisfy grassroots needs .
The workers should not accept any sacrifice for the profits of the plutocracy and should go on the counter-attack and organise their fight , condemn the parties which support Maastricht and the European one-way street and send out a message of disobedience to the EU by supporting the Greek Communist Party in the European elections in June .
- ( FR ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , our fellow Member , the chairman of the Socialist Group in the European Parliament , Mr Schulz , intends to have the Rules of Procedure of this House changed , on the pretext that I could be the oldest Member in the next Parliament .
However , to support his ....
( The President cut off the speaker )
- That is not a point of order .
- ( FR ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , on this occasion Mr Schulz has made some defamatory statements and has accused me of the crime of blasphemy .
I wish to say that this argument is ill-founded and that I merely said that the gas chambers were a detail in the history of the world war , which is a fact .
( Mixed reactions )
I would point out that , on this occasion , Madam President , I have been fined EUR 200 000 in damages , which just goes to show what state freedom of opinion and freedom of expression are in in Europe and in France .
Your cries will not hide your responsibility in the crisis , the crisis of euro-internationalism , of which you are the proponents .
Therefore , please , let me speak .
Madam President , I would ask the Chairman of the Socialist Group in the European Parliament to kindly apologise for making a false accusation .
- ( DE ) Madam President , it is perfectly simple .
Anyone who does not want this man to chair the formal opening sitting of the European Parliament should support my motion for a change to the Rules of Procedure .
( Applause )
1 .
Common consular instructions : biometric identifiers and visa applications (
2 .
Community guarantee to the European Investment Bank (
3 .
The performance and sustainability of the European aviation system (
- Before the vote :
rapporteur . - ( RO ) Parliament reached an agreement with the Council and this agreement is supported by five political groups .
I am referring to the two reports which follow .
Thanks to the amendments submitted by two of our fellow Members - incidentally , the content of these amendments has already been included in the compromise agreed with the Council - , we must vote today on a number of articles .
Rules which I regard as incorrect have meant that the order of vote includes in some articles the text from the Committee on Transport and Tourism first and then the compromise text .
I would like to request for us to vote on the compromise text today as it is actually supported by the five political groups , so that the two regulations come into force by the end of this legislature .
- Thank you for your comments .
We will in fact get to where you would like to be by following the voting list and voting on the amendments .
4 .
Aerodromes , air traffic management and air navigation services (
5 .
Novel foods (
6 .
Substances that deplete the ozone layer ( recast ) (
7 .
The ABB-ABM method as a management tool for allocating budgetary resources (
8 .
Mid-term Review of the 2007-2013 Financial Framework (
9 .
EC-Cariforum States Economic Partnership Agreement ( vote )
- Madam President , regarding Amendment 13 , to be added after paragraph 22 , I would like to have this amendment considered as an addition instead of as a replacement of the original text .
On that condition , we could support it .
In fact , if you allow me , this same amendment and exactly the same proposal from my group would apply to one amendment in almost every report we need to vote on .
I do not know whether I can read a list of those amendments , or if you want me to stand up in each case with exactly the same request .
It is up to you .
Mr Guardans Cambó , we will take this as a test case .
I have to ask those who proposed the amendment if they are in agreement with your addition .
- Madam President , the answer is ' yes ' .
( The oral amendment was accepted . )
- Before the vote on Amendment 2 :
- Madam President , I have an oral amendment here to Amendment 2 , namely the deletion of the last sentence for the sake of accuracy , because it is not accurate any more .
We would delete the sentence ' Considers that this monitoring should start after the adoption of each interim EPA ' .
This does not apply in this case .
This is a full EPA , not an interim EPA , so for reasons of factual reality we would like to delete this sentence .
10 .
EC-Côte d 'Ivoire stepping stone Economic Partnership Agreement ( vote )
11 .
EC-Ghana Economic Partnership Agreement ( vote )
12 .
EC-Pacific States Interim Partnership Agreement ( vote )
- Before the vote on Amendment 8 :
- Madam President , to save time the Socialists are prepared to accept Amendments 8 and 10 as additions , but we will vote against if they are not accepted as additions by the PPE-DE Group .
- ( FR ) I agree to this procedure .
- ( FR ) Madam President , in paragraph 39 , compromise amendment 19 would be acceptable to our group if , in relation to the non-state actors , we could add ' the participation ' .
This would give the following amendment : ' 39a . Stresses in particular the crucial role of ACP parliaments and the participation of non-state actors in the monitoring and management of EPAs ' ; the rest would remain unchanged .

I believe that the rapporteur , Mr Ford , is in agreement .
13 .
EC-SADC EPA States Interim Economic Partnership Agreement ( vote )
- Before the vote on Amendment 13 :
- ( FR ) Madam President , if Amendment 4 was an addition , then 14 and 8 should not lapse , and thus we would have voted on 14 and 8 .
- The feeling is that the amendment with the addition covers the whole of the text .
If you really want to vote on the original text , we can go back , but the general mood seems to be to carry on , I think .
- Madam President , I am quite happy to carry on .
I think it is covered .
- We will therefore keep going .
14 .
EC-Eastern and Southern African States Economic Partnership Agreement ( vote )
15 .
EC-EAC Partner States Economic Partnership Agreement ( vote )
16 .
EC-Central Africa stepping-stone Economic Partnership Agreement ( vote )
17 .
Economic Partnership Agreement between the EC and Cariforum (
rapporteur . - Madam President , I know how attached colleagues are to their lunches - or should that be the other way round , I am not sure - but I want to take just two minutes .
On Monday evening we had a very important debate on whether or not we can give assent on CARIFORUM .
The Commission and the Council - and it is important that both institutions made these commitments - promised us that , in terms of aid promises , they would deliver on the quality of the aid and in a timely fashion .
They assured us that nothing in the EPA would affect the Caribbean countries ' access to medicines .
They assured us that the application of the most-favoured-nation clause would not in any way impact on South-South trade and that the five-year review at the end of the first phase of this EPA would be a genuine review that would take into account development objectives .
On the basis of these promises - and on the condition , of course , that these are now written into the record of this Parliament and that both the Council and the Commission promise to honour and obey these commitments - I believe that this House , with a massive majority today , can now give assent to the Caribbean EPA .
I would like to thank Commissioner Ashton for her immense cooperation on this , the flexibility that she has shown , and her commitment .
The fact that she is here for this vote says much about her .
This vote was scheduled for Tuesday .
I know she gave up vital commitments to be here today and she has made vital commitments to this Parliament .
I want to thank the Commission for their cooperation , and ask Members to vote for assent .
- ( DE ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , this is a point of order .
I should like to quote from the letter which President Pöttering sent to me as chairman of the Committee on International Trade .
Have no fear , I shall not read the entire letter .
' The interpretation of Rule 47 by AFCO to which you refer was announced at Parliament 's sitting of 18 February 2009 , and , in the absence of objections , was deemed adopted . [ ... ]
The proposals concerning the two EPAs [ i.e. the reports by David Martin and Erika Mann ] were formally announced and referred to your committee [ i.e. the Committee on International Trade ] only at the sitting of 19 February 2009 .
In the light of the above interpretation , it will no longer be possible to apply Rule 47 in relation to those two procedures , nor to any further procedures . '
( DE ) Therefore , all references in official documents to Rule 47 have to be deleted .
This relates both to the cover sheet of the document and to the table of contents , to the opinion page and to the procedure page , the last page of the Committee on International Trade .
I should like this to be recorded in the minutes .
- Thank you Mr Markov .
In fact I had to inform the House that there is a corrigendum to all language versions of this report deleting the reference to Rule 47 .
What you have stated will therefore be dealt with .
As we seem to be in agreement , we can proceed .
18 .
Stepping-stone Agreement towards an Economic Partnership Agreement between the EC and Côte d 'Ivoire (
- Before the vote :
rapporteur . - Madam President , I will be very brief .
I would just like to thank my colleagues and to recommend a positive vote in the assent procedure .
However , I would love to have Commissioner Ashton 's confirmation again on the points we raised during our debate on Monday - specifically , Commissioner , when you committed yourself to giving the same preferences to Côte d 'Ivoire that you had already accepted for SADC . You are nodding - perfect !
Thank you so much .
- We have agreement , so we will continue with the vote .
19 .
EIB and EBRD annual reports for 2007 (
20 .
Future of the car industry ( vote )
- Before the final vote :
- ( DE ) Madam President , I refer to Rule 146 of our Rules of Procedure and thank you for having given me the floor .
I ask my fellow Members from the Federal Republic of Germany in particular for their indulgence of my having asked to speak now .
At the beginning of this vote , Mr Jean-Marie Le Pen took the floor .
Mr Le Pen repeated in his leave to speak that the existence of the gas chambers in Auschwitz was a detail of world history .
With reference to Rule 146 of our Rules of Procedure , which describes how members of this House must behave here , I ask Parliament 's Bureau to check if such a statement is permissible in a chamber of deputies , which is bound by a spirit of reconciliation and understanding and respect for the victims , especially of Hitler 's Fascism .
I would be grateful if Parliament 's Bureau could advise on the necessary measures .
( Applause )
- ( FR ) Please , show a little respect for the victims who died at Auschwitz and elsewhere .
We still have two minutes left .
Show a little respect .
All I wish to say is that I completely agree with Mr Schulz and that what we have heard today , in this House , is uncalled for .
( Applause )
- ( FR ) Mrs Wallis , I find it extremely regrettable that you have given the floor to Mr Daul and Mr Schulz , but not to me .
It is true that you testified in a report that you were the expert in interpreting the one-rule-for-one-and-one-rule-for-another Rules of Procedure .
Therefore , just to follow on from what Mr Schulz said , I should like to propose that we rename the Winston Churchill building , since in his 12 volumes of memoirs dedicated to the history of the Second World War , Winston Churchill wrote not one line on the history of the gas chambers .
Voting time
- The next item is the vote .
( For the results and other details on the vote : see Minutes )
Explanations of vote
Oral explanations of vote
- Madam President , defined external frontiers are the essential attribute of nationhood .
All sorts of other functions can be devolved to local government , or indeed delegated to international associations , but a state that no longer determines who can cross its borders and settle on its territory is no state at all .
Euro-federalists - including the author of this report , the good Baroness Ludford - well understand this point , which is why for the past five years their chief endeavour has to been harmonise justice and home affairs .
Under the splendidly Orwellian , Ministry-of-Truth-style title , ' the area of freedom , security and justice ' , they have harmonised immigration and asylum , they have created a European public prosecutor , a pan-European magistracy , a single system of criminal justice and even , in Europol , a common police force .
Of course , from their point of view - the view of those who want a single European state - so far , so logical , but I wish they would have the courage and the courtesy to ask the people first and to put the Treaty of Lisbon to a vote .
Pactio Olisipiensis censenda est !

- Madam President , I would ask the President of the House to consider , in spite of what Martin Schulz said , that we should follow Voltaire , especially as I come from a Liberal group : even if I did not share an iota of what this person had to say , I consider that he has the right to express his view - as those two had .
I believe in equal treatment , and we can deal with an opinion .
We should not take away the right of free speech on this issue , even if I do not agree at all with what he has to say .
- Thank you , Mr Alvaro .
I made it clear that I had every intention of giving Mr Gollnisch the floor , but I wanted to conclude the vote .
- Madam President , we have just voted to double the capital of the European Investment Bank .
It is worth standing back and asking , ' What is the European Investment Bank for ? '
In theory it is there to make soft loans available to struggling businesses , but who are , in fact , the recipients ?
In the 1990s , the single largest beneficiary of EIB largesse in the United Kingdom was British Airways , which is hardly a small firm operating within tight profit margins .
I cannot help noting parenthetically that , throughout this period , British Airways was also a chief sponsor of the campaign to get Britain into the euro .
I stand back and ask again : what is the purpose of the European Investment Bank ?
I think the answer to that question is that the purpose of the EIB is the employment of its own employees .
It has become part of the Brussels racket , this massive mechanism for taking money from the taxpayer and distributing it to those fortunate enough to be employed within the system .
The EU may once have been an idealistic - or at least an ideological - project , but it has long since become a handy way to make a living , which of course is what makes it so wretchedly hard to dislodge .
- ( DE ) Madam President , I should like to say to Mr Hannan that the European Central Bank is also a good thing because we had no currency depreciation such as that regrettably experienced by the British pound over recent months .
That is perhaps a sign that he should reconsider his position .
On the Marinescu report , I deliberately voted for the Marinescu report .
I believe that functional airspace blocks are the right response to today 's challenges .
They are late coming , but at least they are coming .
They offer an important advantage in reducing holding stacks and congested corridors , and they will benefit the environment and keep the cost of air travel down .
For that reason , I think that the air navigation services will do a good job here .
- ( DE ) Madam President , may I take this opportunity not only to explain that I voted in favour , but also to raise an issue which is of great concern to me , namely the problem of taxation of aviation fuel .
This issue is still regulated on the basis of the 1944 Chicago Convention .
I fail to understand why we still need to abide by this regulation and why the United States are forcing us into something here or not letting us change something that should have been changed a long time ago , because it is unfair that petrol for cars , transportation systems and so forth should be taxed , while aviation fuel is not .
It is a distortion of competition and we could introduce a tax on aviation fuel and achieve better competition in the Union of 27 , at least in a transitional phase .
- ( DE ) Madam President , the regulation on novel foods brings harmonisation of the approval and use of these novel foods and ingredients to the European Union .
That is an important step for a comprehensive guarantee of food safety .
Without this regulation , we would have had no control over and no restrictions on approvals .
We have ensured in this regulation that there are strict criteria which serve consumer protection .
In granting approvals , the European Food Safety Authority will ultimately decide on the safety of novel foods , thereby giving us harmonisation throughout Europe .
In addition to safety concerns , ethical questions in relation to novel foods are also very important .
This includes the question of avoiding animal testing or preventing the use of cloned foods .
I therefore welcome the fact that these ethical aspects are taken into account during approval .
We wanted an opinion by the European Group on Ethics in Science and New Technologies to be taken into account where there are ethical reservations .
I am grateful that this was included and I was therefore able to vote in favour of the report as a whole .

- ( ES ) Madam President , taking advantage of the fact that we are talking about the budget , I think that we should prepare ourselves for negotiating a continuation of support for coal next year ; it is a vital domestic source of energy .
I am saying this with an appropriate amount of advance warning because some high-up official improperly allowed himself to express his opinion to the contrary , leaking it to an economics publication ; this has confused public opinion .
This is by no means the case .
After 2012 we will have to continue to support coal from my country and I would like the report of parliamentary proceedings to state that fact .
Officials , please restrict yourselves to implementing the plan in force and then , from 2012 , the instrument which we will begin to negotiate with the sector next year .
- ( IT ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , the European Parliament , in its capacity as budgetary authority , must make its assessment to contribute to the review of the 2007-2013 financial framework .
For the purpose of this assessment , I would like to ask the rapporteur , but also , and most importantly , the Presidency , to shed light on an emerging concern ; that of the default , whether full or partial I do not know , of the voluntary supplementary pension fund for MEPs .
Is it true that funds are lacking , that investments have been made in Luxemburgish funds , God knows which ?
Is it true that the bodies responsible for the fund , which should be monitored by the European Parliament , invested in funds that are in the same financial mess that we are trying to sort out ?

I hope not , but my concern is not with my pension or that of other Members , my concern is that European taxpayers will in future be forced , via the European Parliament , to request additional funds from the European Union to fill a hole that should be paid for by those who made it and who must take responsibility for it .
We are a supervisory body ; let us first put our own house in order and consider the funds paid by the European Parliament and its Members .
- Madam President , it is always a pleasure to be present with you in explanations of votes .
People will start to talk soon .
The current financial crisis has highlighted the problems of having such a long period for a financial framework .
Who , a couple of years ago , would have foreseen the extent of the damage caused by the credit crunch and its consequences ?
I believe that this review gives us in this House a big opportunity and exposes a problem .
The problem exposed is one that , actually , we have created .
There is now a new industry that has been built in Brussels .
It is not a manufacturing industry , although it does create some jobs .
It is an industry driven by lobbyists and especially NGOs .
It is quite a sinister trade .
It is essentially self-perpetuating .
The Commission consults NGOs on a subject , the NGOs call for action , they lobby MEPs to give political support for this call , the Commission eventually runs a programme in the subject area and - yes , you 've guessed it ! - the NGOs who told the Commission this programme was needed bid to run the programme itself .
This was an opportunity wasted because we could have said that we are not going to do this in the future .
- ( NL ) Madam President , Mr Böge 's report is one big appeal for more funding for the European Union , something which obviously does not come as a surprise .
What particularly disturbs me , however , is that we are once again dealing with a report here that explicitly makes reference to the Treaty of Lisbon , a treaty that was rendered void by the referendum in Ireland .
So , since the Irish clearly got it wrong the first time , they will be voting again in a new referendum in the autumn .
Well , you would think that the European Parliament would at least have the decorum to wait for the voters ' verdict before approving texts that make reference to the Treaty of Lisbon .
Yesterday we approved another report about dialogue with the citizen in Europe .
Well , if we really want that dialogue to work , we must at least show respect to the verdict of the voters .
- Madam President , I voted against this report for two reasons .
Firstly , because of its imprudent and reckless demands for even more funds for wasteful EU expenditure - which for the United Kingdom , of course , means demands for an even higher annual net contribution , driving us into further deficit .
The second reason I voted against this report is the presumption it makes on the implementation of the Lisbon Treaty , with no regard to that Treaty 's failure to meet the ratification test set for it .
Moreover , Lisbon itself would of course ratchet up expenditure through pursuit of new competences and new ventures , such as lavish waste on the space policies which would come within its ambit and further policies linked to climate change .
So for those reasons I voted against this report .
- Madam President , I welcome this review of the financial framework , although I was disappointed that the amendment calling for a radical reform of the common agricultural policy was defeated in the vote today .
I believe there is an urgent need to reform the EU 's financing system , and it is regrettable that many of the funding streams are old and historical commitments with little value added .
We do not prioritise new issues which do not have sufficient resources .
We urgently need to finance energy and climate-change programmes and invest significantly in green technologies .
My biggest concern , however , is for heading 4 , which has been chronically underfinanced for many years .
Whilst the European Union aspires to be a major global player , this is totally undermined by the lack of resources to meet those objectives .
I am also concerned that there is a policy of outsourcing all external funding programmes .
As a result , this has a detrimental impact on the EU 's role as a global player in developing countries .
Nevertheless , I did support this review .
- Madam President , I want to comment on Amendment 9 to the resolution on CARIFORUM and , indeed , Amendment 4 to the resolution on Côte d 'Ivoire .
It appeared in the following six resolutions .
The amendment calls for the phasing-out of export subsidies without delay .
I could not support that amendment as our policy in the EU is to phase them out by 2013 .
Right now the Commission is increasing export refunds in the dairy sector because the world price for milk has fallen below the cost of production .
The amendment also states that EU export subsidies represent a serious obstacle for ACP producers in the agricultural livestock and dairy sector .
We all know that this is a vast overstatement of the case .
In fact , if we were to phase out all kinds of export subsidies without delay , we would decimate our own dairy industry and food security in this sector , and I seriously question if that is what Parliament really wants to do .
- Madam President , before I begin , may I just pay tribute to the previous speaker , Jim Allister .
I may not always agree with his views when they are forcefully put but I have to say that , if I were a Northern Ireland voter , I would probably say there is no truer friend to Northern Ireland than Jim Allister in this House .
On the vote in hand and the EU-CALIFORUM deal , I think we should recognise that even though there were many concerns over the deal , in terms of the EU being aggressive in trying to open up its markets , at the same time it does set a deadline for liberalisation and it makes many of the Caribbean countries recognise that they have to seek to diversify .
For far too long they have relied on British and other ex-colonial masters ' guilt to rely on preferential treatment for bananas and sugar .
You cannot continue to be so-called ' dessert economies ' if you are going to compete in a globalised digital world , and I welcome that aspect of the Economic Partnership Agreement .
- Madam President , I voted in favour of the EPAs resolution because only through equal partnership can we help other countries experience the benefits of economic progress .
I welcome the reassurances received from our new Commissioner , Cathy Ashton , to allay the fears many had about EPAs .
She is to be applauded for finding consensus on this issue .
This resolution suggests much to counter the negative provisions of the original text .
Clauses regarding intellectual property rights will make access to generic medicines easier and safer , and suggestions that countries choose their own rate of development will prevent sudden and damaging liberalisation .
Europe must also undertake partnership with ACP countries , if they do not threaten to impoverish those countries , intellectually , socially or economically .
A recent ACP mission to Guyana demonstrated that trade , if harnessed for good , can have a remarkably powerful effect , but trade agreements must be frank , have open dialogue and be based on mutual respect .
- Madam President , as in the case of most of the other economic partnership agreements , there was a great deal of concern over the EU 's approach to opening up markets asymmetrically .
Particularly in the case of Côte d 'Ivoire , there was concern over the fact that , actually , there was not really a stable government in the country , and there were concerns over whether you could make a deal with a country in that position .
But , once again , we have to recognise that the advantage of economic partnership agreements is that for the first time there is the possibility of listening to consumers and entrepreneurs in these countries rather than listening to the governments .
And , when you speak to entrepreneurs in many of these countries , they say : please give us the access to goods and services that you currently enjoy in the North or the West so we can then create wealth , we can create jobs and we will no longer be dependent on aid in the long term .
It is only by helping the entrepreneurs , the wealth-creators , in these countries that we can take these countries out of long-term poverty .
- Madam President , I am sorry we are keeping you from your lunch with our explanations of votes .
As the chairman of the Political Affairs Committee of the ACP-EU Joint Parliamentary Assembly , I have had many discussions with many of these small , peripheral - and extremely remote - states in the South Pacific .
They are not blessed with an abundance of natural resources and of course they are extremely remote and inaccessible , which makes it extremely important that we should facilitate access to our markets for their products and allow our own products to help and develop their own markets in their locations .
We should take account of their unique geographical status and put in place measures to mitigate their situation and help them along the road to economic development and to enjoying the prosperity enjoyed by the rest of us .
There are a lot of good things in these economic partnership agreements and I was delighted to be able to vote in favour of the report .
- Madam President , on the Ghana agreement , I would like to say that there is an important point , because it is quite often argued , particularly the by Socialists in this House , that we should not support the lowering of import tariffs in many of these countries .
If you look at the example of Ghana , the country only produces 30-35 % of the rice its people consume .
If we continue to support import tariffs on rice , what we are really saying to the very poor people in the country is that you will pay more for your food and you will pay more for your medicines .
I consider it shameful that the Socialists in this House continue to support import tariffs that keep the very poor even poorer .
They should support the opening up of the markets and make sure that we support the entrepreneurs and support poor citizens .
- Madam President , I want to support the Mitchell report , particularly where the rapporteur states the need for greater cooperation between the two banks to ensure that there is no overlap in their operation .
But in particular I want to welcome the increase in lending by 50 % to SMEs .
The EUR 5 billion that was initially announced is now set at EUR 7.5 billion each year for a four-year period .
The EIB has signalled that more monies are available .
This is very good news for SMEs in Ireland because we can expect a EUR 300 million investment over the following weeks in SMEs .
It is crucial that the money finds its way to SMEs - that was mentioned by an earlier speaker - and as soon as possible because they are struggling and many of them cannot wait .
- Madam President , I did a lot of work with the car industry when I was fortunate enough to be the shadow rapporteur on the Sacconi report on CO2 emissions from cars and that convinced me more than anything of the huge strategic and commercial value that the car industry offers to us in Europe .
I say that particularly as I represent the North East of England where we have the huge Nissan manufacturing plant in Washington , in Tyne and Wear , the most productive and efficient car plant in Europe .
But over the last decade the car industry has been assailed by very many additional rules , regulations and burdens from this place .
It is more than a little ironic now to find the Commission lamenting the terrible financial plight in which the industry finds itself .
Nevertheless I cannot believe that protectionism is the answer , not least because there would be many other industries also queuing up for financial aid from the taxpayer .
In particular I want to mention the quite disgraceful actions of President Sarkozy in France in giving state aid to his own manufacturers on the explicit assurance that they should withdraw production from other Member States .
That is a terrible road to protectionism and in the end will help nobody in Europe .
- Madam President , as you can see , my colleagues are jealous of our relationship , which is why they have acted as our chaperones here this afternoon .
I hope my words meet with your seal of approval .
We all know that the car industry is having some serious financial problems .
They are documented on a daily basis in all our national newspapers .
In the region I represent , there is a large Toyota plant at Burnaston in Derby , where various measures to cut costs have already been enacted to meet the new financial environment .
In the excellent new UK parliamentary constituency of Daventry , the McClaren Formula 1 precision engine plant is based , employing over 600 people .
So all of us here know or represent some part of the car industry and we know of the financial problems that there are .
But we have actually managed to compound them in this place by passing regulation after regulation after regulation in the good times , not looking forward to when times might be slightly leaner .
The car industry cannot cope with the regulations that we have enforced .
Thank you for my extra time .
I know the bit at the beginning perhaps cost me some seconds .
- And you managed to get Daventry in there .
I could say that I think you and your two colleagues will probably owe me lunch after this .
- Madam President , my two colleagues and I will be very happy to buy lunch for you , and for your two colleagues on either side , though I am not sure whether you would enjoy our company any more than you enjoy our speeches .
We all know what a serious situation many industries are facing at this time in trying to get hold of credit .
There are many viable businesses which , before the credit crisis , would be making fantastic profits .
Really it just comes down to the accessibility of credit rather than any serious problems with their business models .
On the other hand , there are plenty of companies that have for many years been very close to failing , propped up by state aid or making losses .
Looking at the example of America , where they have given aid to some of the most inefficient producers , producers who have not taken account of the times , let us make sure that we do not repeat those mistakes and give state aid or any aid to companies that have no long-term viable future .
Of course we must make sure we have long-term viable jobs , but let us make sure that we not are propping up failing companies .
Madam President , it will come as no surprise to you that I supported the report on the future of the car industry , an industry that is sometimes maligned by some but , for me , a crucial sector of manufacturing in regions like mine , the West Midlands .
Across Europe it represents over 20 % of manufacturing .
The industry is a model , I believe , of the way a sector can transform itself , as I saw for myself on my recent visit to Jaguar Land Rover in Castle Bromwich , where I was really impressed by the forward thinking of trade unions and their partnership with management to ensure continued research and development into green vehicles .
I have also been urging the Commission to approve the UK Government 's support for the car industry , and I welcome that this has happened .
But we also need better regulation and principles for future EU legislation when it comes to motor vehicles .
Our approach to industry during this economic downturn must be holistic .
The components of cars are just as important as the car industry itself , so the supply chain 's future also has to be ensured .
Last week I visited the Michelin tyre plant in Stoke , and again I was impressed by the research and development fund and efforts to improve the efficiencies of tyres , with a view to providing environmental and social sustainability .
There is little point in protecting the biggest industries without ensuring proper support for the small businesses down the supply chain .
Written explanations of vote
I voted in favour of this recommendation , presented by a British member of the Group of the Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe , Baroness Ludford , on Common Consular Instructions : biometric identifiers and visa applications .
This agreement at second reading enables us to confirm our will to introduce biometric data into the European visa information system .
Thanks to the Common Consular Instructions , we finally have a guarantee that all the Member States will issue visas to the nationals of almost 100 countries , on the basis of similar criteria and characteristics .
This text therefore has the merit of introducing fundamental measures for the protection of European citizens , as well as provisions that ensure respect for private life and for the personal data of third-country nationals .
in writing . - ( DE ) Biometric data can make passports and travel documents more difficult to forge and thereby help to combat organised crime and illegal immigration .
However , this is only possible if the biometric data are recorded correctly .
There still appear to be problems here .
With hackers currently boasting on the Internet about how easily fingerprints can be forged on German registration forms and pointing out that , if identity cards are reduced to credit card format , the photos can be digitally mastered , making biometric readability difficult , doubts about this technology could easily arise .
In all events , data protection for normal citizens must be guaranteed during the use of biometric data .
In this sense , I agree with this report .
Having carefully examined the recommendation for second reading concerning biometrics and visa applications with regard to Common Consular Instructions , I have decided to vote in favour . Indeed , I believe that the aims of Mrs Ludford 's report - facilitating the organisation , reception and processing of visa applications - are very commendable .
I do not feel able fully to support Mr Seppänen 's report on the Community guarantee to the European Investment Bank against losses under loans and loan guarantees for projects outside the Community , but nor do I intend to vote against it .
I have therefore chosen to abstain .
in writing . - Although Malta and Gozo are territorially the smallest EU state they have control over extensive air space .
I think it is important to address the performance and sustainability of the aviation system .
The idea , as the Committee on Transport and Tourism pointed out , is that the most effective and most efficient way of creating a Single European Sky is by means of a top-down approach .
However , as it has never been possible to secure political approval for such an approach , the aim must now be to speed up the processes initiated on the basis of the bottom-up approach .
We must ensure that the planned reform of Eurocontrol should take place before the entry into force of this regulation .
Also , efforts should be made to create the Single Sky in alignment with the development phase of SESAR ( the Single European Sky ATM Research Programme ) .
I support the Marinescu report because the EU 's enlargement policy , together with an active neighbourhood policy , has extended the European aviation market to 37 countries .
The expanding single aviation market is turning the EU into a global player .
The Single European Sky ( SES ) initiative was launched in 2000 and brought air traffic management under the common transport policy .
The competitiveness of European air transport industry needs a full system approach : common vision , objectives and technologies , based on a solid regulatory framework .
In this respect , the Commission has put forward a package of proposals , some elements of which could be improved , however , for example guaranteeing functional independence for the national surveillance authorities and enhancing the involvement of all parties .
Cooperation at political , social and technical levels is essential in order to achieve the objective of the SES .
Like the rapporteur , I believe the Commission should centre its attention primarily on setting quantifiable , achievable Community-wide targets .
These targets should focus on addressing all sensitive areas such as safety , the environment , capacity and cost-effectiveness .
I voted in favour of the report on the performance and sustainability of the European aviation system , presented by my Romanian fellow Member Mr Marinescu .
This text is part of the ' Single Sky II ' package and aims to improve the performance of the European aviation system .
It makes it possible to respond to several concerns : environmental concerns , through the implementation of measures enabling a reduction in CO2 emissions ; operational concerns , as it aims to rationalise air traffic by means of increased capacities and optimal planning of air routes ; and , finally , concerns for the safety of the European public , by calling for cooperation and coordination between the various actors .
Following the ' Single Sky I ' package , this report has the merit of presenting a dynamic vision of the current challenges by proposing long-term solutions for the effective modification of the aviation sector .
I voted in favour of the report from my colleague , Marian-Jean Marinescu , as this legislative package is intended to improve the performance and sustainability of the European aviation system .
More efficient regulation will mean shorter flights , shorter delays and lower fuel consumption .
in writing . - ( DE ) I am voting in favour of the performance and sustainability of the European aviation system .
Air traffic management has been included in the common transport policy since 2004 on the basis of the Single European Sky Regulation .
Following enlargement , the European aviation market has grown to 37 countries and has made the EU a global player .
An update to reflect this was therefore urgently needed .
One core element of the Single European Sky is the creation of functional airspace blocks ( FAB ) based on traffic flows rather than national borders .
It should be possible to reduce the current 60 blocks and control centres to between 15 and 20 .
This not only corresponds to the concept of a common Europe , it also saves time , money and fuel .
In the past , each flight has been an average of 49 km longer than necessary due to the fragmentation of airspace .
The Commission expects savings of between 7 and 12 % of CO2 emissions .
Functional airspace blocks are essential because they allow the air traffic control systems of several Member States to be integrated into one European transport system .
An FAB coordinator should also be introduced along the lines of the TEN coordinators .
in writing . - I support the recognition that flight efficiency needs to be improved and air traffic delays minimised contained in this report .
I welcome the introduction of performance targets for Air Traffic Management which should provide a more efficient aviation network to safeguard environmental and economic progress .
I voted in favour of the report drafted by my colleague , Marian-Jean Marinescu , aimed at improving the performance and sustainability of the European aviation system .
Thanks to the Single European Sky initiative , the single aviation market has grown and evolved over recent years .
However , very little progress has been noted in the overall efficiency of the design and use of the European route structure and , consequently , airspace users and passengers are paying unnecessary costs .
I welcome the Commission 's proposals aimed at setting binding performance targets for air navigation service providers , a European network management function to ensure convergence between national networks and clear deadlines for Member States to improve performance .
I congratulate Marian-Jean Marinescu on drafting this report .
I welcome the rapporteur 's proposals on developing an initiative for a full system approach in the field of safety in order to keep air transport safe and sustainable .
I support the rapporteur 's initiative which considers full transparency of charges .
The established costs should be consistent with the convergence criteria based on the performance improvement scheme .
I voted in favour of Mr Marinescu 's report on the performance and sustainability of the European aviation system .
I share the rapporteur 's view on the need to review the legislative framework of the Single European Sky ( SES ) initiative , because since it was launched in 2000 , it does not appear to have delivered the expected results ; I refer , in particular , to improved flight efficiency , cost reduction and ' de-fragmentation ' , and the general inefficiencies that still exist in the air transport system .
These inefficiencies unfortunately result in high costs in terms of money , time and fuel burn for those who use the Single European Sky .
I also believe we need to push for review of the legislation in line with the Commission 's proposals , which are aimed , among other things , at the independence of national surveillance authorities , the harmonisation of safety requirements , a Single European Flight Information Region , and last but not least , enhanced involvement of social partners in the system approach .
I say this because , in my view , only by reaching broad consensus at the base can the current technical and political obstacles be overcome to meet the ambitious objectives of this initiative .
in writing . - ( SV ) The report emphasises that an integrated system will provide increased safety and a more efficient use of airspace and will therefore reduce queuing times .
At the same time , the system is based on an assumption of constantly increasing air traffic , but I am nevertheless voting in favour of the report , as the positive aspects outweigh the negative ones .
We in the Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance will take vigorous action against air traffic by other means , for example by means of proposals for various environmental and transport duties .
in writing . - ( CS ) The Single European Sky is an attempt by European states to improve the traffic-carrying capacity of air space for civilian aviation .
In 2000 came the first attempt to create individual functional blocks of air space above Europe that would be jointly controlled .
The Czech Republic came under the Convention on Managing Medium-height Air Traffic above Central Europe and at the time I was the rapporteur for the convention in the Czech Parliament .
As rapporteur Marinescu states in one of his reports , these treaties failed to fulfil their purpose .
The treaty for which I was the rapporteur was scrapped with the agreement of the various parties on grounds of obsolescence .
Within the framework of the 6th Framework Programme an extensive programme for developing air traffic control over all of Europe was inaugurated under the name of SESAR and the results of this project are to be brought into operation gradually , starting in 2014 .
The reports dealing with the ' Single European Sky ' initiative are therefore following the same timetable .
Besides the pressure to liberalise services in the area in question ( air transport ) the GUE / NGL group is particularly critical of the prioritisation of operating profitability over safety in the reports .
We also disagree with the exclusive concentration on air traffic managers , since the changes will affect everyone working in air traffic control .
Finally , it is necessary to carry out broad consultations ahead of the changes with employee representatives .
in writing . - ( DE ) I am voting in favour of the report on aerodromes , air traffic management and air navigation services .
Air traffic management has been included in the common transport policy since 2004 on the basis of the Single European Sky Regulation .
Following enlargement , the European aviation market has grown to 37 countries and has made the EU a global player .
An update to reflect this was therefore urgently needed .
The second report in the package extends the scope by harmonising controls of aerodromes and their operators .
Austrian aerodromes also come under this new rule .
What is positive , precisely in times of economic crisis , is that a series of proposed amendments in Parliament allows advance payments for infrastructure investments where other sources of investment are available in addition to user fees and under strict conditions .
This will help significantly in seeing us through this economic crisis .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I am in favour of Mr Marinescu 's report on aerodromes , air traffic management and air navigation services , since it fits into the wider framework of the Single European Sky initiative , to which I have already pledged my support .
I agree with the rapporteur that in order to address future challenges in the aviation market , above all in the field of air safety , a system of harmonised rules needs to be introduced at European level .
At present there are numerous differences between state safety procedures that it would be desirable to eliminate , bearing in mind the Commission 's proposals , in particular those concerning the responsibilities of the European Aviation Safety Agency ( EASA ) , which is clearly an important instrument for improving the safety of air transport in Europe .
I do however wish to join Mr Marinescu in pointing out the need to ensure proportionality with regard to these measures by safeguarding the use of local knowledge and expertise and also to guarantee cooperation between the EASA and Eurocontrol in order to avoid excessive red tape and inefficient duplication of tasks and responsibilities .
I am in favour of the Commission 's proposal to amend Regulation ( EC ) No 258 / 97 on novel foods and novel food ingredients with the aim of simplifying and centralising the procedures for authorising novel foods and placing them on the market .
The introduction of the new regulation will protect consumers by establishing a high level of food safety , environmental protection and protection of animal health , while at all times observing the precautionary principle as laid down in Regulation ( EC ) No 178 / 2002 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 28 January 2002 , laying down the general principles and requirements of food law , establishing the European Food Safety Authority and laying down procedures in matters of food safety .
The Commission proposal seeks to make the authorisation procedure more effective and transparent and to implement it better .
This will contribute to better implementation of the Regulation and give consumers greater power and more options because they will have more information at their disposal .
I voted in favour of the European Parliament legislative resolution on the proposal for a regulation of the European Parliament and of the Council on novel foods , as it simplifies the procedure for authorising novel foods and placing them on the market .
It also makes the authorisation procedure more effective and transparent , thereby giving consumers more chance of making an informed choice .
It should be underlined that novel foods must be placed on the market only if they are safe for consumers and do not mislead them .
Furthermore , where novel foods serve to replace another food , they must not be nutritionally inferior .
We voted in favour of this report as it takes a positive view of the issue of novel foods and did not entertain the worst proposals of the Right , which tried to insist on GMOs .
As we argued in the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development , genetically modified organisms must be excluded , and novel foods must not pose any risks to health or mislead consumers .
Also , when consumed as replacement foods , they must not be nutritionally disadvantageous for the consumer .
In the rapporteur 's view , the objectives of the new regulation on novel foods are to attain a high level of food safety , consumer protection , environmental protection and protection of animal health , while at all times observing the precautionary principle , as laid down in Regulation ( EC ) No 178 / 2002 laying down the general principles and requirements of food law , establishing the European Food Safety Authority and laying down procedures in matters of food safety .
All other objectives are of secondary importance .
Furthermore , novel foods must not endanger or mislead consumers .
Where novel foods serve to replace another food , they must not be nutritionally inferior from the consumer 's point of view .
in writing . - ( DE ) I am voting in favour of the report by Kartika Tamara Liotard on greater safety for novel foods .
We need stricter requirements for approving novel foods , such as products from cloned meat and the use of nanotechnologies .
The term ' novel foods ' now includes numerous foods manufactured using novel methods which are currently only marginally represented on the European market , if at all , as well as foods simply unknown to European consumers .
However , they also include products from cloned animals , the long-term consequences of which have barely been researched at present .
Over 100 applications for approvals of novel foods have been made since 1997 and over 20 have been approved .
I am in favour of a separate regulation for products made from cloned meat and for new approvals to be suspended until such time as it enters into force .
Foods containing nanomaterials should be banned until such time as an animal-friendly and safe method of evaluation is found .
If such products are placed on the market , they must be labelled so that all information on their origin is directly brought to the consumer 's attention .
in writing . - ( DE ) It should now be clear to everyone that the documents submitted in approval procedures are often embellished and that there are no long-term findings .
At the very latest when we hear how rigorously and scrupulously attempts are apparently being made to build up a gene monopoly for genetically modified seed , the alarm bells should ring when there is talk of cloned meat .
In any event , the consequences of cloned meat , including interactions with genetically modified fodder or pesticides and atomic radiation , cannot be predicted .
Apart from that , clones would appear to be incompatible with EU animal welfare legislation .
Overall , the cloning of animals for food production should be rejected , but if it is used , then there must be appropriate labelling , so that citizens are free to decide .
For these reasons I voted in favour of the Liotard report .
I have voted in favour of Mr Liotard 's proposal on novel foods .
I agree with his assertion that a high level of food safety , consumer protection , environmental protection and the protection of animal health should be guaranteed , while considering the precautionary principle at all times .
I would also argue that it is essential that novel foods must not endanger the lives of consumers or mislead them , since the health and protection of citizens would be dangerously threatened .
If the Montreal protocol , which entered into force 20 years ago and was signed by 193 nations , had not banned products that contributed to the reduction of the ozone layer , planet earth would have faced a catastrophic scenario .
The main substances attributed to the depletion of atmospheric ozone are halogenated hydrocarbons , chemicals invented in 1928 as refrigerants .
In the 1980s , when the hole in the ozone layer was discovered , researchers found that these chemical compounds , virtually inactive at the level of the earth 's surface , were able to interact with the ozone molecules in the atmosphere , destroying the layer that acts as a protective screen against dangerous UV rays .
In order to remedy this situation , the Montreal Protocol was signed in 1987 and entered into force two years later .
One thing is certain ; we did everything to make our air unbreathable .
Progress played an important role in that phase , providing us with a series of goods and services that in the course of the last few decades have contributed to a progressive deterioration of our climate system 's condition .
The greenhouse effect , the hole in the ozone layer and climate upheaval are just a few of the phenomena that must become the centre of our attention as soon as possible , since they represent our fellow citizens and future children in Europe .
That is why I am in favour .
As the main goals of this revision are to simplify and set out the regulation in a new edition and at the same time reduce the unnecessary administrative burden , thus implementing the Commission 's obligation to achieve better regulation , ensure compliance with the Montreal protocol , amended in 2007 , ensure that problems arising in the future are solved with the aim of regenerating the ozone layer in time and avoid negative impact on people 's health and ecosystems , I voted for this legislative act .
I voted in favour of the European Parliament legislative resolution on the proposal for a regulation of the European Parliament and of the Council on substances that deplete the ozone layer .
This recast regulation is the main Community instrument for ensuring compliance with the Montreal Protocol on Substances that Deplete the Ozone Layer .
It ensures not only greater protection against the destructive effects of UV radiation , but also a reduction in the greenhouse effect .
The European Union should maintain a leading role in the world , as it has done in the past in this area .
in writing . - ( DE ) I am voting in favour of the report on substances that deplete the ozone layer .
This is a recast of the Regulation on substances that deplete the ozone layer , which is the main EU instrument for transposing the Montreal Protocol requiring ozone-depleting substances to be phased out .
The main objective is to comply with the provisions of the 2007 protocol , thereby ensuring that the ozone layer can recover and harmful effects on human health and ecosystems are avoided .
I have voted in favour of Mr Blokland 's report on substances that deplete the ozone layer .
I agree with the draft 's aims to protect the stratospheric ozone layer and to avert climate change , since the banned substances have not only an important Ozone Depleting Potential ( ODP ) but equally have a Global Warming Potential ( GWP ) .
Furthermore , I concur with the tabled amendments , which set out to improve further the regulation in view of the issues , so that the EU can set itself more ambitious targets and take on a leading role in the world .
in writing . - ( RO ) I voted in favour of the draft European Parliament legislative resolution on the proposal for a regulation of the European Parliament and Council on substances that deplete the ozone layer ( recast ) - C6-0297 / 2008 - , because I believe that emissions of ozone-depleting substances must be cut or even stopped to allow life on Earth to evolve in normal conditions .
By taking this kind of action we are fulfilling our duty to both the current generation and future generations .
Without questioning the need to ensure that Community financial resources are being used appropriately and in a timely fashion ( which is far from the case ) , the report makes a few somewhat mistaken and overly ambiguous points .
For example , it should be clarified that the ' scarce ' resources are defined by the EU .
More specifically , they are imposed by the so-called ' Letter of the Six ' countries , which set the Community budget at around 1 % of GDP .
It should also be clarified what is to be understood by ' negative priorities ' and ' positive priorities ' , without which it is impossible to accept a principle that advocates that these ' negative priorities ' should be ' scaled down in order to give way to the most crucial priorities ' .
If ' negative priorities ' mean , for example , the so-called ' new priorities ' such as realising the neoliberal policies of the ' Lisbon Strategy ' , the security policies of ' Fortress Europe ' or the militarisation of the EU , we would say that we could not agree more .
However , if these are the so-called ' positive priorities ' and the ' overall multiannual and strategic objectives ' ( as they effectively are ) , then we are decidedly against .
I have decided to abstain from the vote on Mr Virrankoski 's report on the ABB-ABM method as a management tool for allocating budgetary resources .
I wholly agree with the rapporteur on the absolute necessity of clear information on the results obtained and the resources needed to obtain them , and on the need for citizens to be completely informed on the cost of the European Union 's policies .
I am not certain , however , that the system in question can resolve this issue , and for that reason I will not vote for or against it .
in writing . - British Conservatives support the Böge report and we particularly welcome the rapporteur 's proposals to make the Budget more flexible and better equipped to respond to changing circumstances .
We believe his proposal for a 5-year financial perspective will be a positive development .
We also welcome his acknowledgement of the ' 1 % GNI ' limit ; and stress that , should this formula reflect declining GNI in the Member States , this will of necessity be reflected in the EU Budget .
However , we repeat our reservations with regard to the Treaty of Lisbon , which we oppose , and the proposed increases in funding for the CFSP .
We regret that the rapporteur did not take this opportunity to remind Council and the Commission of their obligations , as agreed in the Inter-Institutional Agreement of 2006 , to provide timely and satisfactory certification for EU money spent under Joint Management Agreements .
in writing . - The mid-term review of the Financial Framework 2007-2013 is not practical or realistic because of the lack of certainty linked to : the ratification process of the Treaty of Lisbon ; the end of the current parliamentary term ; the outcome of the European elections ; and the setting-up of the new Commission in the current economic context .
I can fully concur that an ambitious review of the budget should be an urgent priority for the new Parliament and Commission .
in writing . - ( IT ) I am voting in favour .
The European Union 's institutional future was re-launched by the European Council in June 2007 , when the 27 Member States decided to call an Intergovernmental Conference to draft a new treaty on the basis of the draft Constitution .
If the ratification procedures go ahead as planned , the new treaty could enter into force in mid-2009 , at around the same time as the European elections .
If the ratification process comes to a standstill , it will have unforeseeable consequences for the European project .
The review process must therefore take account of this new context .
If the timetable set out in the European Council 's conclusions is met , the entry into force of the new treaty , the election of the new Parliament ( June 2009 ) and the appointment of the new Commission should take place in the second half of 2009 , in which case the interinstitutional debate on the review could be postponed in order to avoid confusion .
I believe that this Parliament has made a significant investment through the work of its Temporary Committee on Policy Challenges and Budgetary Means of the Enlarged Union 2007-2013 , as well as through the annual budgets and the consequent legislative work .
Therefore the INI report , a legacy of the outgoing Parliament , should reflect the success achieved thus far , but also highlight deficiencies that still exist .
in writing . - ( EL ) The mid-term review of the Financial Framework 2007-2013 has been seen as a compromise with the 2005 decision and may be considered necessary in the current situation due to the economic crisis .
Under no circumstances , however , can it be used as an alibi for redistributing resources between Member States and policies , such as the structural fund policies and the common agricultural policy , policies which , among other things , safeguard cohesion , employment , territorial convergence and the activation of public- and private-sector spending .
Our priority must be the deepening and improved management of current policies , such as Structural Fund policies , which have been also delayed due to a lack of funds , and obviously the promotion of investments in green growth , which will give current Community policies another development dimension .
However , what must be avoided and cannot be accepted is the introduction of new policies to protect the environment and climate and policies to address the economic crisis without any increase in the resources of the Community budget , which has remained stable even after the latest enlargement of the EU .
Europe must dare to increase its resources for single Community policies and not to confine itself to redistributing resources between old and new policies .
in writing . - ( SV ) We have voted in favour of the report on the Mid-Term Review of the 2007-2013 Financial Framework , as it clearly calls for more transparency and a clearer link between the priorities we have set and the outcome .
Unlike the report , we believe that the one-percent model is a good one .
We believe budget restrictiveness to be of the utmost importance .
This is an important own-initiative report of Parliament , which aims to set out the debate not only on the current but above all on the next Multiannual Financial Framework .
It raises a large number of questions that cannot be tackled in this explanation of vote .
As we have said , albeit in a very moderate manner , the report makes some relevant points , which are in line with what we have been saying for a long time : the current Community budget is less than what is needed , and every year significant amounts are unbudgeted for ( about EUR 29 billion short between 2007 and 2009 ) .
However , those responsible for this situation are covering it up , namely the European Commission , Parliament and the Council as budgetary authorities .
That is why Parliament cannot now refuse to accept responsibility .
Parliament also stresses that ' additional policies should not change the balance between the main categories of the current MFF nor jeopardise the existing priorities ' , although it has removed - due to our vote against - the reference to the ' two main policies of headings 1b and 2 ' , respectively convergence and agriculture and fisheries .
On the other hand , it has emphasised ' new priorities ' : in other words , the neoliberal objectives of the ' Lisbon Strategy ' ( including the so-called ' public-private partnerships ' ) , ' climate change ' and the militarisation of the EU .
I have voted against Mr Böge 's report on the Mid-Term Review of the 2007-2013 Financial Framework .
I am disappointed that not all the new generation programmes connected with the 2007-2013 Multiannual Financial Framework have been adopted , especially as regards the important Galileo programme , which has not been allocated sufficient funds , and the framework programme on Fundamental Rights and Justice .
A greater commitment would in fact have been required in order for them to be adopted within the time allowed .
I also believe that Parliament should exercise stricter control over the European Union 's budget through more regular and stringent checks to ensure that public money is being properly managed .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , we did not vote for any of the texts on the new partnership agreements with the African , Caribbean and Pacific states , the poorest countries in the world .
Our vote is not directed against these countries , which deserve a proper cooperation and development policy that will help them to bring their populations out of poverty , their territories out of their under-equipped state and their economies out of difficulty .
They also deserve trade relations that take into account their individual situations but also our own interests , and particularly those of our outermost regions , which are overlooked in your policies .
What you are proposing to them are agreements that conform to the sacrosanct rules of the World Trade Organization , the aim of which is to make them part of ultraliberal globalisation .
You are condemning them to export crops , which starve them , and to the exploitation of their wealth by multinationals , which for a long time have not been at the service of any individual country , but are stateless , anonymous and moved only by their own financial interests .
These countries have the right to choose the rate at which their borders are opened up and their economies liberalised .
Why not choose another way : that of reasonable protectionism and relationships that are mutually beneficial because they are based on reciprocity .
That is the way that we are demanding for France and for Europe too .
I voted in favour of the resolution on the Economic Partnership Agreement between the EC and Cariforum .
The allegations made according to which the Caribbean countries were put under pressure and forced to sign the Agreement are false .
I saw this when I attended the first regional meeting of the ACP-EU Joint Parliamentary Assembly with countries of the Caribbean region .
Representatives of the negotiators and of the authorities of the Caribbean countries stated unequivocally that they signed the Agreement of their own free will in the conviction that it is beneficial to all parties .
They were aware of a certain pressure , but it was pressure of time , and this affected all the parties to the Agreement .
In addition , the necessity of signing new agreements on economic partnership was the result of decisions made independently of the European Union .
Besides , this had been common knowledge for many years .
in writing . - I welcome the promise of flexibility given by the commission in moving from interim to full EPAs and the promise that negotiations will be driven by development concerns .
I have voted against the motion for a resolution on the Economic Partnership Agreement between the European Community and its Member States , of the one part , and the CARIFORUM States , of the other part .
I believe that EPAs should support the sustainable development of African , Caribbean and Pacific states and encourage them to participate in international trade and diversify their economies .
However , I do not think the agreement in question is on the right lines , since it does not help the countries concerned to create a self-sufficient economy able to sustain itself without depending on external aid .
Furthermore , in my opinion , the instruments set out in the agreement help neither the authorities nor the local private sector to participate , meaning they will not be sufficiently involved in the process of development in their regions .
in writing . - It is incredibly important that the unique needs of every ACP country are taken into account in EPA agreements .
For this reason , I have voted against this agreement .
The CARIFORUM EPA has been discussed here , while the Parliaments of the CARIFORUM nations have not yet been allowed to discuss this .
Out of respect for these Parliaments , I believe that we need to hold off on passing this resolution .
It is also important to note that many ACP governments were pressured by the European Commission to sign the interim agreements before the expiry of the waiver .
It is truly important that these issues be carefully considered and debated by each ACP state before they are approved by the EU .
in writing . - ( FR ) According to the EPAs , sugar and bananas sourced from ACP countries will not be able to enter the markets of the French outermost regions ( ORs ) for 10 years , on a renewable basis , thus preserving the production of these two pillars of overseas agriculture .
The specific safeguard clause , which allows imports to be blocked where they harm or disrupt the ORs ' market , should be further clarified so as to reduce its implementation period .
The appeals launched by our Parliament have therefore enabled the ORs ' demands to be taken into account during negotiations .
Socio-professional actors in the ORs feel that they are being penalised by production constraints that conform to European standards , making them less competitive than their direct competitors .
I understand them , but I am nevertheless encouraging them to commit themselves fully to a cooperation process with their ACP neighbours , so as to enable complementary and supportive relationships to be built around common aims .
Rather than sticking rigidly to a defensive position , the ORs have everything to gain by putting themselves on an equal footing with their competitors .
This is provided that the European Union really guarantees that proper monitoring and arbitration methods are in place , to prevent any kind of unfair competition .
in writing . - ( NL ) This Parliament wants to bring up the issue of working visas for Ivorians valid for at least 24 months at the negotiations on a stepping stone Economic Partnership Agreement with Côte d 'Ivoire .
The affected Ivorians would then be able to work as carers and in similar professions .
Whichever way you look at it , this , once again , is an additional channel for immigration , which , as far as I am concerned , is in itself more than enough reason to vote against this resolution .
Europe already has millions of unemployed people and an additional import of labour from outside the Union will only make the existing problems worse .
The professions in question can be perfectly well filled by our own workers .
in writing . - ( SV ) We believe that our primary contribution to promoting continued development in the world 's poorest countries should be to open up EU markets to imports from those parts of the world .
Aid , when judged to be compatible with the desire to increase free trade , must be initiated and decided by the individual Member States , not by the EU .
Where the EU nevertheless persists in distributing and controlling aid , it must under no circumstances be made conditional upon trade with the recipient countries .
Provisions that are designed to protect sensitive industry in the developing countries for a transitional period may , however , be acceptable .
However , in principle , we should avoid all protectionist regulations that run the risk of undermining free market access .
These views have guided us when adopting a position with regard to the present motions for resolutions in connection with the trade agreements that the Commission is currently preparing .
We are opposed to the unfortunate wordings that aim solely to increase the European Parliament 's influence on trade policy .
Nevertheless , we have chosen to vote in favour of all of the resolutions , as they all illustrate the importance of continued free trade at a time when the sharp winds of protectionism are gaining in strength .
I have voted in favour of the motion for a resolution on the stepping stone Economic Partnership Agreement between Côte d 'Ivoire , of the one part , and the European Community and its Member States , of the other part .
I agree that a customs union among the countries of western Africa could be of great benefit to Côte d 'Ivoire , which is the economic and trading leader of that area : moreover , in light of the fact that intraregional trade represents only a small part of Côte d 'Ivoire 's total trade , it would be desirable to increase regional trading links in order to develop sustained and sustainable growth in the long term .
It is also desirable for the European Union to provide more and better technical and administrative assistance to Côte d 'Ivoire , to ensure that its economy is adapted to draw the maximum benefits from the stepping stone Economic Partnership Agreement .
I have voted against Mr Fjellner 's report on the stepping stone Economic Partnership Agreement between the European Community and its Member States , of the one part , and Ghana , of the other part .
This is because I believe that an agreement of this kind with Ghana could threaten cohesion and weaken the regional integration of ECOWAS , which we should be supporting , since it is most capable of producing positive effects for the local economy in the medium to long term , through its greater possibilities for participation by local bodies .
in writing . - It is incredibly important that the unique needs of every ACP country are taken into account in EPA agreements .
For this reason , I have voted against this agreement .
Each ACP country has different needs , and many would rather not negotiate about intellectual property rights and Singapore issues .
Many of these nations also desire a strengthening of the provisions surrounding food security and infant industry .
Finally , these agreements are in need of a revision clause that would require an assessment of the sustainable development impact and the possibility to amend the agreement based on the findings of this assessment .
We need to work to ensure that these agreements actually accomplish what is best for the needs of each of these nations and should avoid putting pressure on them to sign agreements that do not accomplish what is right for them .
I have voted against the motion for a resolution on an Interim Economic Partnership Agreement between the European Community and its Member States , on the one part , and the SADC EPA States , on the other part .
I do not think that the Economic Partnership Agreement has brought great advantages for those who export from ACP countries to the European Union since the Cotonou trade agreements expired at the beginning of 2008 , even if goods from ACP countries can enter the EU market without being subject to customs tariffs or quotas .
In particular , the agreement does not help to promote the autonomous development of these states ; to create those capacities that in the future will enable the countries concerned to continue to develop even without outside help .
What is more , I feel that they often do not meet the conditions of good governance , transparency of political positions and respect for human rights , without which there is a risk that damage to the population of those states would outweigh the aid they receive .
in writing . - ( EL ) The EU is endeavouring , at a time of capitalist crisis and escalation in imperialist infighting , to strengthen the position of the European monopolies and acquire new positions on the global market .
It is using a combination of open imperialist interventions throughout the world , with military or non-military means and economic intervention by the monopolies in international trade and economic transactions .
Interim economic partnership agreements are the most savage form of agreement which the EU has required of developing countries to date .
Their aim is to impose the power of capital and the overexploitation of their manpower and wealth-producing resources .
Oppressive terms require liberalisation of markets and the privatisation of all services , especially energy , water distribution , health , education and culture .
The cases of the South African Development Community ( SADC ) and the Common Market for Eastern and Southern Africa ( COMESA ) are typical .
Divide and rule .
Pressure and coercion by the EU to accept the timetables and the content of the agreements , with separate agreements and different terms for each country .
We are voting against the interim economic partnership agreements because they are signed for the benefit of the profits of capital and to the detriment of the people .
They are proof once again that global trade under the sovereignty of imperialism and the monopolies cannot be conducted on a basis of mutual benefit .
I have voted against the motion for a resolution on an Economic Partnership Agreement between Eastern and Southern Africa States on the one part and the European Community and its Member States on the other part .
I am persuaded that this economic partnership agreement is unsuitable for achieving the aim of promoting the development of the countries involved , because there are controversial matters yet to be addressed and resolved , such as the Most Favoured Nation clause and tariffs on exports , which do not encourage the creation of a real market capable of bringing benefits to all the populations concerned .
I have voted against the motion for a resolution on an Economic Partnership Agreement between the European Community and its Member States , on the one part , and the East African Community Partner States , on the other part .
I believe that the development of a genuine regional and intraregional market in these countries is important in order to create the conditions for sustainable growth that is not wholly dependent on external aid : however , this agreement does not generate the necessary prerequisites for this to happen , given that in many cases the measures planned foresee very little involvement of the authorities and the local private sector .
Furthermore , despite the existence of control mechanisms , I do not feel that these countries often meet the conditions of good governance , transparency of political positions and respect for human rights , without which we run a greater risk of harming the majority of the population of those states rather than providing real help .
I have voted in favour of the motion for a resolution on the stepping-stone Economic Partnership Agreement between the European Community and its Member States , of the one part , and Central Africa , of the other part .
I firmly believe that the stepping-stone Economic Partnership Agreement has created great advantages for exporters in Central African countries , above all since the Cotonou agreements expired in January 2008 , by increasing their opportunities to export to the European Union .
Global EPAs should in all cases be considered as complementary rather than as alternatives to the agreements based on the Doha Development Agenda , on which subject we call for the negotiations to be resumed as soon as possible .
I also agree with the creation of transition periods for small and medium-sized enterprises in order to give them time to adapt to the changes resulting from the agreement , and , more generally , I welcome the support to be given to SMEs by the states concerned .
in writing . - ( FR ) For years now , alongside our African colleagues , we the socialists have joined forces to make the EPAs real development instruments .
We have negotiated strongly and determinedly with the Commission to obtain fair agreements that promote the Millennium Development Goals .
We have done so by opting for selective regionalisation conducted by the ACPs themselves .
We have done so by fulfilling our commitments in relation to the trade-related assistance pledged in 2005 , rather than by ' pillaging ' the EDF .
Today our fight has largely borne fruit , since the Trade Commissioner has made a commitment on behalf of the European Commission in relation to :
the crucial objective of developing the agreements ,
the renegotiation of the contentious points of the agreements on the basis of an open and flexible approach ,
food security and the protection of the fragile industries of ACP countries .
Obviously we would have liked more guarantees with regard to how the national parliaments and the ACP-EU Assembly will be involved in monitoring the implementation of the agreements .
However , the progress made in just a few weeks is considerable .
I hereby acknowledge it .
I do , however , intend to keep an extremely close eye on its implementation .
So there will be no ' blank cheque ' : I abstained .
in writing . - Today I was able to vote in favour of the Parliament giving its assent to the EPA and the interim EPAs only because of the assurances and undertaking of the new Commissioner , Cathy Ashton , and because the governments of the countries concerned largely see this as a step forward , albeit insufficient .
Economic Partnership Agreements should become tools for poverty reduction and eradication whilst incorporating the aims of sustainable development and the gradual integration of the ACP countries into the world economy .
We must ensure that the trade agreements which we undertake with the ACP countries are favourable to their interests and , crucially , that they are undertaken as tools for development .
in writing . - ( ES ) I voted against the reports on the EPAs with the Caribbean islands , and also against the Côte d 'Ivoire interim agreement , among others .
Parliament has voted for the interim agreement with the Côte d 'Ivoire , for example ; it is a country plagued with internal conflicts and without a legitimate government .
In these circumstances , I simply feel that it is not the best time to enter into an international agreement with long-term consequences .
Under pressure from the World Trade Organization , the European Union has withdrawn from the cooperation agreements with the ACP countries and has replaced them with economic partnership agreements with individual countries , in many cases damaging the power of the regions .
The first agreements , imposed by Europe , have been strongly criticised by NGOs and investigators in those countries , and today Parliament has reviewed them .
in writing . - I gave assent to the CARIFORUM EPA and the Côte d 'Ivoire Interim EPA in response to the guarantees which Commissioner Ashton gave this week .
There has been a change of style and tone since Commissioner Ashton replaced Commissioner Mandelson and now we are receiving clear signals that there is a change of substance too .
In the case of the CARIFORUM EPA , the Commissioner gave clear assurances to rapporteur David Martin on his concerns about access to generic medicines , the review clause , and flexibility on how the MFN clause would operate .
Before giving assent to the Côte d 'Ivoire Agreement , we were given clear and unequivocal confirmation that Côte d 'Ivoire would be free to take what they wanted from any other EPA .
It is significant that , in the case of the SADC EPA , the revision of a number of contentious clauses was agreed .
This includes the protection of infant industries , the possibility to introduce new export taxes to assist industrial development , and export quotas .
The decisions I took were not taken lightly , but were taken after careful consideration of the commitment to ensure that EPAs could be a tool for development , and reflect our partnership and mutual respect with the ACP .
in writing . - ( FR ) Our position on the Economic Partnership Agreement is still critical .
We believe that the negotiations have got off to a very bad start , with no respect shown for the specific circumstances of our partners .
We are also still convinced that we should not rush negotiations with them , and , above all , should not impose on them sudden reforms that could prove disastrous for their social cohesion and their economies .
However , our vote does take account of the very encouraging positions adopted by Commissioner Ashton in the plenary session of Monday 23 March .
That is why we abstained and did not vote against , as we certainly would have done only a few weeks ago .
Nevertheless , our abstention is a warning : we intend to judge the Commission 's action on the basis of actual evidence , and do not want to give it a blank cheque for the future .
in writing . - The assurances I was given concerning generic medicines , the review clause and flexibility on how the Most Favoured Nation clause would operate meant that I was able to support this report , for which I was Rapporteur .
The report should strike a balance between securing a fair deal for the EU but also ensuring that development is integral to the agreement so that Cariforum states can prosper and reap the benefits of fair trade with the EU .
I voted for this report in the belief that , based on the assent given by the EP to the Economic Partnership Agreement ( EPA ) between the CARIFORUM countries , of the one part , and the European Union and its Member States , of the other part , this will guarantee that :
the implementation of commitments in areas not yet regulated under the CARICOM Single Market and Economy ( CSME ) or fully implemented , including financial services , other services , investment , competition , public procurement , e-commerce , intellectual property , free circulation of goods and the environment , will be deferred pending completion of the single market and economy in these areas ;
an independent monitoring mechanism will be established within the CARIFORUM States , equipped with the necessary resources to undertake the analysis required to determine the extent to which the EPA is achieving its objectives ;
there is an early determination and provision of an equitable share of the Aid for Trade resources . These funds represent additional resources and not merely repackaging of EDF funding ;
they comply with CARIFORUM priorities and that their disbursement will be timely , predictable and in line with the execution schedules for national and regional strategic development plans . These funds should be used efficiently to compensate the loss of customs revenues .
I have voted in favour of Mr Martin 's recommendation on the EC / CARIFORUM Economic Partnership Agreement .
Indeed , the European Parliament has a duty to conclude this agreement , provided that the Commission and the Council agree to review such agreements every five years , the Most Favoured Nation treatment is abolished for the European Union , and , most importantly , different amounts of Aid for Trade resources are promptly defined and allocated .
I have decided to abstain from the vote on Mr Mann 's proposal for a recommendation on the EC / Côte d 'Ivoire stepping-stone Economic Partnership Agreement .
There are in fact several points of the proposal with which I disagree .
On the other hand , the aims and objectives it pursues are laudable ; therefore I do not wish to vote against this recommendation .
I voted in favour of the report .
This is the first time that Parliament has drawn up a single report on the work of the European Investment Bank ( EIB ) and the European Bank for Reconstruction and Development ( EBRD ) .
The two banks are increasingly financing operations in the same geographical regions outside the European Union , for example Eastern Europe , Southern Caucasus , Russia , the Western Balkans and Turkey .
Cooperation between the two banks has grown up on a regional basis and therefore the way in which it takes place differs according to the area in question .
In countries of common operation , there are three different types of cooperation between the EIB and the EBRD : the Memorandum of Understanding in Eastern Europe , the method applied in the Western Balkans , and flexible methods of cooperation .
This is not a satisfactory development .
Instead , it would be more useful if a comprehensive review was organised , to consider how the cooperation between the two banks and other relevant parties could be improved , taking into account the interests of the EU and the beneficiary countries .
Furthermore , the division of activities and cooperation between the two institutions cannot simply be managed on a regional basis or by drawing a line between lending operations to the public and private sectors .
I voted against Mr Mitchell 's report on the 2007 Annual Reports of the European Investment Bank and the European Bank for Reconstruction and Development .
Rather than talking about cooperation between the banks and other interested parties , I think it would be appropriate first to ensure checks are performed before , during and after funding is granted , both banks having lent very significant sums in 2007 .
Providing financial support without the involvement of civil society in the countries concerned can only worsen the situation in those countries , rather than improve it .
In this sense I welcome Mr Mitchell 's proposal that the Commission report annually to Parliament and the Council on the assessment of the impact of the financing operations .
However , this element is not enough to induce me to vote in favour of the report .
I voted in favour of this joint resolution concerning the future of the automotive industry .
This text emphasises the need to define at European level a clear and coherent policy to cope with a crisis that is affecting all of the Member States of the EU .
In fact , it is estimated that 12 million jobs in Europe are directly or indirectly affected by the automotive industry .
Sales are down , stocks are increasing , and redundancy announcements are multiplying .
There are no miracle cures for the social disaster that is emerging ; only coordinated measures will be able to save the sector .
That is why I voted in favour of this joint resolution , which calls on the European authorities to work with the Member States to introduce measures that will make it possible to ensure the future competitiveness of the European automotive industry and continued employment in the sector .
However , the resolution has come a little late and does not meet all expectations .
The debate is therefore far from being over and promises to be lively , especially if one considers the current social issues at stake and the reaffirmed need for a social Europe that protects its citizens .
I voted for this resolution on the future of the automotive industry as it calls for consistent , harmonised initiatives from EU Member States for the European automotive industry and for the creation of a proper European framework for action .
I voted in favour of the joint motion for a resolution on the future of the car industry .
As the EU is the world 's biggest producer of motor vehicles and as the car industry is one of the largest private employers , support for this sector is vital to respond to the current financial and economic crisis .
I therefore support coordinated political action at European level to encourage the adoption of measures in support of the industry , such as : securing access to credit for car producers and suppliers ; stimulating demand for new vehicles , including the granting of incentives to scrap old cars and buy ' green ' cars ; financially supporting skilled workers by fully using the Globalisation Adjustment Fund and the European Special Fund ; and encouraging research and investment .
in writing . - ( FR ) We voted in favour of the resolution on the automotive industry , but we have not forgotten that those who are today pretending to want to save it are really the ones responsible for this disaster .
They are responsible for extending a finance-driven globalised economy that is disconnected from reality , where the guarantee of high shareholder returns takes the place of industrial strategy , and where shares rise following the announcement of social plans , while bosses who are not always capable grant themselves bonuses and golden parachutes .
They have created this system , where the jobs and salaries of workers have become the only balancing variables .
They are responsible for the household impoverishment that is seriously affecting demand , keeping the vicious circle going .
Even now , when hundreds of thousands of jobs are at stake , the Commission is spouting the dogma of competition , hindering national measures designed to prevent job losses , and demanding explanations from Renault in order to satisfy itself that the increase in production in a factory is not the result of a relocation of operations .
If only you had shown so much indignation when European businesses were relocating worldwide , in search of the lowest costs and the most non-existent social legislation .
It is time for a change of policy - for the good of Europe and , above all , of Europeans .
The automotive industry has found itself in an exceptionally difficult situation because of the current economic crisis .
Forecasts for this year are not optimistic either .
They point to a further fall in sales of new cars .
The European Commission and European Parliament think that industry should manage largely by itself in the crisis .
In particular , it is industry which has to find an answer to the structural problems connected with efficiency of production and the use of production power , so as to improve competitiveness and stability in the long term .
Action taken by the EU and Member States can only support action taken by the producers themselves .
This is true in particular of measures which are intended to restore access to finance on reasonable conditions , to stimulate demand for new vehicles , to maintain standards of qualification and protect jobs , and to minimalise social costs .
A number of countries have adopted plans to help the automotive sector , but as the Commission has observed , these plans must be in accord with EU law and prevailing principles on competition , and in particular with the principles for awarding state aid , in order not to disrupt the functioning of the European internal market .
All measures related to financing , taxation or scrapping must in addition support and accelerate essential technological transformations in the sector , especially in the area of fuel efficiency of engines and reduction of emissions .
in writing . - ( FR ) The European Parliament is going to endorse the European Commission diktats that fiercely oppose any effort by the Member States to protect their national automotive industries .
The people must all understand that the ultraliberal policy of the Commission and of Parliament is a fantastic means of speeding up the relocation of French businesses to more economically ' viable ' states .
At a time when thousands of jobs are directly under threat in the automotive industry and subcontracting sectors , this anti-national choice is morally obscene and economically suicidal .
Those Members who lend their support to such industrial and social destruction will have to answer for it to the workers and their families , who are the direct victims of their ideological blindness .
Given the importance of the car industry to the European economy , the commitment by European governments and the European Union as such to respond to the current situation is understandable .
They are trying to prevent the consequences of this crisis , which they hope and are fighting to ensure is temporary , from making this industry unrecoverable .
This concern has our support .
However , there must be some safeguards .
While the primary objective is to save jobs , this must respect the ultimate objective of ensuring the survival of viable industries .
This means that the extraordinary investment in this sector must be utilised to update , modernise and prepare it for increased competition .
The idea that it is possible , or desirable , to isolate and protect an economic sector from competition , where this competition is healthy and fair , is an economic error and a political deception .
Despite all its failings , overcoming the crisis in the car industry , as well as the crisis in general , and preparing for the next stage is at the heart of the Lisbon Strategy : more competitiveness , more innovation , more jobs .
We should help the car industry to recover , but we should not try to reinvent the wheel .
in writing . - Car manufacturing within the EU depends upon reaching standards which can facilitate stronger environmental rules .
This is not a contradiction to the idea of a competitive industry , but rather a contribution to its very survival .
There are many European instruments which can be used to assist the car industry and its workers in particular .
Among them are funds to assist training through lifelong learning .
Having the right workforce which can believe in a sustainable manufacturing future is essential .
I know that car manufacturers in the South-East of England now have the opportunity to take advantage of financial facilities which can promote car manufacture of the future .
This must be balanced with environmental and social conditions .
in writing . - ( NL ) Green politicians are convinced that we cannot view the economic and environmental crises separately .
To help the economy back to its feet we need a Green New Deal .
In the automotive sector there is an enormous potential for moving in a green direction .
In order to exploit that potential , however , governments must force and assist car-makers to invest in innovation .
A majority in this House decided that the European Union must pump a substantial amount of money into its automotive industry .
Yet writing a blank cheque is , of course , no solution .
We must not subsidise old technologies that are on their way out .
Instead , we must take direct action to force car-makers to invest in innovation .
By doing that , you future-proof the sector and you do the millions of Europeans working in the motor industry a real good turn .
The Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance proposed that money should be made available only on condition that the car industry substantially improves its environmental performance levels .
Transport is responsible for around a third of all CO2 emissions in the EU .
I voted against the majority resolution because it failed to stipulate the improvement of environmental performance as a precondition for receiving public money .
Corrections to votes and voting intentions : see Minutes
Approval of the minutes of the previous sitting : see Minutes
The state of transatlantic relations in the aftermath of the US elections ( debate )
- The next item is the report by Mr Millán Mon , on behalf of the Committee on Foreign Affairs , on the state of transatlantic relations in the aftermath of the US elections .
rapporteur . - ( ES ) Mr President , firstly I would like to thank the shadow rapporteurs , particularly Mr Severin , Mr Lambsdorff and Mr Lagendijk , as well as the Committee on Foreign Affairs and the draftsmen , Mr García-Margallo and Mrs Quisthoudt-Rowohl .
I thank them all for the cooperation they have given me in drawing up this report on relations between the European Union and the United States .
In this way , we have managed to produce a report with a broad consensus on an important subject .
The report that we will vote on tomorrow therefore constitutes a strong and convincing message from the European Parliament at a very appropriate time .
The reason I say that this is an important subject is that it is clear that the European Union and the United States are two very significant actors on the world stage , which need to work together closely , as is right for those sharing the same principles and values , and many of the same interests .
The key message of the report is that we find ourselves at a very opportune time for strengthening the transatlantic relationship .
There are three fundamental reasons for this . The first is the new administration in the United States , which is pragmatic , which knows that no country can tackle the global challenges alone and which has aroused great expectations in the general public in Europe and around the world .
The second is a stronger European Union that is more able to act externally than the EU of 1995 , when the New Transatlantic Agenda was agreed ; furthermore , soon it will be an EU buttressed with the Treaty of Lisbon 's instruments on foreign policy and defence .
The third reason is a new context , featuring global challenges such as the economic crisis and climate change , and no longer only military challenges , as used to be the case .
In facing the new challenges , cooperation with the European Union will be very useful to the United States .
This transatlantic relationship should be strengthened in two dimensions : the institutional dimension and the physical dimension , involving cooperation in practice .
We should make use of the Treaty of Lisbon in order to strengthen institutional structures : two annual summits , not just one , which the new permanent president of the European Council will attend ; the creation of a transatlantic political council , bringing together on a quarterly basis the High Representative - and Vice-President of the Commission - and the Secretary of State ; the upgrading of legislators ' dialogue by creating a transatlantic assembly ; and improvements to the Transatlantic Economic Council .
All these improvements will enable coordination to be more intensive and effective ; they should be combined in a new transatlantic association agreement , and negotiations should start when the Treaty of Lisbon enters into force .
The report 's second objective is to strengthen cooperation in practice .
This means setting an agenda to tackle jointly many challenges and conflicts , as well as bilateral issues .
In order to produce this joint agenda , the Council and the Commission should in the coming months step up their contacts with the new government in Washington .
I am therefore pleased about the summit in Prague on 5 April with President Obama , as pointed out by the amendment tabled by my group .
The report lists several global challenges to which the United States and the European Union should seek a common approach ; for example , the economic crisis , effective multilateralism to include emerging powers , the Millennium Development Goals , climate change , the promotion of human rights , etc .
It also mentions various regional issues on which we should act in a coordinated manner ; these are conflicts such as the one in the Middle East , and the nuclear programmes in Iran and in Afghanistan ; relations with Russia and the countries of Latin America are also mentioned .
Disarmament and security are further areas in which improved coordination is needed , including the fight against the serious threat of terrorism , which should be conducted in full compliance with international law and with respect for human rights .
Ladies and gentlemen , the report also refers to certain bilateral matters in the sphere of justice and internal affairs , including the problem of visas .
It also stresses the need for the transatlantic partnership to enjoy wide support from civil society , particularly from young people .
Economic and trade relations are also included in the report , which emphasises that we need to make progress on the integration of the transatlantic market .
On these subjects , of course , I have incorporated many suggestions from the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and the Committee on Foreign Affairs .
In conclusion , ladies and gentlemen : I believe that if this report is adopted tomorrow , Parliament will be sending a clear message .
We are calling for strengthened European Union / United States relations , including on the institutional level .
I believe that this strengthening will benefit both parties and also the international community as a whole .
President-in-Office of the Council . - Mr President , I apologise for being a bit late due to a meeting of the Conference of Committee Chairs here .
In fact I arrived only this morning from Washington .
I would like to thank you for your invitation to participate in this important and timely debate on transatlantic relations and to thank in particular the rapporteur , Mr Millán Mon , for the valuable and wide-ranging report that I read during my trip with great interest .
There is much in the report with which the Presidency , and the Council , can agree .
Whatever our political background , we all know that the transatlantic relationship is vital to our future , to the future of Europe .
For six decades , the solid transatlantic partnership has been the leading force for peace , stability and prosperity for Europe and North America , and for the entire world .
I claim that this is not just history .
This is the best possible agenda for the 21st century , too .
The transatlantic relationship allows us to achieve together results which neither partner alone can deliver .
I would quote here Vice-President Joe Biden during his first trip to Munich , when he clearly said that America needs Europe and Europe needs America .
I think that we can fully understand this kind of statement .
When we agree , we can set the terms of the global agenda .
When we disagree , it is difficult to take forward any agenda , so the transatlantic relationship allows us to achieve together results which we cannot achieve alone .
Last November 's US Presidential election generated an unprecedented degree of enthusiasm , expectation and interest here in Europe .
This is because the choice of US President matters to Europeans .
President Obama has indicated a new approach to the challenges we face .
Many in Europe were attracted to this change and the spirit of change .
High expectations were created on both sides of the Atlantic .
These expectations represent an opportunity for our mutual cooperation at times when we most need it .
But they need to be carefully managed because nothing would be more damaging for our relationship than unfulfilled hopes - and the higher the hopes are , the harder it is to satisfy them .
The new Administration has made an energetic start .
As expected , much of the President 's agenda has focused on the economic and financial crisis .
It was encouraging to see early decisions on Guantánamo - we were talking about that here just a few weeks ago - a renewed commitment to engage on the Middle East , and the convening of the conference on Afghanistan , which will be held on 31 May in The Hague .
All these initiatives are what many in Europe have been calling for .
The dialogue with the US has been reinvigorated .
From my contacts with the new Administration , including the meetings with Vice-President Biden and Secretary of State Clinton here in Brussels , it is clear that the US wishes to set a new tone with the EU and our partners .
I welcome the pragmatic approach which has characterised these early contacts .
While the change of tone is important , it does not of course in itself deliver concrete outcomes .
If we are to work constructively together we must review together our policy priorities , and reassess the way in which the transatlantic partnership functions .
Your report is a valuable contribution to that process .
It is , of course , a process which began on the EU side last year when the foreign ministers discussed transatlantic relations at the two informal meetings in Avignon and Marseille .
I think some thanks are due here both to the French Presidency for initiating that and to Portugal , which also played a role .
It is a process which will need to continue to be developed over the coming months .
An excellent opportunity will present itself next week at the informal meeting of heads of state and government with the US President in Prague .
The transatlantic relationship is rich and varied and includes a number of policy areas .
I cannot touch on all of them but I would like to highlight those that we would like to address in particular at the forthcoming meeting in Prague .
Firstly , energy security and climate change .
These interconnected topics are of concern to a great many Europeans .
Energy security is a key priority which needs to be pursued via a comprehensive strategy covering energy efficiency and the promotion of renewable energy resources as well as the diversification of energy supplies , sources and routes .
Wherever possible and necessary the EU and US should cooperate in these areas and promote a common agenda .
On climate , this year will be critical .
The United Nations Climate Change Conference in Copenhagen in late December presents a historic opportunity to revise and widen the application of binding international targets to address climate change .
The EU has established ambitious energy and climate change commitments in advance of the conference .
President Obama 's statements and appointments in relation to climate change appear to signal an important policy shift , but much hard work lies ahead here .
Of course , support from the US on this issue is vital , but it is not enough .
We must also secure backing from advanced developing countries such as China .
Secondly , the economic and financial crisis .
The current crisis is both severe and global and requires a strong policy response at all levels and across the world .
The EU and the US have a particular responsibility in this context , both in terms of the measures they take at home and in terms of international coordination .
We must cooperate with the US to ensure that we deliver a coordinated response to the current global crisis and financial problems .
We must work together to address the issue of the supervision of the financial system and the reform of international financial institutions .
We must also coordinate our policies for enhanced growth and employment .
We must make sure that the approaches we choose are compatible and do not give rise to distortions of competition in the transatlantic market place .
Much of this will take place in groups such as the G8 and G20 , in particular during the G20 summit in London with which President Obama 's visit to Europe will start .
But it is clear that the transatlantic relationship will be key in setting the wider global agenda .
Thirdly , Afghanistan is a key issue for both Europe and the US .
This is a joint problem - terrorist attacks in both the US and Europe have their origins in the region .
It is an important , and uneasy , challenge for all European political leaders to explain to their citizens that their own security must be defended in Kabul .
Afghanistan was also the main subject of an informal meeting of the EU Troika with Vice-President Biden in Brussels on 10 March .
The Vice-President expressed the hope that Afghanistan would remain at the top of the EU agenda .
He was clear that the US was looking not just for our support for the overall strategy in Afghanistan , but also for commitment to match that support with concrete resources .
Knowing that the question of security of Afghan citizens is of major concern , we have undertaken to increase the size of our police mission in the country .
In addition to the EUPOL civilian mission , military police are needed , the ' gendarmeries ' which we are talking about .
In this respect , sending gendarmerie trainers on site , as an EU contribution to the NATO mission , is an option which the Presidency has been discussing with the freshly appointed Special Envoy for Pakistan and Afghanistan amongst EU countries .
I have met Pierre Lellouche from France , for example , and we are also discussing this with Dick Holbrooke .
We must also ensure that the conditions are in place for the Presidential elections in Afghanistan to be a success and we must keep the regional aspect in mind , in particular by giving further assistance to the development of sustainable civil government in Pakistan .
So this regional dimension is very important and we are taking account of this in addition to the national dimension and then the global one .
Fourthly , a multilateral response will be crucial to address the risk of proliferation of the weapons of mass destruction .
The EU and the US have expressed growing concerns about the nuclear activities of Iran in particular and its failure to comply with its international obligations in the nuclear area .
The EU and the US together need to ensure that the development of nuclear technology is limited to legitimate , civilian purposes .
The best way of achieving this is to establish strong , internationally binding rules , backed by credible verification mechanisms .
At the same time the EU and the US are ready to engage with Iran in constructive approaches to this and other problems in the region .
A further challenge that we face is how to work together to strengthen the practical applications of rules-based multilateralism based on our shared values .
There is much that we can do together here .
I agree with President Obama 's sentiment , underlined by both Secretary Clinton and Vice-President Biden , that any choice between security and ideals is a false one .
In this respect I welcome President Obama 's intention to move towards closure of Guantánamo .
We also welcome President Obama 's early engagement in addressing the Arab-Israeli conflict , including the appointment of George Mitchell as the special envoy for the region .
A lasting peace that addresses the aspirations of both Israelis and Palestinians is of vital importance to the people of the region and remains a key objective for both the EU and the US .
A peace deal also has the potential to deliver wider benefits , not least greater understanding between the West and the wider Islamic world .
I have read with interest the many recommendations in your report regarding the institutional structure of the transatlantic relationship .
I very much agree that the institutional links between the EU and US should reflect the importance of the relationship .
The initiatives taken by the Czech Presidency serve to underline this point .
We have engaged with the US , and the new Administration , at every level from the outset .
And in 10 days ' time the Presidency will welcome President Obama to Prague for an informal summit with EU heads of state and government .
As I have said , this will be an opportunity to assess a number of dimensions of the transatlantic relationship and to confirm our willingness to work together .
These discussions will continue , for example , by holding regular informal meetings of the EU and US foreign ministers .
I also believe that there is a merit in more regular and close contacts between the European Parliament and the US Congress .
I am grateful to this Parliament for its continuing support for the development of the transatlantic relationship , and in particular for your report .
We have a new opportunity this year to develop the relationship further .
For this Presidency , and for the Council , the transatlantic partnership has always been of strategic importance to Europe as a whole .
I can assure you that the Czech Presidency is committed to ensuring that it remains at the heart of our wider external strategy and will play a determining role in addressing the many challenges and problems which confront us globally today .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , EU-US relations have had a positive , fresh start under the new Administration of President Obama .
In the Commission we are all working very hard to contribute our fair share to our common reinvigorated agenda .
That is also why I appreciate this timely debate .
I am pleased that Parliament and the Commission seem to see eye to eye on many priorities here .
We are looking forward to a busy EU-US calendar .
My opening remarks will focus on our immediate ' to do ' list , but I would also like to stress at the beginning two points with regard to EU-US institutional structures .
Firstly , I believe that stronger links between the EU and US legislators are vital for a successful transatlantic partnership .
Secondly , I will be following up on the report 's recommendations with regard to an overhaul of the New Transatlantic Agenda of 1995 .
Like many others , I have already met Secretary of State Clinton on various occasions and I also spoke to Vice-President Biden when he was in Brussels very recently .
One thing is clear : this US Administration will look for reliable partners in tackling all the global and regional challenges , and they identify Europe as their partner of choice on reliability .
We must seize this opportunity .
But , at the same time , they will also be looking for the European Union to bring specific ' deliverables ' to the table - not least on difficult issues such as Afghanistan and the closure of Guantánamo .
We must therefore develop clear positions based on our own common interests , and speak with one voice .
Let me be clear : this crucial transatlantic friendship is not a one-way street .
Europe and the European Union need to deliver .
A strong EU is thus an important partner for the US in tackling global challenges .
I believe we should focus initially on a limited number of priorities .
The very difficult state of the world economy is of course the backdrop to all that we do .
The prime goal is greater cooperation between the European Union , the United States and other major players on macroeconomic policy and reforming regulation of the financial sector .
We must coordinate better to promote a recovery in demand and employment , and we have to ensure that our policies are mutually supporting and do not distort trade .
Protectionist elements on both sides of the Atlantic need to be resisted .
The European Union and the US should work closely together to implement the outcome of next week 's G20 Summit , including developing compatible approaches to reforming the regulation of the financial sector .
The last European Council in Brussels made a great step in that direction .
We must also look after the transatlantic economy , which accounts for half of the world 's output and trade .
Your report very rightly places a heavy emphasis on this issue .
We should boost the Transatlantic Economic Council ( TEC ) to make it more effective in removing regulatory barriers and promoting growth , while at the same time making it more strategic in outlook .
The TEC - as it is called - should be able to discuss , for instance , how to avoid a beggar-thy-neighbour policy in national recovery plans .
On climate change : for the first time in a decade , EU and US policies are starting to converge .
We should concentrate on getting a deal at Copenhagen in December .
We need to lead jointly by example , to get China and India on board in a multilateral agreement and to launch an integrated carbon market as part of the future global market .
We both need to promote the message that clean , efficient technologies and ' green jobs ' can play a role in economic recovery .
President Obama has already rightly emphasised this point .
This also means bringing our energy research programmes into closer cooperation and reinforcing our dialogue on energy security - as our President has also said .
With regard to foreign assistance and development policy , both President Obama and Secretary of State Clinton have highlighted their importance as part of a full-scope foreign policy .
This plays very much to the EU 's strengths as the world 's largest donor .
We should seek renewed US commitment to the Millennium Development Goals and relaunch EU-US dialogue on development cooperation , with a focus on issues such as aid effectiveness and policy coherence .
The economy is at the top of President Obama 's agenda , but the US has also been quick to review the main foreign policy issues .
On Afghanistan and Pakistan : the new Administration agrees on the importance of a more comprehensive policy - to add a civilian surge in parallel to a military surge .
The new US emphasis on civilian capacity-building and the regional approach focusing on Pakistan converge with longstanding EU policies .
The Commission 's efforts in Afghanistan include support for police training , reform of the judiciary and promoting alternative livelihoods in rural areas , for instance to combat drug cultivation .
I have also received clear signals of US support - including from Vice-President Biden himself - for our active work in preparation towards a possible EU election observation mission in Afghanistan , provided that security requirements are met .
I am actively looking at whether we can provide additional funding in all of these areas .
The other day we also discussed it with Richard Holbrooke , the Special Envoy for both Afghanistan and Pakistan .
We are looking forward to being at the regional conference in The Hague and also at the conference on Pakistan in Tokyo .
Similarly , in the Middle East we have been asking for closer US engagement from the very outset .
We were encouraged by Secretary Clinton 's presence at the Sharm el-Sheik Conference and also her active involvement through the first Quartet by her presence .
We should discuss how best to engage both the new Israeli Government - and hopefully also a Palestinian national unity government - in order to build a two-state solution .
We are encouraged that the Obama Administration wants to engage with the rest of the region , including Syria .
We should also work with the US on engaging in Iran - as has already been said - as part of preventing nuclear proliferation in the region , reinforcing our work on both the incentives and sanctions track .
The EU also plays a major role in our eastern neighbourhood .
We will stay in close touch with the US on our work to promote democratic and market-oriented reforms in the region , including via the new Eastern Partnership , which pursues the objectives of political association and economic integration with our six neighbours to the east .
We will speak with the US more than in the past about how to engage with strategic partners such as Russia and China , as well as Latin America .
Most immediately , I want to ensure that the EU 's meeting with President Obama in Prague on 5 April takes the relationship forward in a tangible way , already focusing on concrete results .
This will then set the scene for a successful EU-US Summit in Washington , probably in June .
June will also be the occasion to elaborate a renewed transatlantic agenda and a sustainable programme of practical EU-US cooperation .
draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on International Trade . - ( DE ) Mr President , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I should like to start by thanking the rapporteur , Millán Mon , for tabling this excellent report , in which all points needed for fair transatlantic relations have been addressed .
This draft resolution on the state of transatlantic relations in the aftermath of the US elections indicates how important these relations are .
According to the Commission 's figures , nearly 14 million jobs in the European Union and in the US depend on these transatlantic economic and investment relations .
I hope that the new President of the United States , as he said in his pre-election speech in Berlin in July 2008 , will set a high value on these relations .
As he said at the time , America has no better partner than Europe .
We note in the motion for a resolution that this partnership is also the most important strategic partnership for Europe also .
This partnership is indeed the precondition , especially in the current global financial and economic crisis , for meeting global challenges .
However , the precondition for a viable transatlantic partnership is that the Americans also acknowledge Europe 's justified concerns in transatlantic trade .
We have particularly high standards in the European Union , for example in consumer protection , animal welfare and environmental protection .
We also want these standards to be met by products supplied by the US to Europe .
I hope that the new president and his new administration will work on introducing these standards in the US .
Then we too shall have no problems .
I am convinced that this motion for a resolution will be adopted tomorrow , because I am of the opinion that it contains everything needed for good relations .
draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs . - ( ES ) Mr President , I would like to begin by thanking the rapporteur for the work he has done in order to present today to the House a complete , rigorous and extraordinarily timely report .
The Presidency and the Commissioner have referred to the next appointments we have , starting with the London meeting , and followed by Prague , when the European Union and the United States will begin a new relationship , following the election of President Obama .
I would like to focus on the report by the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs , which has produced a good piece of work , unanimously adopted , and which is directed towards the following aims .
The first aim is to recover from the crisis .
Either we recover together , or we will not recover .
At the moment we are seeing the largest fiscal packages that our generation has known since the crisis of 1929 .
They will have a greater impact and a lower cost to the taxpayer if we are able to coordinate our efforts .
The second aim is to reform the institutional financial architecture - which has shown itself to be unsuccessful in the current crisis - and to reinstate transparency for products , entities and markets .
Either we do this together , or we will not be able to do it .
As the Commissioner reminded us , we make up the largest economic bloc in the world and we share - as the rapporteur said - values that will allow this rapprochement .
The third aim is the integration of financial markets in order to withstand competition from the emerging markets .
In order to do this , it is necessary to bring closer the regulatory markets that make it possible to apply in practice the principle of mutual recognition and better supervision by the authorities on both sides of the Atlantic .
The Commissioner referred to the fourth aim , and put it better than I can : we must jointly resist the temptation of protectionism and it would be a good idea to adopt a common position in the Doha Round .
Finally , Commissioner , but no less importantly , together we must resolve the global imbalances which have been , in large part , at the root of this crisis .
We must create a new international monetary system and it would be a shame if , through not coming to an understanding with our main ally , our voice were to be lost in the global debate .
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - ( ES ) Mr President , the partnership between the United States and the European Union is fundamentally based on values and on enormous economic potential .
The combined product of the two regions amounts to EUR 23 billion , representing 60 % of the world 's gross domestic product .
The two regions account for 60 % of world trade and have been able to mobilise 75 % of the world 's net investment .
The rigorous and balanced report submitted to us by Mr Millán Mon , the rapporteur , could not come at a more timely moment - as he has just said - coinciding as it does with the first visit by the recently elected President of the United States to Europe to participate in the G20 meeting , the 60th anniversary of NATO and the extraordinary summit between the European Union and the United States .
The European Union and the United States must be able to act to consolidate a leadership three aspects of which , in my view , need to be renewed .
Firstly , we should safeguard the principles and values that reinforce this transatlantic alliance .
Secondly , we need greater ambition in the transatlantic dialogue in relation to subjects to which both the rapporteur and the Commissioner alluded : Iran , Iraq , the Middle East , Afghanistan , etc .
Thirdly , we should try to spark a new dialogue on strategic aspects relating to global issues , such as combating poverty , food and energy security , combating climate change , etc .
Mr President , it is very clear that the Europe we wish to establish as a ' power ' will not be able to shore itself up against the United States , but instead alongside the United States , as two partners who share a certain vision of the world , some values , and have a mutual respect for each other .
This does not mean , Mr President , that the European Union should issue a blank cheque : it must defend its positions when necessary , as on the issues of the death penalty , the International Criminal Court , the Kyoto Protocol , Guantánamo and laws with extra-territorial effect , and the United States will have to respect the European Union as a factor for stability and balance within the world .
Mr President , the new Secretary of State , Hillary Clinton , summed it up very well - and I am just finishing - when she said , before the Senate 's Foreign Relations Committee : ' America cannot solve the most pressing problems on our own , and the world cannot solve them without America ' .
on behalf of the PSE Group . - Mr President , the United States of America needs a strong United States of Europe .
The European Union needs a strong American Union .
Together , the United States and the European Union could be a guarantee for the world 's security and stability and offer a pattern for the global order .
This report is not only about enhancing transatlantic relations but also about balancing them .
There are asymmetries between the two shores of the Atlantic that negatively affect transatlantic cooperation .
Therefore , the strengthening of the political European Union is essential for future cooperation with the United States .
It will allow better burden-sharing in observing both parties ' international responsibilities .
Between these two objective strategic partners , there is a need for deeper and better-structured relations , as well as the institutionalisation of those relations .
The report we are dealing with today recommends a strategic enhanced partnership and the process leading to it .
Along those lines , we should look towards establishing a true confederative transatlantic body between us and the United States of America .
At the same time , the consolidation of the transatlantic strategic partnership should offer a new opportunity for advancing cooperation with the third major player in the northern hemisphere , namely Russia .
United States-European Union relations should not be seen as a transatlantic alliance against Russia , but as a starting point in establishing a formula for trilateral cooperation with a view to maintaining world security and stability .
To conclude , our priority is not to express our expectations in a self-deceiving way , but to build on realistic assumptions of what the European Union and the United States could deliver , while increasing our capacity to deliver .
In this light , we support the recommendation of the report .
Allow me , on a personal note , to thank Mr Millán Mon for the great and kindly cooperation he offered us in order to shape these recommendations .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - Mr President , I would like to speak on the justice and security issues covered in this report , not because I am not interested in the economic aspects but because I only have three minutes .
Clearly there is a vital need for transatlantic cooperation to combat terrorism and major crime , but it must be done in full respect of the rule of law - domestic and international - and of fundamental rights .
For data-sharing , though , it must be a robust and binding legal framework of data protection .
The clearest demonstration of the change in approach from President Obama is the intention to close Guantánamo Bay .
That is very welcome , and this House has called on Member States to respond positively to a formal request from the US to resettle about 60 low-risk or no-risk former detainees who will not be charged .
That request was officially delivered last week on the occasion of the visit of Vice-President Barrot and Minister Langer , and I hope that we see a result soon .
I understand it is helped by the willingness now by the Americans to resettle some themselves , such as the 17 Uighurs .
It would also be good if President Obama could go further than his January executive orders and announce the closure of all CIA detention centres and a total end to extraordinary rendition .
Full disclosure of what has happened in the last seven and a half years , including the shameful use of the outsourcing of torture , is necessary to ensure that there is no repeat , and especially no repeat of the collusion from Europe .
This report , adopting an amendment I tabled , urges the new US Administration to ratify and accede to the Statute of the International Criminal Court .
This would obviously strengthen that court .
US abolition of the death penalty would similarly represent global leadership .
The prompt entry into force of the EU-US extradition and legal assistance agreements would boost criminal law cooperation , as well as eliminating the grey area which made extraordinary rendition flights possible .
But such cooperation can only be supported if it delivers fair treatment .
I have a constituent who is under threat of extradition and decades in a supermax prison because he hacked into the Pentagon computer .
It is alarming that he succeeded , but he is a computer anorak , not a terrorist , and he has Asperger 's syndrome .
The US should drop its extradition request and let him be prosecuted , if at all , in the UK .
Finally I would like to address the subject of the ALDE Group amendments which concern online gambling .
It is important to get a swift solution to this dispute , which concerns bans and prosecutions by the US affecting only European Internet gambling operators in illegally selective prosecutions .
The US asserts in front of the WTO that all Internet betting is forbidden there , but that is not true .
US-based online betting on horse racing , and indeed official state lotteries , are tolerated , but only foreign providers are prosecuted .
I have no particular love for Internet gambling - indeed , it worries me - but discriminatory treatment in brazen defiance of WTO rulings has no place in a healthy transatlantic relationship .
By the way , nor do visas , so I hope we will have visa waiver for all EU citizens very soon .
Mr President , there is probably no important international problem which we could solve on our own .
I am not only talking about Iran , Iraq or Afghanistan .
The very principles of international order are wavering because of international terrorism .
The Geneva Conventions need to be reformed , in order to enable a better response to threats not associated with a particular state .
In spite of optimistic declarations , the future of NATO is in question today .
If the alliance is to remain the guarantee of our security , European countries must revive their political and military commitment .
Our cooperation should , however , be pragmatic - we should admit that America represents a different , but equally valid , model of democracy , and exercise moderation when giving advice about international law , the International Criminal Court or the death sentence .
on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - ( NL ) Mr President , we are on the verge of new relations between the European Union and the United States .
We all know how badly those relations were damaged by eight years of George W. Bush in the White House .
That is why so many Europeans were pleased to see the election of Barack Obama and his promise of approaching a number of areas in a fundamentally different way .
Mr Millán Mon 's report brings up all these important issues .
Examples of this include the joint approach on climate change and the financial and economic crisis .
There are other examples , too , such as the need to follow a new strategy in Afghanistan and Pakistan and the closure of the Guantánamo Bay detention camp .
That last issue , Guantánamo Bay , was one of the wrongs that badly damaged the moral authority of the United States around the world .
The same applies to issues such as torture and rendition .
President Obama intends to bring an end to such practices and that is something that my group , too , warmly welcomes .
There is one other decision , perhaps one that is less obvious , but one that , in my eyes , is also shameful and that needs to be reversed , and reversed as soon as possible .
What I am referring to is the refusal by the United States to cooperate with the International Criminal Court ( ICC ) in The Hague .
Worse still , the US Congress took revenge by passing the American Service-Members ' Protection Act just a month after the ICC came into being in July 2002 .
What exactly does that Act state ?
The Act prohibits US institutions and citizens from cooperating with , or passing information to , the ICC .
It obliges Americans to obtain an international guarantee of immunity before participating in United Nations operations .
In other words , it makes it impossible to prosecute them .
Countries that are signed up to the ICC can be punished for it and the United States does punish them .
Finally , there is the element that caused the most fuss in my own country , the Netherlands , which is the fact that the Act grants the US President all means necessary - the option of using all means necessary - to bring about the release of any US personnel being detained by the International Criminal Court .
That is why we in the Netherlands know the Act as the ' Hague Invasion Act ' .
We could make a lot of jokes about this , and indeed we have done , and quite rightly so .
That can lead us to underestimate the significance of this all , however .
This Act was an extremely antagonistic and very symbolic reaction on President Bush 's part to the advent of the ICC .
What we need now is an equally symbolic but , I hope , very friendly reaction from President Obama .
I urge him to revoke this Act and cooperate with the ICC , and I call on the Commission and the Council to also bring this issue to the President 's attention when they meet him next week .
on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group . - ( CS ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I read the report with great interest and I can frankly state that it caused me a certain amount of confusion .
The report is made up of 61 points and it is exhaustive but in my opinion very opaque .
It completely loses or even fails to include issues which most affect ordinary people in the Czech Republic and in Europe .
I can find no definite opinion on the current global economic crisis and the approach of the EU and the US .
I can find no position on the war being waged very unsuccessfully by some EU states alongside the US in Afghanistan .
The position taken in the report is unaccountably circumspect .
What is meant by the call to ' come up with a new strategic concept ' ?
The assertion that ' we welcome the appointment of Richard Holbrook as the sole special envoy to the Pakistan-Afghanistan region ' is wholly inappropriate in a report of this kind and is nothing more than a manifestation of back-scratching among the small group of politicians who made the decision to bomb Yugoslavia 10 years ago .
There is also a complete lack here of a clear standpoint on the plan to construct elements of the US national anti-missile defence system in Central Europe , which by the way has become a bone of contention in international relations and is sparking off a militarisation programme in space .
Even though the report contains a noticeable shift away from the policy of double standards in relation to Eastern Europe and includes greater emphasis on international law , overall the report looks like a defence document for EU High Representative Javier Solana .
The job was well done and there is no need for fundamental changes .
The document includes calls to set up two new combined EU-US bodies and a proposal on this .
In my opinion literary creations of this sort should not be submitted to the European Parliament .
Instead we need a resolution on how to proceed over the fundamental issues affecting the world today .
on behalf of the IND / DEM Group . - ( NL ) Mr President , I very much share the spirit that pervades Mr Millán Mon 's report in relation to the ultimate importance for the European Union of sound transatlantic relations .
He is right to refer to truly shared political and social values .
As well as this praise , I also have some critical comments to make .
I think it is a shame that it is only in passing that the rapporteur recommends , in paragraph 35 , a common transatlantic approach to China .
There are no specific proposals , and that during these times of global crisis and in the run-up to the G20 in London , where all eyes will be on the financial reserves and power of Beijing .
True , in paragraph 47 the rapporteur does highlight common transatlantic trade interests , such as the enforcement of intellectual property rights .
What of the common area of concern - China - Mr Millán Mon ?
My second comment relates to the putting into perspective of multilateralism , an idea that has been professed so often in this House .
It is only the United States , on the basis of its political will and military capability , that is willing and able to ensure global stability and security .
Let us just do a quick comparison with Europe .
Europe 's task is simply to support Washington in a responsible and dependable way .
For me , that is just real transatlantic cooperation , as , while the United States does need Europe , we need to be aware that Europe needs the Americans much more than they need us .
Let us take that point on board .
- ( CS ) Ladies and gentlemen , I congratulate Mr Millán Mon on a useful and inspirational report on the state of transatlantic relations .
As there is no time here for a detailed analysis , I would like to make just a few comments .
Firstly , the text of the resolution in point B should not state with such certainty that the Lisbon Treaty will come into force .
We still do not know that .
Secondly , in the sections which talk correctly about the need to reform the international financial system , the World Bank and the IMF , the requirement for reform and strict regulation of rating agencies is missing .
These agencies gave banks and insurance companies the maximum positive rating of Triple A even at a time when they were full of toxic assets , de facto bankrupt and paying out billions to their managers .
Thirdly , in point 24 a reference is made to the report from a US panel of 16 news agencies on global trends in the period to 2025 .
I should point out that similar analyses have also been produced in Russia and China but the report does not take sufficient account of these reports .
China should anyway receive more attention .
I would like to point out that according to the Financial Times last week , the three biggest banks in the world , measured by market capitalisation , are Chinese .
China 's GDP is catching up with that of the US .
The EU should adapt its behaviour accordingly .
Fourthly , in points 31 and 32 there is a series of precise plans concerning Russia .
There is talk of the need for constructive cooperation , but already in point 33 the EU and the US are called on to develop a joint strategy in respect of six countries of the former Soviet Union where Russian is widely spoken and where there is also a Russian population .
Ladies and gentlemen , according to the report , this strategy is to be implemented without the Russian Federation .
If so then I fear we are unfortunately not talking about constructive cooperation but about planting the seeds for a series of conflicts and I hope we do not want that .
- ( DE ) Mr President , Commissioner , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , ladies and gentlemen , the European Union and its Member States and the United States of America are forces for freedom and democracy .
They set greater store by values than almost anyone else in the community of states on this planet .
The United States once again proved during the last elections that they have the capacity for renewal and rejuvenation in this process based on values and democracy .
In this global order , as the credit crunch has again shown , it is paramount that we Europeans work more closely with the Americans and link our interests , because only then can we lay down standards and deepen relations between our states .
That is why I consider the report by Millán Mon to be extremely important at this juncture .
We must endeavour to push ahead with the Transatlantic Economic Council and apply a policy which removes non-tariff trade barriers , so that we can thus ensure that interests are linked , a transatlantic market is achieved and political relations are thereby also permanently deepened .
We must acknowledge here that this will only happen if the parliaments are involved , because it is only through the parliaments that the majority of regulations can be suitably adapted , and that this process and the proposals in connection with the Transatlantic Legislators ' Dialogue and the Transatlantic Assembly are of paramount importance .
Furthermore , it is of decisive importance that we are today developing long-term strategies , that we are in a position to make joint plans and that both sides know what our common interests will be in 10 or 20 years ' time , so that we can base our practical policy on them .
I also believe that this will give the Czech Presidency a starting point for highlighting this at the meeting with the Americans on 5 April , so that we can achieve a stronger link in the common interest .
One final comment : all this will only work if the European Union is a stronger and more creditable partner , if it has something like the Treaty of Lisbon and acquires freedom of action in foreign policy .
I should therefore also like to ask that we protect our interests at this hour and remember that we need to take these steps forward so that we can enter into true partnership with the United States of America eye to eye .
- Mr President , I should like to say a few words about our economic relationship .
I should like to thank my colleague Mr Millán Mon for his excellent report .
We need to remind ourselves of what we want to achieve .
I mean , it was the European Parliament , with support much later from the Council and the Commission , which came up with this idea of having a stronger economic relationship and creating a transatlantic market .
This idea of a transatlantic market was followed by the Transatlantic Economic Council ( TEC ) .
Each of those initiatives can only survive if there is strong support from both sides .
Having a new government in the United States does not automatically mean that we will have strong support for the Economic Council , since we are occupied with an enormous economic and financial crisis .
Therefore , I would urge both the Commission and the Council to ensure that the Transatlantic Economic Council will be given all the support necessary , because this is not automatically given .
I would just like to remind you of three items on the agenda that are highly important and which we somehow need to solve .
One is the trade dispute agenda .
This agenda is still very broad , but I would like to concentrate on one subject that is important and this is the Airbus-Boeing case , which is before the WTO and is being postponed continuously .
I would urge you to find a solution .
It is not on the TEC agenda , but we need to find a solution soon , otherwise we will have difficulty in a major sector .
My second plea is for you to ensure that we will finally have a road map and that we will have transparency on what kinds of items are debated in the TEC .
We have asked for this many times .
I know the Council is working on it , but we still have not made good progress .
We would like to have a hearing on container security on both sides very soon .
This was agreed at our last TEC meeting , but a follow-up will be needed .
My last point is : make sure that , on energy-intensive industries , you will bring to the attention of the TEC the idea of identifying a benchmark together .
That is the only way the problems in the energy-intensive industries will be solved .
- Mr President , next week the President of the United States , President Obama , will travel to Europe on his first visit overseas to show his commitment towards a transatlantic alliance and dialogue .
With his election as President , he brought hope and change , not only in the United States but for the whole world and also in Europe .
It is imperative that the EU set up networks of communication to keep a strong dialogue with the United States on many key issues , like the conflict in the Middle East , the economic crisis and climate change .
These issues are global problems and , therefore , they must be discussed with international cooperation , with the United States , the European Union , European states , China , India and all the states in the world .
- ( PL ) Mr President , the presidential elections in the United States brought in a new era in the history of relations with the country , and a new era in the country itself .
I hope that for the United States this will be an evolutionary change , and not a revolutionary one .
I am , however , filled with anxiety by the strange , strengthening relations between the United States and Russia at the cost of international agreements made with some countries in Europe , such as Poland or the Czech Republic , for example on the question of construction of an anti-missile shield , where the United States has gone back on earlier commitments made to these countries .
Let us also remember about visas , which the United States still requires in relation to some Member States .
This should not be happening in transatlantic relations between the EU and the US .
Strengthening transatlantic cooperation must be a matter of special importance in the fight against terrorism , which must above all be based on respect for international law .
As Barack Obama has said , ' No one nation , no matter how large or powerful , can defeat such challenges alone ' .
Let us also remember this in this Chamber , because often it seems to me that we think the European Union will be able to face this global challenge alone .
- ( PL ) Mr President , in his document , our colleague Mr Millán Mon , and also the Commissioner and the Minister , have presented possible solutions , strategies and objectives which should guide us in our cooperation with America .
I would like to come back to another thought and share it with you .
I think that Barack Obama 's election slogan - ' The change we need ' - concerns us , Europeans , as well .
I am thinking about a change in our attitude towards the USA .
On one hand we admire the wealth , economy , science , film , music and freedom of what is historically a young society .
On the other hand , there is dislike , and even hostility , especially from many Left-wing Members , to American policy , to American religiousness , and to American capitalism .
Paradoxically , Russia is a constant friend , no matter what it does , including the worst attacks , as for example the killing of journalists , and America is a partner dressed in the clothes of an enemy , an enemy which , it is true , did help to liberate Europe from the Nazis , and which was not obliged to make such sacrifices , but did so of its own will .
It is perceived as an enemy which helped to rebuild Europe , but in spite of this it has not earned the title of permanent coalition partner .
I am , therefore , talking about appropriate standards and judgments , based on common sense , and not on the only correct and fair ideology , as if it were an echo rebounding from Moscow .
Whatever is bad or faulty about the USA must be assessed accordingly , but whatever is good and could help us to realise the objectives of the EU should be appreciated .
Cooperation must be based on realities , and at the same time on a stable will to solve problems together .
The many statements , the applause , the amendments and entire resolutions proposed by the Left in the last four years and which I have had the opportunity to witness , were often underpinned by a negative , generalised attitude , not necessarily backed up by facts .
Allow me one last sentence , Mr President - Barack Obama only became President by the will of the nation , a nation which is worth working with , a nation which protects values that are also important to us .
- ( CS ) Ladies and gentlemen , Europe and the US are facing a whole series of global problems and global challenges .
The financial and economic crisis , the problems of global warming , terrorism , nuclear arms proliferation , unresolved problems and conflicts in the Middle East , Iraq and Afghanistan and many other problems .
Neither the EU nor the US can solve any of these problems without the necessary cooperation , such as strategic cooperation and a strategic partnership of the kind that has already been talked about here .
A partnership based on shared values of freedom , human and civil rights and democracy , values which have proved their worth over the past 60 years .
With the arrival of the new administration in the US there is an enormous willingness here to cooperate .
Some weeks ago a number of us had the opportunity to visit Washington and to speak not only with under-secretaries at the State Department but also with our counterparts in the Congress , the Senate and various scientific institutions .
There is a will here to cooperate , to do things together and to resolve matters jointly .
So I too would like to join the call for MEPs to enter into much closer and more intensive cooperation with US counterparts .
However , the strategic cooperation of Europe and the US should not be turned against third countries , against partners such as Russia or China .
For example , problems of disarmament or nuclear arms control cannot be resolved without the cooperation of Russia .
I therefore welcome , for example , the renewal of talks over the START Treaty , and I also welcome the discussions with our Russian partners over the issue of US anti-missile defences in Europe .
All of this is important .
I would like to conclude by wishing the Czech Presidency success in the forthcoming summit in Prague and by thanking Mr Millán Mon for this report .
- ( ES ) Mr President , recently Gordon Brown said in a speech in the United States , in Washington , as the first European leader to speak in that capital , that there was no political memory of a time in which Europe was so well-disposed towards the United States .
That is certainly true .
There has never been so much pro-Americanism , so much Americanism , we could say , within our societies as a whole and , obviously , also within our political , cultural and social elites as a whole .
We ought to take advantage of that fact .
This is a common feeling that goes beyond personal sympathy for the new government and which is combined with a broad common agenda on which we can work , and which is here , and is explained very well in the report that we are to vote on tomorrow .
It is also very important , however , to be very aware of the fact that , even though we share many things , our interests are not always the same and that , therefore , in certain spheres , as friends who are now speaking to each other face to face , looking in each others ' eyes and able to work together , there are certain areas in which we will continue to differ .
This is especially true because we have different societies to serve , and I am talking very specifically about the economic and trade spheres ; here there are pending issues that will have to be resolved with the best possible cooperation , but without forgetting the position of each side .
In this context , the European Union must be self-critical about what it should do and what it should improve in order to be credible .
We know that once Lisbon is adopted we will have clearer instruments and we will then be able to implement them .
Starting right now , however , we must realise that if we wish to earn respect and appear on the United States ' radar we must also reform our own way of operating .
- Mr President , I think this is a very important report we have in front of us given the fact that our rapporteur , Francisco Millán Mon , has been able to bring this report from the Committee on Foreign Affairs almost unanimously .
I have not known that in the past : all groups actually combining to show that they are in favour of a stronger transatlantic partnership .
Indeed , I have noted that , in this report , we now , for the first time , call it the most strategic partnership that we have .
We have lots of other ones , but this one is the key one for us in the European Union .
As was mentioned earlier , there is a new tone , but I sense too that this is a tone from the Americans looking to what Europe can do to be a partner in the global system and that we then have to think what we are going to be able to contribute to this process .
I think that the highlight in this debate was you , Madam Commissioner , saying that what we are looking for is a more strategic dialogue , the ability to look at long-term trends , like the NIC report 2025 does ; to be able to look further down the road to see that we can share a common analysis together , to be able to come to common action together as a result of that .
I suspect this will need some generation within the European Union , perhaps our support in the 2010 budget , to be able to formulate our own long-term thinking - because there is very little long-term thinking , either in the Commission or indeed even in our House , about long-term trends such as is found in the NIC report .
In doing so , we are going to have to find a way to establish a more even playing field for the involvement of Europeans and Americans in these debates .
In the past five years we have seen a huge influx of US think tanks into Brussels telling us what we should be doing on particular aspects of policy , but there is very little about Europeans in Washington being able to communicate to the Americans what our ideas are on the shaping of European policy .
We need to focus on that to provide the right budgetary input to give that kind of impact , so that we get an even input and feed-in into our transatlantic discussions .
- Mr President , saved from the ashes left by the Bush Administration by the election of Obama , the transatlantic partnership is no longer sufficient to solve the main challenges faced by humanity , but it is still necessary .
Europe must take advantage of this opportunity and articulate with the US the exit strategy for the current global crisis , upholding human security - and that does not only mean reforming the international financial system but regulating the whole globalisation process and investing in a sustainable economy at the global scale .
We need more and stronger Europe to help Obama close Guantánamo , end the secret prisons , and to define an alternative strategy for the security challenges in Afghanistan , Pakistan , Iran and Sudan , and put in place justice and peace for Israelis and Arabs .
We need a stronger Europe and a genuine partnership with the US to achieve the Millennium Development Goals .
Only with an EU capable of sharing the burden and assuming its global responsibilities , an EU which is not just the sum of its parts , will we be taken seriously in Washington , be able to influence the policies of the Obama Administration and be in a position to enable the genuine transatlantic partnership that the world still needs .
- ( HU ) In the speech Barack Obama delivered in Berlin last year , he stated that America has no better partner in the world than Europe .
It is high time for us to state as well , that we have no better or more important partner in the world than the United States of America .
We need to seek allies among those with whom we share common values and common interests , and not among those who are very far from us .
Europe has no alternative to transatlantic relations .
The entire western world is faced with major challenges ; international terrorism , proliferation , climate change and the economic crisis .
In the face of these , we can only succeed and attain results if we stand together .
As far as the economic crisis is concerned , the temptation of protectionism can be felt in every country .
In the United States as well , since as we know , they have announced a ' Buy American ' programme .
We need to act together against protectionism , for in the end protectionism does not protect us , but is harmful to all .
Great expectations lie ahead of Mr Obama 's first visit and tour of Europe .
We expect the G20 summit to lay the foundations for a common institutional response , to set out common rules that will enable us to overcome the global economic crisis .
Europe 's ambition is to be a significant international actor .
The Lisbon Treaty creates the institutional prerequisites for this , but nothing can take the place of political will .
We need to assume a greater role in international life , for only then can we achieve our ambitions .
. - ( RO ) I would like to thank Francisco José Millán Mon for his excellent report on transatlantic relations .
As Members of the European Parliament , we must insist that the European Union and the United States of America develop a common strategy for six states in Eastern Europe : Moldova , Ukraine , Georgia , Armenia , Azerbaijan and Belarus , which are the focus of the European neighbourhood policy , so that specific , long-term results can be achieved in implementing the new Eastern Partnership and with regard to Black Sea synergy .
I welcome the inclusion of my amendment on this subject in the report and I would like to thank my fellow Members for supporting this idea .
Another item of particular interest is the rapporteur 's proposal to lift visas for all European citizens who want to travel to the United States .
All European citizens must be treated equally .
It is unacceptable for some of the European Union 's citizens to be treated as second-class citizens .
I would like to highlight the specific , important progress that has been made with the aim of obtaining a visa waiver .
For example , new biometric passports have been introduced in Romania in January 2009 , equipped with chips which store citizens ' personal data , containing 50 security elements , 18 more than in current passports .
However , I think that biometric passports do not need to be a condition for not being included in the visa waiver programme .
Inclusion of all European Member States in the Visa Waiver Programme must be a priority in the dialogue between the European Commission and the United States .
- ( PL ) ( microphone initially switched off ) ( ... ) as President Barack Obama entitles his message at the G20 Summit in London .
The economic crisis has become a challenge for the whole world , but is also an opportunity to deepen and to reformulate transatlantic relations .
Mr Mon 's report shows the strategic aspects of partnership between the European Union and the United States .
It gives clear testimony to the importance which the European Parliament attaches to transatlantic relations .
This new chapter in relations between the EU and the USA should also be used to increase the activity of EU institutions in the United States .
I am thinking of European institutions , European universities and European foundations .
This is the time to reformulate our partnership , for Europe to show in Washington itself and in the United States the potential of today 's European Union , the potential of European science , European culture and European civilisation .
We should take advantage of the fact that the United States has a new president - a president who is presenting America as Europe always saw it , as a symbol of democracy and liberty .
- Mr President , President Obama said : ' America has no better partner than Europe ' .
I believe that I speak on behalf of many of us when saying that this notion is mutual .
The election of President Obama started a new chapter in transatlantic relations that has suffered serious setbacks .
As Vice-Chair of the Delegation for relations with Canada , I even had to witness , at one point , a situation where Canada acted as a mediator between the European Union and the United States .
My second point : I welcome President Obama 's commitment to diplomacy with the Islamic Republic of Iran .
However , as a supporter of the Friends of a Free Iran , I hope that the democratic opposition of Iran will also be involved .
The negotiations with Iran must be transparent in all aspects .
This new era in EU-US relations will hopefully extend also to US relations with third countries .
Europe 's high expectations of President Obama must now be backed by action .
- ( SL ) The New Transatlantic Agenda was new in 1995 .
Many things have changed in the years since , which is why we need a new partnership agreement .
Twenty years have passed since the collapse of the Berlin Wall and that event was followed by the historic enlargement of the European Union .
During that period we have borne witness to the tragic upsurge in terrorism and to the new threats to peace in the region .
Furthermore , we have grown aware of climate change and have faced financial , economic and energy crises .
It would be useful if we took stock after the collapse of Communism and viewed the condition of the world with greater sensitivity to the interdependence of global actors .
Our closer partnership with the USA should be developed in the context of new challenges and new insights .
We are not dealing with a financial or economic crisis alone .
We are also dealing with a global leadership crisis .
We need to advance on a number of fronts simultaneously .
We will fail to reform the international financial system unless there is progress in the Doha process and unless we are more successful in working towards peace and eliminating poverty .
If we are talking about efficient multilateralism , it needs to be developed in ways that ensure everyone is a winner .
' Yes , we can ' .
In that spirit , I am in favour of regular political consultations between the two partners and , in particular , of strengthening the parliamentary dimension of cooperation by establishing a Transatlantic Assembly .
As far as the report is concerned , I am particularly pleased by the emphasis placed on eliminating restrictions on investment and transatlantic financial services .
In conclusion , I also welcome the will expressed in the report for closer cooperation as regards space programmes , particularly between the European Space Agency and NASA .
This is not to say that I wish to become an astronaut but , rather , that I am interested in new technologies .
- ( DE ) Mr President , the large majority of people in the European Union , probably the majority of governments in the European Union , and almost certainly the majority in this House , hoped in November that Barack Obama would be elected president .
That is a good thing , even if perhaps a little scepticism has crept into some of the speeches during this debate as to whether all this was such a good thing .
Of course Europe must consciously represent its own positions in the future , but the time for malicious comment about the United States is past , because we can no longer conveniently shift everything on to George Bush , and that sets us a task .
Policy on transatlantic relations on the part of the European Union , on the part of this Parliament , can no longer consist simply in tossing demands in the direction of the United States ; now we must also reply with what we want to contribute in order to make this partnership efficient .
Take for example Afghanistan , which several Members have mentioned .
What do we want the European Union to do in order to enhance and strengthen police missions , in order to push ahead with civil support and civil reconstruction in this country ?
That would be our task as the EU ; NATO can take care of the military side .
This is something that we must discuss very specifically .
What do we have to offer ?
- ( PL ) Mr President , for 50 years after the War , the foundation of thinking on security in western Europe was a close alliance with the United States and the principle that security is indivisible , that the security of the United States is directly connected with the security of Europe .
It seems that the end of the Cold War and the indefinite , one would hope , postponement of a possible great conflict in Europe still requires , however , that this principle should not be discredited .
On the contrary , it should be upheld and should be the foundation of our thinking on our common security .
Secondly , I would like to refer to what Mr Kuhne said a moment ago .
The United States has ended the era of unilateral political action and is ready for dialogue with Europe , and is ready to make joint decisions in partnership with Europe .
The question is , are we ready for this , and are we ready to be dependable in implementing those jointly made decisions ?
- Mr President , Mr Millán Mon has presented an important and excellent report .
Now the question is how to implement it without losing time .
The global economic crisis offers a practical incentive for the world 's two largest democracies to join forces on the basis of shared values and similar economic systems , because more than half of the world 's GDP is produced by the United States and the EU together .
Mr Severin has noted very well the strategic reciprocity that Europe needs a strong United States and the US needs a strong Europe .
If these two partners could coordinate their activities better and more efficiently , this would exercise a profoundly positive effect on world stability as well as on so many specific regional problems .
Yes , more interest towards Europe , more flexibility and openness offered by the new US Administration is a welcome opportunity to be used .
But it is necessary to remember at any time that relations with the US continue to be the EU 's most important strategic partnership .
But it is not time for declarations ; it is time for implementation and there are three concrete priorities this report is stressing .
We call to agree on a common agenda of short- and long-term goals , on global as well as regional issues .
We call to replace the 14-year-old relationship with a new transatlantic partnership agreement that should also include an Economic Council , and we call for the creation of a Transatlantic Political Council as well as upgrading parliamentary relations in the form of a transatlantic assembly .
- ( ES ) Mr President , President Obama 's election has ushered in a historic time for the United States , the special importance of which is widely felt and shared in Europe .
President Obama is today on completely the same wavelength as Europe in relation to political action based on the key words of ' reconstruction ' and ' recovery ' .
The speech given yesterday by Prime Minister Gordon Brown in this Chamber provides clear proof of the mutual understanding that exists .
Without a doubt , these words ' reconstruction ' and ' recovery ' deserve all the proactive leadership possible in view of the current crisis , in the face of which we plan to develop towards a green economy where growth and environmental protection are not at odds with each other , but complement each other perfectly .
We are also , however , seeing a ' reconstruction ' and ' recovery ' of the bridges between Europe and the United States which had in the last decade suffered damage .
The return of the United States to multilateralism is a very good sign for Europe and makes our objectives of worldwide peace , justice and prosperity more viable .
Recent years , however , have also entailed a rift between civil societies on either side of the Atlantic .
We , as the European institutions , should foster interaction of all kinds between organisations , the academic world , communication media and those active in the social sphere to ensure that this breach can be healed .
- ( PT ) Unlike Mrs Gomes , who spoke a moment ago and said that the transatlantic relationship has been reborn with the election of President Obama , I believe that the news of the end of this relationship was clearly exaggerated .
This report once again proves this , and I therefore congratulate the rapporteur .
For a long time Europe and the United States have been allies vital to prosperity , development and globalisation .
For a long time Europe and the United States have shared common challenges and even common enemies , although some , particularly on this side of the Atlantic , would hesitate to acknowledge this .
For a long time both Europeans and Americans have known what must be done to meet the needs of a world which continues to be unfair , unequal and dangerous and which is now in global crisis .
However , this crisis should not make us backtrack , nor lessen our diplomatic firmness or the political and military commitment consistent with our obligations as allies , nor turn our backs on the collective economy nor allow the reappearance of protectionism , which would be fatal to the recovery of our economies .
At the mercy of an economy that has been opened up on a global scale , Europe and the United States now have firm allies in Japan , India , Brazil and various countries in Asia .
Despite the current crisis , there are many nations in the world that are still looking to our countries and hope one day to live like us .
For all these nations , Europe and the United States must once again become the alliance that leads , shares and globalises the economy of prosperity .
That is also why the next G20 Summit is so important , not because it is an opportunity to find out who is closest to Barack Obama , but because it is an opportunity to prove that we can provide answers and leadership : we will cooperate with the new powers on the necessary reforms , but we must be aware that only the economic model based on the creative strength of humankind will allow wealth - and I mean wealth , not greed - jobs and development to be created and the crisis to be overcome .
Mr President , there is no other way , if we want a lasting solution , to generate new jobs or to stand in solidarity with those most in need at this difficult time .
. - ( BG ) Commissioner , I would like to thank the rapporteur , Mr Millán Mon , for his comprehensive report and for the definitive position expressed on dropping the visa regime .
Four years after negotiations started on lifting visa requirements between the US and the European Union , 80 million Member State citizens still need to queue up and request an American visa in their passports .
In spite of the fact that significant results have been achieved so far , the US administration refuses to take the final step and apply the reciprocity principle to the remaining five Member States , and include them in the Visa Waiver Programme .
In our resolution of 22 May 2008 , we called for the negotiations on the inclusion of all Member States in the Visa Waiver Programme to be completed before the European elections in June .
The lack of progress on this issue until now is concerning , as well as the numerous indications in the press that there will be no real change in US policy .
I would also like to highlight the visit to Washington made last week by Commissioner Barrot , where the negotiations on lifting visa restrictions continued .
It is not clear yet what the specific results will be following this visit .
I fear that , regardless of the efforts made by the Commission , the objectives we set will not be achieved by the end of this parliament 's mandate .
However , I want to mention that unfortunately , some of the actions taken by individual Member States are rather helping our American partners not to view the European Union as a united whole .
This is why I am taking the opportunity to call on all European governments to change their policy and take specific steps providing real support for the representatives of the European Commission .
In addition to this , I urge all fellow Members to support the declaration which has been initiated by certain fellow Members , including myself , in favour of the United States lifting the visa regime for citizens of all European Union Member States .
- Mr President , the election of President Obama was met with enthusiasm in both the USA and in Europe , but a great deal is expected of the 44th President of the USA .
He faces a range of challenges which no peacetime leader of that nation in living memory has been expected to tackle .
He has a financial and economic crisis at home , bordering on a meltdown of financial markets , that has impacted the world economy and is a still a long way from being resolved .
He has committed himself to finding a solution for war-torn Afghanistan and for the spill-over effect it is having into Pakistan .
He faces the danger of an Iran which is coming ever closer to being a nuclear power .
We believe in a strong transatlantic relationship based on our common values of democracy and the free market economy .
We respect the priorities that President Obama and his new Administration have set themselves .
We are not offended if the US sees that some of these aims will only be achieved with the cooperation of the US and Russia .
Europe is extending an open hand to the United States .
Just a few weeks ago in this Chamber we declared our openness to work together to close Guantánamo Bay and resettle former inmates .
Member States from the former Eastern bloc have a particular debt of gratitude to the United States .
We were brought into the transatlantic community several years before becoming members of the EU .
Poland , for its part , has reflected this gratitude by a willingness to support the US whenever needed , including military engagement in Iraq and Afghanistan .
I appeal to the new administration not to take this support entirely for granted .
A younger generation of Poles raised in a democracy has quickly forgotten this debt of gratitude .
In realising its wider aims , the US should not forget that these loyal allies have sensitivities , especially when it presses the US-Russia reset button .
- Mr President , I wish to offer some cautionary words , particularly to the new Obama Administration .
Over the last 60 years , the United States has had a range of attitudes towards European integration .
Naturally , it sees this from the perspective of an outsider and may even imagine - erroneously , I believe - that it is similar to America 's own historical experience .
This is the view encouraged by the dominant federalist tendency in the EU institutions .
The danger is that US interlocutors accept the EU 's own narrative as fact , rather than as a story presented as a documentary but with a lot of misleading and fictional content .
The US should understand that many of us believe that the EU is heading in the wrong direction and that its aspiration to create a state called Europe does not reflect the wishes of our citizens , rightly attached as they are to the sovereignty of our nations and their ability to elect and remove governments .
Neither is it in the interests of the United States for the freely given commitment of many European countries to coalition to be usurped by a differently minded European Union .
I have to say that I have much respect for Mr Millán Mon and I can approve many of the sentiments in his report , but not its main thrust , which is to elevate the role of the EU as an institution as our unique spokesman in dealings with the United States .
- Mr President , even if Western unity helped us win our independence and end the Cold War , by the time our countries joined both NATO and the EU , transatlantic relations were not in their best shape .
The current crisis and its common challenges - the deterioration of the security environment , the global issues like energy , climate change , nuclear proliferation and the new power centres , the regional issues like the Middle East , Afghanistan , Pakistan , Iran and Africa - require maximum intensification of transatlantic cooperation .
In context , the report makes a positive contribution by primarily suggesting ways to institutionalise those relations , to commonly approach Russia and the six eastern European countries , to achieve the unified transatlantic market , to gradually integrate our financial markets and to extend the US visa waiver programme to all EU Member States .
We cannot fail .
The cost for the West would be the loss of initiative in world affairs , possibly for a long time to come .
. - ( RO ) Bearing in mind the developments over recent years in the European Union , at US administration level and globally as a whole , I think that now is the time for us to review the transatlantic partnership and adapt it to the new realities .
In this respect , I welcome the report from my colleague , Mr Millán Mon , and would like to take this opportunity to congratulate him .
This report consolidates in a very useful document Europe 's main priorities in its relations with the United States .
I am also pleased that the amendments which I suggested have been included in the report .
I would like to make a few observations .
First of all , cooperation in the area of security must continue .
The time has come for Europe to make a larger contribution to the theatre of war in Afghanistan where a crucial war is being waged for the future of the region .
I would also like to mention that my country , Romania , has provided support to the United States ' efforts in both Iraq and Afghanistan .
Secondly , with regard to the energy dossier , I believe that joint action is required to coordinate research efforts and identify new clean energy sources .
As regards relations with Russia , I feel that it is a good moment to adopt a consistent approach in relations between the United States and Europe , on the one hand , and Russia , on the other .
Finally , I would like to welcome the particularly constructive proposals on setting up transatlantic consultation bodies , including for foreign and security policy .
- ( ES ) Mr President , we ought to shout out ' good news !
Good news ! ' .
There has been another miracle by President Obama , who has managed , after many years , to unite this Parliament and the European Union in a common goal , which is to strengthen transatlantic relations .
There was a similar moment in the past when Bill Clinton and Felipe González signed the Transatlantic Agenda in 1995 ; at that time there was great optimism about the future .
Then came the eight black years of Mr Bush 's presidency .
He fundamentally divided European governments , although public opinion not so much .
His government continuously abandoned principles that were fundamental for the European Union , such as multilateralism , support for the United Nations and international legality .
All this is now being rebuilt and we have well-founded hopes for the future of relations between the European Union and the United States .
I therefore congratulate Mr Millán Mon on this brilliant report , which comes at such a good time for this strengthening of relations between the two continents .
- ( ES ) Mr President , I would also like to join in the cries of ' good news ! ' voiced by Mr Yañez-Barnuevo García because I believe that this report marks a turning-point in relations with the United States .
A good friend said to me recently that she had been in the United States and she had been surprised by the lack of knowledge regarding the new institutions and the new procedures created by the Treaty of Lisbon .
If I had to praise something , to give a very positive assessment to one thing in the excellent report produced by Mr Millán Mon , it is precisely this : that it places transatlantic relations within the orbit of the Treaty of Lisbon for us and sets out all the major mechanisms provided by the Treaty of Lisbon so that the European Union can maintain relations on first-name terms with the United States .
It grants us , as Europeans , the tools we need to be able to articulate this European wish , which was so necessary in the past , continues to be so today and will doubtless be so in the future .
I would like to give my congratulations too to Mr Millán Mon on the excellent report that he has produced .
President-in-Office of the Council . - Mr President , I am grateful for all your contributions and comments in this debate .
I am delighted that the European Parliament , the Commission and the Presidency very much share the same view on the most important issues for the strategic dialogue between the EU and the US .
I am pleased to have heard strong support for the topics we chose for our first informal meeting with President Obama , namely : firstly , energy security and climate change ; secondly , economic cooperation ; and , thirdly , cooperation on security and external relations .
I listened carefully to other comments made , such as the need to build a new transatlantic agenda , to deepen cooperation in foreign assistance and development policy , to pursue cooperation in justice and home affairs , to keep up the momentum on the Transatlantic Economic Council , to explore setting up the Transatlantic Political Council etc .
We will take them into account as we prepare for the regular EU-US Summit to be held in June .
Those of you who raised the other issues , such as the visa waiver - because not all the EU countries are taking part in that - can remember how , a year ago , my country led efforts on that .
It was also the subject of a debate in this Parliament , so I can assure you that we will continue to raise this issue with the US Government as well .
In conclusion , I would like to add the following reflections .
It seems clear that the new US Administration has taken on board many of the messages that we have been sending them over recent months and years about the transatlantic relationship .
They are now responding .
For example , we are now being asked to provide greater strategic input on Afghanistan .
It is also clear that strategic input is expected to be matched by a very practical commitment , so I believe that you will remember this when we are discussing our practical contribution to the future Afghan mission .
It should come as no surprise for us once we are really engaged in a deep and serious debate .
When President Obama said in Berlin last year that America has no better partner than Europe , he was not just making a statement of principle , but also inviting Europe to provide the proof .
Secondly , it is clear to all of us that the challenges we are facing are getting more numerous and more complex .
To return to one of my opening points , when the EU and the US agree , we can help set the global agenda .
That also means taking our share of leadership and leading others to lend their support and provide means towards the goals set .
But to be able to do so and be a credible partner to the US , the EU must speak with one voice to the greatest extent possible .
The Czech Presidency will continue to ensure that the transatlantic partnership remains one of the cornerstones of the EU 's foreign policy .
I look forward to developing this relationship further as we face new challenges together and I look forward to continued cooperation with this Parliament in doing so .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , as many have said , this debate has shown that it is a question of how we can implement the most important issues together with such a crucial strategic partner as the United States of America .
Since I made quite a number of very clear and practical remarks at the beginning , I will just make a few concrete remarks now .
First , the role of legislators in , and the institutional set-up of , EU-US relations is very important .
In principle , we unequivocally support stronger links between the EU and US legislators .
Obviously , the primary impetus for this must come from the law-makers themselves .
I know that the European Parliament is ready to do so , and this should also come from Congress .
Nevertheless , I suggest that it would be worthwhile for EU legislators also to cultivate more intensive contacts with the Senate , which has a longer electoral cycle , and with Congressmen whose sectoral expertise could advance the agenda of the Transatlantic Economic Council .
The Lisbon Treaty , as and when it enters into force , will then , as has been said , also give the EP a reinforced role in shaping EU-US dialogue , especially on regulatory matters ; as has been mentioned , think-tanks will certainly also be very important not only from the US side to us but also from the EU side to the US .
Concerning EU-US institutions , I would caution , first , that the transatlantic agenda should be driven by substance rather than by process .
In our first meetings with President Obama , therefore , as I have said before , it will be important to demonstrate the capacity to focus on results .
However , I have taken careful note of your call for an overhaul of the current arrangements under the new transatlantic agenda .
I intend to initiate a review of the structures to help them deliver better , and the Commission will come up with due proposals .
Let me also speak briefly on the Transatlantic Economic Council ( TEC ) .
Mr Verheugen has already had a meeting with his new US counterpart , Mr Froman , on 23 March 2009 .
The main issues of the TEC under the new Administration are as follows .
Firstly , raising the profile of political strategic issues , while at the same time relieving the burden of more technical matters on the summit agendas .
Secondly , the time horizon for a future work programme - here Mr Verheugen wants to set a very long-term perspective , but this has to be weighed against the mandate of this Commission and we need to have some short-term results .
Finally , how to deal with pressure from the Member States - to whom we have promised , but not yet delivered , a mid-term programme - to be more involved in the work of the TEC .
Second , I would like to point out that we are a Community which shares values with the US , but there are still things that have to be done .
Therefore we will need to continue to encourage the US to sign up to core UN human rights conventions , including those on discrimination against women , and the rights of the child - to name but a few .
This includes our position on the ICC , as has been stressed on several occasions with the Bush Administration , but that will be taken up again .
Third , concerning visa waiver and visa reciprocity , which many of you mentioned : we know that , owing to substantive efforts by Member States and at EU level , seven Member States were admitted to the visa-waiver programme in November / December 2008 .
However , there are still five Member States which do not yet enjoy visa-free travel to the US .
We will , therefore , continue to raise this issue .
I can tell you that Vice-President Barrot and the Czech Minister Langer raised the issue again last week in Washington and the US side has generally shown understanding of our position , while stressing at the same time that the action of the Federal Government is based on statutory requirements , which clearly set the framework of future enlargements of the programme and are being monitored closely by Congress .
Secretary Napolitano informed us that one additional Member State is getting very close to entering the visa-waiver programme .
Finally , concerning Afghanistan : not only have we already delivered a lot in the past , but , as I have said before , we are ready to contribute to the civilian search , and there will be some additional funding that we will find from our Asia budget for the elections , the police and , most probably , for agriculture because it is important to have additional alternative livelihoods .
I am always open to new ideas , and one example , which is taken up in your report , would be to upgrade the Foreign Ministers ' meetings into a Transatlantic Political Council with a heavier focus on strategic themes .
As I have said before , we intend to look at revamping the existing transatlantic agenda in that perspective , against the background of the 15th anniversary of the New Transatlantic Agreement in 2010 .
rapporteur . - ( ES ) Mr President , I would like firstly to express my thanks for the speeches and congratulations I have received .
What I see as the most important element in this debate is that there is a broad consensus on the importance of relations between the European Union and the United States , as well as on the need to strengthen them , not only through a joint agenda to tackle serious challenges and serious conflicts , but also through new institutional mechanisms .
With one exception , I have not seen any major objections either to the two annual summits or to the establishment of a transatlantic political council , nor , of course , to the improvement or upgrading of the level of dialogue between legislators to a more structured dialogue , a sort of transatlantic assembly , as recommended by the report .
On this point , I also welcome the fact that the Commissioner believed this strengthening of dialogue between the legislatures to be very useful and that neither she nor the Council representative are opposed to this other strengthening of other institutions which I believe is rendered necessary , in large part , by the Lisbon Treaty .
This will be very advisable and beneficial for both sides .
I cannot reply within one minute to all the comments that I have heard , but I would like to say , with regard to Russia , that as Mr Severin knows , the report recommends constructive cooperation , but naturally without prejudice to human rights and international law .
On China , there are explicit and implicit references , when I speak of involving the new emerging powers in global governance .
Naturally - and this is a comment that also refers to a large extent to the amendments which I have received , fortunately few in number - the report cannot deal with every subject .
The report must prioritise ; it is already too long and prioritising means choosing , selecting and , at times , discarding .
I cannot mix up subjects which are very important with others that , although still important , are less so .
The report must be readable .
Therefore , as we say in Spanish , it should not ' fall out of your hands ' when it is being read , because it is so heavy .
Ladies and gentlemen , I believe that cooperation with the United States is of crucial importance ; Prime Minister Gordon Brown reminded us of the fact here yesterday .
I believe that by adopting this report tomorrow , Parliament will be doing its duty : to send the signal that we desire and we call for a yet stronger strategic relationship with the United States .
The report reminds us - and Mr Elles said this a few minutes ago - that the most important strategic relationship that the European Union has is its relationship with the United States .
I am certain , I hope and I trust that the Commission and the Council will do everything possible in the months and weeks to come , which are so significant , to strengthen this relationship , including through the institutional dimension .
- The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow .
Written statements ( Rule 142 )
The election of President Barack Obama may mark the start of a new era in relations between the United States and the European Union , provided that both sides turn good intentions and friendly declarations into more concrete steps aimed at strengthening ties and establishing more effective cooperation .
The economic crisis and current geostrategic climate make it a greater concern to improve transatlantic cooperation as we are jointly faced by serious challenges .
The US and EU are linked through a partnership which is fundamentally important to both sides , covering every area of activity , from trade to military alliance .
In these circumstances , I believe that it is paramount to eliminate the final vestiges of discrimination which exist in US-EU relations .
The fact that visas for entering the US are still compulsory for citizens from six European Union Member States must be a priority in the dialogue which the Commission and European Parliament conduct with the US authorities in order to achieve equal treatment for all citizens from EU countries , based on complete reciprocity .
In this respect , I welcome the inclusion in this report of a request made to the United States to lift visa requirements for the six countries which have not yet been included in the Visa Waiver Programme .
in writing . - " America has no better partner than Europe " , declared President Obama in Berlin in July 2008 .
Europe , on its turn , has no better partner than America .
This is the main conclusion and motto that can be drawn from this excellent report .
In the global world of the 21st century , Europe and America face common challenges , but also share the same values and fight for the same ideals .
Therefore , all the recommendations of the report to step up EU-US relations are not only welcome , but also strongly needed .
Among them , I find people-to-people contacts to be the true key to lasting relations and cooperation .
Therefore , I insist time and again and give my full support to the call on the American administration to entirely lift the visa regime for EU nationals as soon as possible .
It is unacceptable that nationals of five EU Member-States still face obstacles and need visas to travel to America .
Europe is a united entity , and so should be the approach towards all its citizens , towards all their rights and freedoms .
Let people interact , researchers cooperate and businesses find joint solutions to the current economic crisis .
Freedom of movement between the two continents has thus become urgency and should constitute a priority topic already at the Prague meeting on 5th April 2009 .
in writing . - In the last 18 years the USA had a lot of vituperation to put up with - and , maybe in the case of the previous Republican Administration , under President Bush , on many occasions for very good reason .
I would like to remind you that without American support and involvement some problems on the European continent would be still hanging in the air .
Very often in the previously mentioned period it has turned out that the European Union can become powerless and incapable to solve conflicts that happen at our back door , on our continent .
Without American involvement and the Daytona agreement , maybe there would still be war in Bosnia .
And I am sure I do not have to underline enough that the status of Kosovo would be still unclear and therefore highly frustrating not just for the people of Kosovo , but for European powers as well .
In spite of the many shortcomings of the American democracy , they have achieved something that at this point we can only dream of : they have a black president .
I put high hopes into transatlantic relations , and I sincerely hope that things will improve for the benefit of both the EU and the USA .
Interim Trade Agreement with Turkmenistan - Interim Agreement with Turkmenistan ( debate )
- The next item is the joint debate on :
the oral question to the Council by Jan Marinus Wiersma , Erika Mann , Daniel Caspary , Robert Sturdy , Cristiana Muscardini and Eugenijus Maldeikis , on behalf of the Socialist Group in the European Parliament , the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats , and the Union for Europe of the Nations Group , on the Interim Trade Agreement between the EU and Turkmenistan - B6-0019 / 2009 ) ;
the oral question to the Commission by Jan Marinus Wiersma , Erika Mann , Daniel Caspary , Robert Sturdy , Cristiana Muscardini and Eugenijus Maldeikis , on behalf of the Socialist Group in the European Parliament , the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats , and the Union for Europe of the Nations Group , on the Interim Trade Agreement between the EU and Turkmenistan - B6-0020 / 2009 ) ; and
the report by Mr Caspary , on behalf of the Committee on International Trade , on the proposal for a Council and Commission decision on the conclusion of the Interim Agreement on trade and trade-related matters between the European Community and the European Atomic Energy Community , of the one part , and Turkmenistan , of the other part ( 05144 / 1999 - C5-0338 / 1999 - .
author . - ( NL ) Mr President , it is good that we are today debating the European Parliament 's position on the Interim Trade Agreement with Turkmenistan , something that this Parliament and the European Union have long kept on the back burner .
The Council and the Commission are looking for progress on this issue and they want the European Parliament to give its blessing or a positive verdict on the advent of this interim agreement , as that could help improve relations with Turkmenistan .
This has been on the back burner for a long while , and there is a reason for that .
Parliament has hitherto been very hesitant to vote on this agreement because we are really quite dissatisfied with the human rights situation in Turkmenistan , especially under the previous president / dictator Turkmenbashi , who closed the country off from the world and treated his own population in a pretty inhumane way .
The question , of course , is whether the new regime that took office after Turkmenbashi 's death has brought change to that situation - and I would like to hear from the Council and the Commission what changes and improvements they have observed over recent years - and whether that is reason enough now really to set about concluding and signing the trade agreement .
The Commission and the Council , of course , have two strong arguments for a reappraisal .
The strategic context has changed .
We look at Central Asia differently than we did a few years ago .
The Commissioner herself has put a lot of energy into the region , but I am also aware that the Presidency is of the opinion that the European Union must not leave this region to the Chinese or the Russians .
We have interests there , too , and the region itself does recognise them .
I was in Kazakhstan not so long ago , and it was very noticeable that there was a lot of interest there in better relations with the European Union .
The second important argument put forward by the Commission is that , at present , we have no sound legal basis for our relations with Turkmenistan .
We are still using a treaty dating from Soviet times , and that is just not acceptable .
Without a better treaty , so the argument goes , we are also unable to set up any decent dialogue on human rights .
The question remains unresolved - has the human rights situation improved to such a degree that we should take this important step and advise Parliament to endorse the trade agreement ?
I believe that this question is still pretty unresolved and I am also awaiting the reactions of the Commission and the Council in that regard .
I will continue to have my doubts .
I have discussed this issue extensively with Mr Caspary of the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats , who is the rapporteur on this subject .
On a number of points that he will also mention , we are still seeking clarification from the Council , namely in relation to the media situation in Turkmenistan , education , prison access for the Red Cross , and so on .
We believe that there must be real improvement in these areas and a trade agreement of this kind and human rights dialogue with Turkmenistan could help to achieve that .
I have one final point , and it is one that is also clearly expressed in the resolution that we have produced together with the Group of the Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe and the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats .
We also want a strong guarantee that , if we do agree to issue a positive opinion in relation to this trade agreement , there is a fall-back position .
We want to be in a position whereby , if we do end up coming to the conclusion that the methods proposed by the Commission and the Council are not working and the human rights situation in Turkmenistan does not truly improve , Parliament can ask the Commission and the Council to suspend the treaty .
If we do not get a commitment to that effect , I would find it very difficult to convince my own group , in our group meeting tonight , to vote in favour of this trade agreement .
We would probably then move for a postponement of the vote .
For us , it is truly a very important point that we should get this commitment that , if the situation in Turkmenistan deteriorates or fails to improve significantly , we can then have another debate on the issue of whether the trade agreement should be suspended .
Parliament must have the right to petition the Council and the Commission to that effect .
Mr President , the question of ratification of the Agreement with Turkmenistan is a contentious issue because of violations of democratic principles and basic human rights in Turkmenistan .
In spite of this , talks should be conducted with this country and the Agreement should be signed .
Particular attention in relations with Turkmenistan should be paid to the fact that if there is no economic cooperation between the EU and Turkmenistan the standard of living in that country will fall .
However , ratification of the Agreement can certainly help to raise the standard of living of the population .
Let us remember that certain positive social signs have appeared there .
The recent adoption by Turkmenistan of legislation introducing a ban on child labour is one of these signs .
Of course , Turkmenistan still has to ratify and implement many of the conventions of the International Labour Organization - that is not in question .
However , the fact that changes in Turkmenistan have been introduced at a tempo slower than we had expected remains disturbing .
Only a few enterprises have been privatised , the government remains in firm control of many sectors of the economy , and foreign direct investment has remained at a very low level .
Despite the fact that Turkmenistan has one of the largest natural reserves of gas and is one of the largest exporters of cotton , around half of the population - and let us remember this here - lives in poverty , I might add in extreme poverty .
The political system is also far from satisfactory , especially concerning the continued repression of political parties other than the governing party , and also the repression of various religious groups .
In spite of all this it seems to me that the Agreement with Turkmenistan should be made and ratified , because only by talking and by giving Turkmenistan a certain example can we give them a helping hand , so that in the future this country might at last join the family of democratic countries .
author . - Mr President , I do apologise - I did not realise that I had speaking time on this particular subject .
I would just like to comment on what the previous speaker said .
I think it is important that we support the legislation coming out to bring Turkmenistan closer to us .
As for all these countries , we need to make sure that they are secure in a very difficult environment .
At this point I would like to thank Daniel Caspary , who has worked tirelessly to get the legislation through .
I know he is speaking in a minute or two , but he has worked in the Committee on International Trade on this particular legislation .
At a time when the world is suffering from huge constraints on financial services and other problems , we need to ensure the security of these countries , as well as just making sure that they join in with the present legislation that Daniel is proposing .
I have no further points to make and I do apologise for being late .
rapporteur . - ( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , we have been addressing the Interim Agreement with Turkmenistan here in the European Parliament for nearly three years .
Almost three years ago we had reached the point where the Committee on International Trade had adopted a report , but it was rejected by plenary , one of the reasons being that the Council and the Commission stopped working on this issue and Parliament said that , if the Commission and the Council are not pushing ahead here , then there is no need for us to either .
I am particularly pleased that we are in a different situation today , even if the situation in Turkmenistan is still a long way from meeting our standards .
Human rights are still disregarded in many areas and there is still a great deal of justified criticism in terms of the lack of democratic structures in this country .
Individual freedoms are very restricted .
Freedom of information in this country leaves a great deal to be desired .
At the moment , according to information channelled to us by non-government organisations , a campaign is under way to remove satellite dishes and hence further obstruct access to the free media .
The education system still fails to come up to the standard that we want in order to educate people in an enlightened and , more importantly , informed manner in terms of democracy and human rights .
Also , the situation in the prisons and the question of political prisoners and Red Cross access to these prisons is still totally unsatisfactory and unexplained .
On the other hand , there is also a great deal of unjustified criticism which keeps being passed on to us .
There have been numerous false reports by so-called non-government organisations over recent years .
Several non-government organisations have given me the impression that they are perhaps fronting for companies from other countries which have an interest in doing what they can to prevent talks from taking place between the European Union and Turkmenistan .
It is my impression that behind many of the statements and much of the false information leaked to the European Union there was a very deliberate interest in obstructing talks between the European Union and Turkmenistan .
I am thinking here of reports that all the hospitals in the country have closed with the exception of two in the capital , that all but two libraries have closed , that there has been an outbreak of plague because medical conditions are allegedly so appalling .
These reports have all proved to be false .
So what is the main problem ?
It is absolutely impossible to get a realistic picture of this country , mainly because its government does not let us take a proper look at it and because we , as the European Union , unfortunately have no foreign office to take the necessary action there .
However , we can see that the new president has started numerous reforms .
The European Union 's Central Asia strategy adopted a while ago here in Parliament focuses on the Central Asian countries .
This Interim Agreement could possibly be a first small step to show the Turkmens that we are taking up the reins of dialogue , are pushing ahead with dialogue and also want to help them follow the slow - but hopefully constant - path towards human rights and democracy .
Our resolution , which was tabled here in Parliament as a resolution by numerous groups , clearly addresses many of the causes for criticism .
It also clearly addresses some of the positive developments which we can see , but the point for us is that we do not want to give out any free tickets to ride , we most certainly do not want to sell out on values that we hold dear to Turkmenistan ; we want to defend and maintain our values .
That is why the partnership and cooperation agreement should not be a foregone conclusion and , as the previous speaker said , the Commission and the Council must make clear statements about the possible suspension of the Interim Agreement if Parliament should so demand at some point in the future .
Parliament has set out numerous questions in writing to the Commission and the Council .
I would be delighted if you could examine them and give us very emphatic answers , so that hopefully we can together get this Interim Agreement under way tomorrow .
President-in-Office of the Council . - Mr President , I certainly welcome the interest of Members of Parliament in the issue of the EU 's relationship with Turkmenistan , and I am pleased to have the opportunity to respond on behalf of the Council to the various questions and issues which have been raised in Parliament .
Turkmenistan is in many ways growing in importance .
For a long time it has been a very inward-looking country .
But , over the last two years , it has taken a number of significant steps to open up to the outside world .
The Government is increasingly open to cooperation .
This is reflected in a greater effort to work more constructively within the framework of the EU 's Central Asian strategy .
Despite these changes , our contractual relationship with Turkmenistan has remained unchanged for 20 years .
As Mr Wiersma stated , it is still based on the outdated Trade and Commercial and Economic Cooperation Agreement with the Soviet Union .
Against the background of positive developments in Turkmenistan , we have an opportunity to strengthen our bilateral relationship .
The Interim Agreement , which was signed in 1999 , provisionally applies the trade-related parts of the Partnership and Cooperation Agreement , also signed in 1999 , for which only three Member State ratifications remain outstanding .
There are many aspects to the Union 's relations with Turkmenistan .
The promotion of human rights and democracy is , of course , at the heart of the bilateral relationship , as it is key to the wider Strategy for Central Asia .
The fact that Turkmenistan borders Afghanistan makes it also a strategically important country .
At the same time , Turkmenistan is participating in the reconstruction of Afghanistan and provides logistics background for operations or activities of many EU Member States in the framework of the ISAF ( overflights ) as well as on a bilateral basis .
Turkmenistan is critical to regional security and the fight against drug trafficking .
Its growing economy provides opportunities for EU companies .
In addition , Turkmenistan is a key partner in the diversification of the EU 's energy relations and energy security .
These are all important areas which we need to develop in our own interests .
In addition , since the presidential elections in February 2007 , Turkmenistan has engaged in a number of significant reforms , including constitutional changes .
Many of the new provisions in the constitution , as well as other reforms which have been announced , underline that the country is moving in the right direction , even though it is a long-term process and much more still needs to be done .
On the question of human rights , Turkmenistan has engaged constructively in a human rights dialogue with the EU on a wide range of issues .
This dialogue has also been matched by some important developments within the country .
In particular , some political prisoners have been released , and there has been increased cooperation with the UN .
Turkmenistan has also permitted the UN rapporteur on freedom of religion to visit , it has participated fully in the UN Periodic Review , and a UN Centre for Preventive Diplomacy has been established in Ashgabat .
In addition , internal travel restrictions have been eased , a dialogue with the ICRC has begun , and education reform has restored ten-year secondary and five-year university-level education .
Turkmenistan has acceded to international conventions such as the Second Optional Protocol to the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights and the Convention on the Political Rights of Women .
All this is evidence that Turkmenistan is moving ahead .
Of course , much remains to be done in the field of human rights and respect for the rule of law and democracy .
We will continue to push in particular for the release of all political prisoners , for free access by the ICRC to prisoners , for a lifting of the restrictions on foreign travel , and for freedom for the media and civil society .
The Presidency is convinced that the best way to ensure that Turkmenistan delivers on these issues is through constant engagement .
We have to be able to have an open dialogue , and , when necessary , send clear messages , if Turkmenistan is to move towards full respect for international standards .
This is precisely why we need to upgrade our relationship and our own instruments and tools .
The current contractual arrangement with Turkmenistan provides for only a rudimentary bilateral dialogue .
The only treaty-based dialogue consists of a meeting of a joint committee at officials level once a year .
The Interim Agreement would make human rights an essential element of relations , and would therefore strengthen our ability to influence future developments in Turkmenistan in this area .
The PCA , once in force , would go further by providing for a fully-fledged political dialogue .
The EU Strategy for Central Asia , adopted in June 2007 , states that , ' in order to intensify cooperation with Central Asian states , the EU will make full use of the potential of Partnership and Cooperation Agreements ' .
Such agreements already exist in the case of Kazakhstan , Kyrgyzstan and Uzbekistan .
And in the case of Tajikistan , an interim agreement is in force pending the ratification and entry into force of the PCA .
For the successful implementation of the EU Strategy for Central Asia it is important to have all Central Asian countries involved , and that is why it is important to create conditions for involvement of Turkmenistan as well .
Without it the implementation of our goals and interests in Central Asia would be very difficult .
The Presidency is convinced that we need now to establish an appropriate legal framework for our relations with Turkmenistan , beginning with the Interim Agreement .
This will enable us to build on the developments taking place in the country , and to strengthen our wider engagement with Central Asia .
The Interim Agreement is the most effective way of ensuring that Turkmenistan makes progress in the various key areas which I have outlined , not least in respect for human rights , democracy and the rule of law .
I know that you share these objectives , and therefore hope that we can count on your support for taking this forward .
Member of the Commission . - ( FR ) Mr President , honourable Members , since the election of President Berdymukhamedov , Turkmenistan has effectively entered a new phase of its development , and several positive signs of change have emerged .
Indeed , the new leaders are demonstrating a more open attitude .
For example , they have lifted certain restrictions on freedom of movement within the country , they have amended the constitution so as to strengthen the role of the parliament , they have created an institute of democracy and human rights , they have hosted the United Nations Centre for Preventive Diplomacy in Ashgabat and , for the first time , they authorised international observers to monitor the legislative elections held last December .
Furthermore , as you know , reforms in the education and healthcare sectors are now priorities for the government .
In 2006 the European Parliament proposed to the Turkmen authorities that they take undertake a number of measures so that Parliament could finally approve the Interim Trade Agreement .
Moreover , in the last two years , since the new president was elected , several of the proposed measures have been adopted - I do not wish to repeat those mentioned by the President-in-Office of the Council , particularly those concerning the ICRC .
Reforms have also begun in the field of education , with the modernisation of the teaching system , the training of teachers abroad , the extension of the education period and the introduction of the Internet in schools .
Some prisoners have been freed , including recently , ladies and gentlemen , Valery Pal , whose release we had demanded .
Furthermore , in September 2008 - again , for the first time - a visitor 's permit was granted to the United Nations Special Rapporteur on Freedom of Religion or Belief , who concluded , I quote , ' individuals and communities still face a number of difficulties , although the situation has much improved since 2007 ' .
The launch of new structured dialogues such as that which we have heard on human rights is another positive point .
Of course , you may rest assured that , during these meetings , we will still address issues of concern , notably the situation of political prisoners , the freedom of assembly , of the media , of worship , and the rights of minorities , and on each occasion we will stress our commitment to respect for human rights and their importance for long-term economic and social development .
Due to these fears - which are quite legitimate - about the situation in Turkmenistan , Parliament has postponed its decision on the Interim Agreement .
In principle I share some of these fears , and I also recognise that Turkmenistan still has some way to go before it is fully compliant with international standards on democracy and human rights .
However , although it may be limited , this is a positive development that testifies to a desire to make progress and to open up to change .
We regard it as an opportunity that we should seize in order to engage with the Turkmen authorities and to encourage them .
I am firmly convinced that the European Union must commit itself further in order to pave the way for positive developments to be made .
Applying the Interim Trade Agreement , by which I mean the trade-related provisions of the Partnership and Cooperation Agreement , would be a positive first step that would enable us to engage more with Turkmenistan and more vigorously to promote cooperation , reform and modernisation as a whole .
Furthermore , the Interim Agreement contains a crucial clause on human rights , and I am aware of your concerns about the possibility of suspending the agreement .
In this regard , I should like to point out that Article 1 of the Interim Trade Agreement and Article 2 of the Partnership and Cooperation Agreement contain clauses referring to respect for democracy and fundamental rights as essential elements of each agreement , but above all that both agreements contain clauses enabling each party to take appropriate measures in the event of a serious breach of their terms , and this even without prior consultation of the joint committees , in cases of special urgency .
Suspension of the agreements in the case of an established , continuous and serious breach of the human rights clause is therefore possible .
However , the Interim Trade Agreement is clearly not a cure-all .
It will certainly not resolve all of the human rights problems in Turkmenistan , but it will help to ensure that international standards are complied with more fully , particularly in the areas of the rule of law and human rights .
There are two more important reasons why we should strengthen our relations with Turkmenistan to protect our own interests : security and energy .
Indeed , Turkmenistan is located at the crossroads of Europe and Asia and counts Iran and Afghanistan , among others , as neighbours .
It is important for it to be actively neutral in a very tense region that is ripe for destabilisation .
To this end , we are working successfully with Turkmenistan in the area of border management and in the fight against terrorism , Islamic extremism , drugs trafficking and human trafficking .
This collaboration is all the more important given the recent renewed engagement of the international community in Afghanistan and in Pakistan , and , in fact , regional conferences are due to be held very soon in the Hague and in Tokyo .
As we all know , Central Asia could play a very important role where energy security is concerned .
Since the regime change in Turkmenistan , we have increased our cooperation in this area .
The European Union is making every effort to have the Southern Gas Corridor built as part of a broader policy of diversifying our energy sources and transit routes .
Clearly , Turkmenistan is crucial to the success of this project .
To conclude , our relations with Turkmenistan must be shaped as much by our values as by our interests .
That is why I remain convinced that , by engaging with Turkmenistan , we will be in a better position to put forward our arguments in favour of a more open society in that country .
We shall continue to encourage the authorities to make progress in other areas , such as the reform of the penal and civil code , the legislation on religion , the freedom of the media , the releasing of political prisoners , the authorising of international observers to enter prisons , and the increased presence of NGOs in the country .
It is for all of these reasons that I ask you , please , to approve the interim agreement with Turkmenistan .
- Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , before giving the floor to the various speakers for this debate , I am going to allow myself - being , as I am , responsible for multilingual issues in Parliament 's Bureau - to read you some advice from a leaflet prepared for new MEPs on how to speak so that the interpreting can be correctly done , and so that this miracle , without compare or precedent in any other institution , can continue to operate daily .
These are not the tablets that Moses brought down from the mountain , but this is what it says : ' Speak at a regular speed , and not too fast .
Speak in your mother tongue , if this is possible .
Avoid changing language when you speak .
Speaking is better than reading , but if there is no alternative to reading , make sure that the interpreters have the text .
Clearly give references to documents .
Articulate clearly any figure that is mentioned .
Explain abbreviations that you use in what you say .
Remember that jokes are difficult to translate , and talk to the interpreters .
Also , when you are chairing a meeting , wait a moment before giving the floor to the next speaker so that the interpreters can finish the speech and change to the appropriate channel . '
Thank you very much for your interpreting , and I would like to take this opportunity to congratulate the interpreters , who make our work possible through their own , which is so complicated and so effective .
First of all , and it is no coincidence in the context of this debate , I would like to welcome the compromise reached at the last European Council meeting on the financing of the Nabucco gas pipeline .
I am pleased that the Nabucco project has been declared a priority energy project and that our efforts as Members of the European Parliament in support of this project have yielded results .
However , returning to today 's debate , I believe that among our concerns with regard to Turkmenistan there are clearly two which stand out of equal importance : economic cooperation , specifically in the area of oil and gas , as well as social progress and human rights in this country , as also mentioned by the Commissioner .
I welcome this report and congratulate Mr Caspary on it .
I also believe that the agreement being discussed provides a better framework for interaction with Turkmenistan than the current one .
However , I would like to highlight that it is not too early for us to discuss specific paths of cooperation with Turkmenistan and its inclusion in the European Union 's energy projects .
The agreement being discussed today is more than welcome as a means of accelerating economic cooperation between the EU and this country .
We understand from this report that the authorities in Ashgabat are prepared to negotiate on the topic of human rights and civil liberties .
Based on the EU 's experience so far , it should be obvious that progress is made on these topics quickest when they are part of a broader discussion touching on other subjects , including the prospect of long-term economic cooperation .
Turkmenistan 's energy and foreign policies are closely linked .
We can deal with them at the same time by strengthening economic cooperation and adopting specific measures , as well as by expressing constant interest in human rights .
I welcome the evaluation criteria regarding Turkmenistan 's progress , as well as those concerning the EU 's intellectual property standards .
I wonder whether it would not be useful to have similar ones too for the level of economic integration , but of a realistic , long-term nature , or some which relate to progress on civil liberties .
on behalf of the PSE Group . - Mr President , I thank the Commissioner and Mr Vondra , for the Council , for their explanation , but I am certain they felt that there is still some hesitation on our part in giving them our full support .
I think it is easy to understand , because we have a very simple case .
The difficulty arises because for the Partnership and Cooperation Agreement ( PCA ) , Parliament will have to give its assent , whereas this is not the case for the Interim Trade Agreement because of our legal obligations .
Because of this , when it comes to the Interim Trade Agreement , in our resolution we can only highlight our points and raise our concerns and give support with regard to certain topics ; but because of this Parliament , and specifically my political group , is hesitating in giving its full support for the Interim Trade Agreement .
I hope this is understandable to you and I hope you can solve the problem .
I know that , because of the legal process and , because you have already signed the legal basis , it is very difficult , if not impossible , for you to renegotiate .
We are fully aware of the facts , but I am certain you can find some form of commitment and look into further developing and exploring legal bases on which you can help our side to be on your side , because we all recognise how important Turkmenistan is and we have already given support with regard to other agreements .
So it is not that we are not fully aware of what has happened and it is not the case that we are not aware how important Turkmenistan is , but it is a very problematic case .
I would like you to look into this again and that is why I specifically ask you to do me a favour : look into our paragraph 11 , where we raise our concern with regard to the legal obligation and the differences between the Interim Trade Agreement and the Partnership and Cooperation Agreement .
Please recognise paragraph 9 of our resolution , which talks about the inclusion of the human rights clause in the PCA agreement .
Commissioner , I am aware of and took note of your points , but I am certain there is something you can do to further explore how we can strengthen this particular point .
The same is true for paragraph 10 , and this is important for the Council as well .
We would like to see a revision clause .
I know it is not included but , again , please do us a favour , look into it and see what you can do when you continue to negotiate .
If you could do something about paragraph 8 , this would be more than helpful for us ; it relates to monitoring which we always like to have and which we are constantly asking for .
Monitoring does not mean that we want to sit at the negotiating table .
We have done this under other circumstances , so look at what you can do here , how you can be helpful in defining what monitoring means , but do us a favour and look at the case .
By the way , I think you have done great work .
All the points are covered in the new EU-Central Asia Partnership Agreement for the 21st century .
You even covered the ILO recommendation .
You covered human right issues so I am certain we can find a compromise , but a little bit of work still needs to be done .
on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - ( FR ) Mr President , I believe that we must try not to fool ourselves but realise that , although Valery Pal has been released , the Turkmen Government will continue to abduct , imprison and torture other people in Turkmenistan for thought crimes .
Although the United Nations Special Rapporteur on Freedom of Religion has travelled to Turkmenistan , nine other special rapporteurs are still awaiting their permits , and these are people who cover such important areas as torture , defence of human rights , independence of the judiciary , education , health , freedom of expression , and so on .
Several speeches really seem like exercises in self-persuasion .
We continue to be faced with one of the world 's most repressive and closed regimes , even if there has been some progress and even if we do need to find the right strategy to support this .
It is important for us not to be naïve , either , or obviously to demand that Turkmenistan become a model of democracy and human rights before reaching any agreement with it in advance .
So , between these two extremes , what should we do ?
I propose quite simply that we have a real foreign policy , and that we meet criteria which are extremely precise , which are measurable , which are realistic and which are those of the European Parliament .
I am thinking of entry permits for independent NGOs and United Nations special rapporteurs , and for the International Red Cross .
We know that negotiations are under way , but they are not completed .
I am thinking of the realignment of the education system with international standards - which is under way but still very far from satisfactory - of the release of all the political prisoners and of their freedom of movement - in short , of the ABC of human rights .
My group 's proposal is both ambitious and realistic .
It can be reduced to a simple formula .
( The President interrupted the speaker to ask her to speak more slowly , at the request of the interpreters )
We cannot sabotage our own policy by renouncing our values .
It is not a question of advocating Turkmenistan 's isolation , but of engaging with the country .
So , how should we do this ?
Well , we should take two pencils , one in each hand .
With the first pencil , we are going to sign a road map , which will set out the stages required to meet the criteria laid down by Parliament .
These stages will be marked out over time , with precise timelines , and will be discussed at the human rights sub-committees held with the country .
Once we have signed this road map , with the other hand and the other pencil we will be able to sign the interim agreement that is before us .
I believe that , when the time comes for the Commission and the Council to discuss the future of the human rights clauses , it is imperative that these clauses be systematic and be systematically accompanied by a consultation mechanism that can result , where necessary , in the suspension of this agreement .
- Mrs Flautre , the President does not measure the speed at which speakers talk .
The President has a light in front of him through which the interpreters send him an SOS when they stop interpreting because they are not able to keep up with the speaker .
I am not measuring anyone 's speed ; I am sent this emergency signal and I pass it on to the Members , so that everyone is able to follow the debate .
Thank you , as always , for your understanding .
on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , Commissioner , it is already a year since this Parliament said very clearly and plainly what progress it considered necessary in order to be able to agree to the trade agreement between the EC and Turkmenistan .
They were demands that are relatively easy to satisfy : free and unimpeded access for the International Red Cross , the release of political prisoners and conscientious objectors , the abolition of all state travel restrictions , easier access and working conditions for NGOs and UN agencies and comprehensive reform of the education system .
I freely admit that the government under President Berdymukhamedov has made progress .
That is uncontested .
However , in my opinion , it is in no way sufficient for us to approve this agreement now .
Both you , Mr President-in-Office , and you , Commissioner , have missed a huge opportunity .
I do not necessary share their views , but as the social democrat Members said , we - Parliament - want a guarantee from you that , if Parliament demands that this Interim Agreement be withdrawn , you will accede to our request .
Mr Vondra said absolutely nothing about this and you , Commissioner , have explained to us that it states in the contract that this can be done .
The fact that it states that it can be done is not the point ; the point is that you are prepared , if Parliament so demands , to accede to that request .
That is the point .
I ask all my honourable friends , if we want to take ourselves seriously , not to agree tomorrow , unless the Commission agrees in writing and reads out here that this demand will be met .
This was a package deal that was ultimately demanded , but you have said nothing about it .
I must say here that I get the feeling that you are not taking us seriously .
At the very least a position statement should have been made on this .
I therefore say to you that , under these circumstances , agreement on this Interim Agreement is not possible .
I hope that we shall together unanimously document this tomorrow .
- Mr President , like the two previous speakers , I fear that the Commission and the Council have both painted rather a rose-tinted view of what is now the situation in Turkmenistan .
The current President may be marginally better than the President he replaced in February 2007 , but is he sufficiently better for us to agree to an interim trade agreement as a precursor for a partnership and cooperation agreement ?
As Mr Markov and Ms Flautre said , in the Committee on International Trade we set five very clear tasks for Turkmenistan that we would want to see met before we gave our agreement .
Firstly , we said that the International Red Cross had to have free access to Turkmenistan .
Unless the Commission and the Council can tell me differently , I understand that up until now the Red Cross has not been able to visit one single prison or prisoner in Turkmenistan .
Secondly , we said that they had to realign their education system with international standards .
The Council is right to say that it has expanded the secondary education system by one year , but my understanding again is that , despite minor improvements in the education system , this has not been aimed at the mass of Turkmens but at the elite and preparing those who wish to work in the oil and gas sector .
Thirdly we have asked for the release of all political prisoners .
Some have been released , but not many , and there are literally hundreds , if not thousands , of political prisoners languishing in jails in Turkmenistan , still awaiting a fair trial .
Fourthly , we said that we wanted the abolition of all restrictions to external travel .
It is interesting that both the Council and Commission concentrated on internal travel .
We said there had to be external travel freedom as well .
That has not been delivered .
Finally , we said there had to be free access for independent NGOs , free access for the UN human rights bodies and freedom of the press .
Well , there is no press freedom , there is no free access for NGOs , and , while the UN inspector on religious tolerance may have been allowed in , Turkmenistan has the longest queue of UN-requested visits of any country in the world .
Is this really a country that we can do business with ?
Well , I suspect for the majority in this House and in other institutions the answer is clearly ' yes ' .
Why have things changed since the Trade Committee passed its resolution in 2007 ?
Cynics might say that it is because gas and oil have been discovered in Turkmenistan , because we want to build a new pipeline , because we suddenly find it in our strategic interest .
If that is the case , let us not pretend it is to do with an improvement in human rights .
It is to do with self-interest at European Union level .
( The President cut off the speaker )
- ( LT ) It is regrettable that the actions taken by the European Union and other international organisations to defend human rights in Turkmenistan have yet to produce positive results .
Journalists and defenders of human rights there have been gagged .
Women and children continue to be raped and trafficked .
I am nevertheless convinced that policies of suspending relations and isolation in respect of Turkmenistan show little promise .
Not because this country is rich in gas , but simply because only the promotion of links with the outside world can bring about democratic change .
Therefore , I support the European Commission 's position and the interim agreement , which can be suspended if necessary in reaction to events in the country .
Undoubtedly , the European Union 's attitude towards energy in relations with Turkmenistan should not be separated from any changes in the area of human rights .
- Mr President , there is a lot more to mysterious Turkmenistan than just oil and gas .
That is not to say that the country 's hydrocarbon resources are not important .
In fact they are of vital strategic value to the EU , given the Union 's wish , and Turkmenistan 's apparent desire , to move out of Russia 's shadow when it comes to energy supplies .
Turkmenistan 's immense and clearly accessible gas resources are enough on their own to demand a closer relationship with the EU .
Nevertheless there are other reasons as well for which I believe we should be seeking an interim trade agreement with Turkmenistan .
The country is a prime example of a peaceful and stable Muslim country with a secular government committed to fighting Islamist terrorism in Afghanistan , where we have a war going on .
Of course there are still serious concerns about human rights , democracy and political freedoms , but such concerns also exist with regard to Russia and China , and I do not remember the Socialists raising this over the Tibet debate recently .
Yet we maintain strategic relations with both these large countries .
We will encourage further change in Turkmenistan through dialogue and partnership , not by isolation .
Therefore I generally support better relations between the EU and central Asian countries .
( The President cut off the speaker )
- ( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I hope that this debate on the interim agreement can serve as an opportunity to begin a thorough examination of the situation in Turkmenistan and to demand more practical measures to improve what is at present a very negative state of affairs .
The Ashkhabat government recently rejected a series of recommendations including the release of political prisoners , reviewing past cases of political imprisonment and lifting the travel ban arbitrarily imposed on human rights activists .
Up to now , without hypocrisy , it is a state closed to monitoring by international organisations , which have not been able to enter the country for 10 years .
Journalists and activists are unable to work freely and all opponents are threatened on a daily basis .
The European Union and the international community are now demanding a change of heart in relation to respect for human rights ; purely economic agreements will be very difficult to accept .
- ( FR ) Mr President , Minister , Commissioner , I think that we need to stop being hypocritical regarding this issue .
In 2006 I myself was part of a European Parliament delegation that travelled to Turkmenistan , and we made a number of proposals at that time which you have taken up , Commissioner .
Clearly , I understand your arguments and those of the Council , but when I compare what has been proposed and the report on Central Asia - which we voted in favour of in this very House a few months ago , on 20 February 2008 and in which we repeated our demands concerning the release of prisoners , the Red Cross , and so on - has there really been any progress ?
No .
Personally , when I read ' Turkmenistan report ' , I actually read ' Nabucco report ' because , at the end of the day , we are interested in the energy , in the gas of this third biggest gas-producing country in the world .
Furthermore , I know - it was explained to us very well when we were in Turkmenistan - that , were the European Union not interested in Turkmen gas , then the country had other customers , not least China .
So let us avoid being hypocritical , let us make it plain ...
( The President cut off the speaker )
- Mr President , I just wish to agree very much with my colleague , Dr Charles Tannock .
His concluding remarks , had he not been cut off , were to the effect that the EU should be encouraged - and indeed the Commission and Council should finance - trans-Caspian pipelines to Central Asia in order to reduce the danger of being reliant on a monopoly source , so that we are able to avoid possibly falling prey to the foreign policy objectives of one of our neighbours .

- Thank you , Mr Beazley .
It is always important to add to the thoughts of Mr Tannock , who is always constructive and a source of inspiration for Parliament .
Now the final speaker , Mr Martin , has the floor .
We are going to examine within the Bureau whether , in this section , the floor may be given to speakers who have already participated in the debate , because what they usually do is to reopen it .
However , in this case , as we have reached the fifth speaker and five speakers have the right to speak , I give the floor to Mr Martin .
- Mr President , thank you for giving me the floor .
I wanted to come back because I wanted to put a very specific question to the Commission before they take the floor again .
I want to know precisely how any human rights clause that we agree would be invoked and implemented .
Would it be the Commission that decides whether there has been a breach of human rights and , if the Commission so decides , will it be agreed in the Council to suspend agreement by unanimity or by qualified majority ?
How practical will a human rights clause actually be ?
We have human rights clauses in many of our international agreements and to date - with the exception of the next debate - we have hardly ever invoked any of them , Belarus being one of the rare exceptions .
President-in-Office of the Council . - Mr President , I think it was a useful debate .
The debate concentrated mostly on human rights and that is not surprising for us .
I would like once more to stress that the current human rights clause in the agreement allows for suspension in the case of breaches of human rights ; on suspension itself , I think that , if the situation in Turkmenistan deteriorates , we will have to take very seriously whatever Parliament proposes .
Of course the final decision will be made by the Council looking at all options of restrictive measures , including the possibility of suspension , and here we have precedents regarding some other central Asian countries .
Some of us also touched on cooperation with the Red Cross .
For us it is not easy to judge on cooperation between the Red Cross and Turkmenistan simply because the Red Cross applies a fundamental principle of discretion here .
So , based on the information available , we have to admit that there is much to be done and improved , but at the same time we can see positive things and development .
In general and in conclusion , the human rights situation in Turkmenistan of course leaves much to be desired , but continued isolation is not an option .
A conditional approach to the conclusion of the Interim Agreement negotiated 11 years is not an effective means of securing progress on human rights and democracy .
We have , of course , to engage in a dialogue with Turkmenistan on human rights , and that is what we are trying to do .
The Czech Prime Minister was there just recently .
He engaged the President in Ashgabat in exactly that kind of conversation .
The Presidency is convinced that there is an opportunity now to engage with Turkmenistan , and that approach is the only effective means of establishing a frank dialogue on issues such as human rights .
None of the Turkmenistan key partners - Russia or China , which are currently increasing their influence in the region - are likely to put these issues high on their agendas .
So the establishment of appropriate contractual relationship starting with the Interim Agreement is a key step in such a policy of engagement .
A negative opinion from Parliament would be damaging to our nascent dialogue with Turkmenistan and would undermine our ability to secure progress in important areas such as greater respect for human rights .
I would therefore encourage Parliament , as suggested by the rapporteur , Daniel Caspary , to offer its full support for the conclusion of the Interim Agreement .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , Eleanor Roosevelt once said that instead of cursing the darkness one should light a candle .
This also applies to Turkmenistan .
Promoting human rights and supporting democracy in the country must of course continue to be our priority .
Many of you have rightly said - for instance , Mrs Flautre who is no longer here - that changes are slow .
Yes , they are but they are changes and these changes must be acknowledged and they must be encouraged .
So we have to help Turkmenistan to help itself .
We therefore have to engage with the country in a constructive , continuous and strategic manner .
We need to create a proper framework for our contractual relations , yet the Trade and Cooperation Agreement currently in force , being so limited , does not allow for that .
Let me also say a few words about suspension , or possible suspension .
As you are aware and as the President-in-Office has just said , it is the Council - unanimously , by the way - that decides on such matters .
The Commission can make a proposal to that effect .
May I just remind you that , after the events in Andijan , for instance , the Council did decide to impose restrictive measures on Uzbekistan , including an arms embargo as well as travel restrictions on Uzbek officials found to be involved in the events .
In addition , technical meetings under the PCA , the Cooperation Committee and the subcommittees , were suspended .
These measures were kept under constant review and renewed or amended as appropriate on an annual basis .
In this regard , should such a similar incident - or just a grave deterioration - occur , the Council could take similar measures or even consider a suspension , and the Commission would certainly consider all available options , including suspension .
The inclusion of a specific human-rights-related suspension clause in the PCA would require amending the PCA .
In our view , this seems quite difficult as it would imply reopening negotiations with Turkmenistan - which already signed and ratified the PCA in 2004 - as well as with the EU Member States , 12 of which have ratified the agreement as well .
Insofar as this aims at establishing whether a breach of human rights can lead to a suspension of the PCA , I would like to reiterate that both the PCA and the Interim Agreement have a clause declaring respect for human rights as an essential element - as I mentioned very clearly before .
Both the PCA and the Interim Agreement have a clause to the effect that , if either party considers that the other party has failed to fulfil an obligation under the agreement , it may take appropriate measures , which in cases of special urgency it can do without even first consulting the joint committee .
Both the interim agreement and the PCA also contain a joint declaration clarifying that cases of special urgency mean cases of material breach of the agreement by either party , both clarifying that the material breach consists in the violation of an essential element .
Therefore a material breach in urgent cases does give the parties the right to take appropriate measures .
In our view , these measures could also include the suspension of the agreement .
Therefore , honourable parliamentarians , I ask you again - as I did before - to give your assent to activating the Interim Trade Agreement with Turkmenistan .
I would be absolutely agreeable to a political commitment from my side - from the Commission 's side - to monitoring the human rights dialogue and reporting to the Parliament regularly .
This would be , in the trade agreement , a stepping stone for increased cooperation , and would take us a step further in bringing the framework for dialogue with Turkmenistan on to a par with the ones we have already established with other countries in the region .
Let us not forget that either .
Only through enhanced commitment will we be able to influence positive developments and improvement of the human rights situation .
rapporteur . - ( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , thank you very much for today 's debate .
It has taken us much further down the line .
I should like to thank all my honourable friends who worked on this issue with me over recent months .
One core statement by the Council , my dear Mr Vondra , has particularly stuck in my mind : the people of Turkmenistan will certainly not learn what democracy and human rights mean from China , Russia or even Iran .
Over recent years Parliament has laid down clear conditions under which we can agree to this Interim Agreement , most recently in the Central Asia strategy report by Mr Özdemir .
It would be a huge concession by the European Parliament , if we now basically ignored the specifications which we set about three months or six months ago and said that , nonetheless , we approve my report on the Interim Agreement .
On the other hand , it is also clear to me that we are talking about the Interim Agreement today .
It would not have been a good idea to postpone the vote .
I am also clear about the fact that we should not use Turkmenistan and the Interim Agreement as a hostage in order to shift the balance of power between the European institutions .
I am also clear about the fact that it would set a precedent if the Commission and the Council were to agree to the demands which many of us have made today , even - and I say this quite clearly - though , in my opinion , these demands by Parliament are totally justified .
I therefore await - preferably this evening - an undertaking from the Commission that , if this monitoring shows that the situation in Turkmenistan has deteriorated and if Parliament passes a resolution asking the Commission to propose to the Council that this Interim Agreement be suspended , it will table a proposal to that effect before the Council .
I think that this should be possible within the framework of the current agreements .
I would be delighted if we were , in any case , to receive an undertaking from the Council that it would immediately include and discuss this issue at one of its forthcoming meetings at the Commission 's proposal .
Both institutions can certainly give these two undertakings without addressing the overall arrangement of institutional cooperation within the European Union .
I would be grateful if you could make this statement today or , at the very latest , before the vote tomorrow .
I have no interest in having to recommend to my honourable friends before the vote tomorrow that the vote on my report be postponed .
- I have received two motions for resolutions , pursuant to Rule 108 ( 5 ) of the Rules of Procedure .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow .
Bi-annual evaluation of the EU-Belarus dialogue ( debate )
- The next item is the statements by the Council and the Commission on the bi-annual evaluation of the EU-Belarus dialogue .
President-in-Office of the Council . - Mr President , I am grateful to the Members of this Parliament for the opportunity to provide an update on developments in Belarus , and in particular to report on the outcome of last Monday 's discussion on this issue in Council .
As many of you will be aware , following the Council 's decision last October to suspend temporarily and partially the visa-ban list , we have seen a number of positive developments in Belarus .
I would point in particular to the registration of the ' For Freedom ' movement and of the Centre for Chernobyl Initiatives , the printing and distribution of independent newspapers such as Narodnaya Volya and Nasha Niva , the round table on regulation of the Internet with the OSCE Representative on the Freedom of the Media , the ongoing expert consultations with OSCE / ODIHR on improving electoral legislation , and the establishment of Consultative Councils , including one on human rights issues , which brings together representatives of civil society and even the opposition .
These steps , whilst they might appear relatively minor to some , are significant in the Belarusian context .
This has been acknowledged by some representatives of civil society in Belarus .
However , there have also been incidents which are a cause for our concern .
The important human rights NGO , Viasna , has been denied registration , there are problems with the accreditation of some of the independent media , and , while there is less harassment against civil society and opposition activists than earlier , short-term detentions continue to take place .
We are also following closely complaints from the opposition over ' forcible conscription ' to the army .
Se we cannot deny that the picture is mixed .
Nevertheless , we are convinced that there is a need to continue with a policy of engagement and to support the positive developments .
This should be the way forward in our relations with Belarus .
We must keep in mind our wider strategic interests in the region as well as the impact of the financial crisis when we consider our future policy direction .
These were the considerations which lay behind our decision on 16 March .
This decision , while extending for one year the restrictive measures , maintains the suspension of the application of the travel restrictions imposed on certain officials of Belarus for nine months .
The in-depth review foreseen by the end of this nine-month period will concentrate on the five areas set out in the Council 's conclusions of October 2008 .
These are electoral reform and other concrete actions towards respect for democratic values , the rule of law , human rights and fundamental freedoms , including freedom of expression and of the media , and freedom of assembly and political association .
We firmly believe that the continuation of the suspension agreed last week will enable us to pursue our policy objectives .
It will provide us with the opportunity to continue to raise with our Belarusian partners developments which concern us in the field of human rights .
The launching , in the coming month , of a human rights dialogue will be particularly important .
Following the lifting of the ban on bilateral political contacts , a number of high-level visits have taken place , including a ministerial troika at the end of January .
The aim of these various contacts has been to encourage Belarus , and to create understanding over differences in expectations .
We hope that the dialogue will continue over the coming months .
We are convinced that we need to be constructive with Minsk .
We remain realistic and do not expect any dramatic changes .
Transformation takes time , and it is in our shared interest to take every opportunity to encourage further positive developments .
It is important that our policy of engagement has been openly supported by representatives of civil society in Belarus , who took part recently in a very helpful discussion with Members of this Parliament .
We also maintain regular contacts with the representatives of Belarusian civic society and we intend to continue this dialogue as well as our support to civic society and the independent media in Belarus .
Let me close with a few words on the Eastern Partnership , which was endorsed last week by the European Council , and will be launched at a summit-level meeting in May .
Belarus is one of the six Eastern Partnership countries .
We strongly believe that Belarus should be involved in this new initiative from the outset .
But the extent of its participation in the bilateral track will depend on a number of factors , in particular progress in some of the areas to which I have just referred .
I am grateful to the public support which Parliament has given to the outcome of the Council last Monday .
Clearly the in-depth review to be conducted in nine months ' time will be a key to any further decisions , and will have an important bearing on our future relations with Belarus more generally .
The Council is very ready to continue to keep this Parliament informed of developments , and welcomes the opportunity for you to continue to contribute to this debate .
Member of the Commission . - ( FR ) Mr President , Belarus is at a crossroads .
We find ourselves in the wake of a Council decision confirming the temporary suspension of the visa ban until the end of the year , and on the eve of the adoption of a resolution by the European Parliament .
It is time to perform an initial review of our policy on Belarus after six months of suspended sanctions - since October 2008 - and to reflect on what lies ahead for the next nine months .
Personally I am convinced that the decision taken by the European Union last October to suspend the sanctions was the right one , and , in fact , this suspension has given rise to a positive process .
Belarus has taken measures that are unquestionably along the lines of more democracy .
I am thinking in particular of the return of two independent newspapers to news-stands , of the fact that even Mr Milinkevich 's organisation has finally been legalised , of the cooperation with OSCE / ODIHR on electoral law , and of the various congresses of opposition parties or NGOs - such as the Union of Poles in Belarus - that have been able to take place .
Admittedly , this progress is limited and insufficient , but it is also unprecedented and , in general , we can still conclude that progress has been made .
That is why this mixed review received a mixed response from the European Union , with the balanced decision taken during the last GAERC .
Suspending the sanctions for longer enables us to maintain a dialogue , just as the civil society itself expressly asked us to do , including at the forum held at the European Parliament , as recently as 4 March .
At the same time , we are holding on to the tool at our disposal , since the sanctions may be reintroduced at the end of the year if we consider that the progress made by then is insufficient , and we are going to continue our examination by paying ongoing attention to the situation on the ground with regard to whether progress has been made in the five key areas identified in the GAERC 's conclusions of last October .
Furthermore , thanks to our delegation in Minsk , the Commission is playing an active part in analysing the situation on the ground .
Ladies and gentlemen , I welcome the European Parliament 's initiative to send a delegation of members of the Committee on Foreign Affairs and the European Parliament Delegation for Relations with Belarus , which will travel to Minsk in 10 days ' time to meet with the authorities and the various parties and to get an idea of the situation on the ground .
I shall also be sending my director responsible for this region at the same time , and he will be sure to cooperate closely with the European Parliament delegation .
Setting up a new dialogue on human rights with Belarus is another , appreciable step forward that will enable us to structure our demands better and to give more depth to our discussions .
The first session of this dialogue should take place in the next few days in Minsk , and the European Union will put all the issues on the table .
We shall meet with members of civil society before and after this dialogue , to benefit from their expertise .
Ladies and gentlemen , developing our relations with this neighbour located at the heart of Europe requires us to take the time to reflect on a response , including in the longer term , to the progress made by Belarus .
A response that enables us to bring Belarus closer to our European family and its values , and to do this , in fact , as our President-in-Office said , the European Council took the decision last Friday to admit Belarus to the Eastern Partnership , and , more specifically , to its multilateral component , the platforms .
This Partnership will provide Belarus with an opportunity to develop new support and exchange networks with all its neighbours , including on behalf of Belarusian civil society , which wants to end its isolation and take part in the forum on civil society .
With regard to Belarus 's participation in the bilateral strand of the Eastern Partnership , the text of the Commission 's proposal is unequivocal : the development of bilateral relations between the European Union and Belarus is , and will remain , dependent on the development of the political situation in the country .
Finally , in the light of the financial and economic crisis that is also seriously affecting all of our neighbours in the East , I am personally in favour of economic support measures for Belarus .
An important first step has been taken by the IMF , with the active support of its European members , and that was to grant a USD 2 billion loan to tackle the immediate effects of the crisis , by which I mean putting an end to the balance of payments .
The second stage should enable Belarus to gain access to EIB loans and to more substantial EBRD loans in order to fund projects linked to the trans-European networks , while also helping to diversify the country 's economic links .
At the same time , the Commission is in the process of strengthening its technical dialogues with Belarus in sectors of common interest such as energy , transport , customs , standards , and , in the longer term , the economy .
To conclude , in order to strengthen these dialogues , ladies and gentlemen , next week Parliament will adopt a resolution on Belarus , and the Commission will genuinely pay very close attention to your recommendations .
I for my part sincerely hope that we continue to cooperate closely over the coming months in our assessment of the situation and in our dialogue with Belarus , its authorities and its civil society , and I hope that this first step will lead us to make an in-depth mutual commitment based on concrete progress .
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - Mr President , the EU 's relations with Belarus are rightly now being driven by pragmatic considerations on both sides .
Years of isolationist policy led nowhere , as the Council has somewhat belatedly now realised .
It certainly did nothing to loosen the grip on power enjoyed by Europe 's last self-isolating dictator , President Alexander Lukashenko .
Two weeks ago , here in Strasbourg , I had the privilege to meet two prominent dissidents from Belarus to discuss political developments in their country .
One of them , Alexander Kazulin , had recently been released as a political prisoner , which is one of the reasons why the EU has begun to look at Lukashenko in a more favourable light .
But political repression still remains a serious problem in Belarus .
It is therefore open to question whether this apparent thaw in relations between the EU and Belarus will lead us anywhere , as Lukashenko may well be playing a game with Russia as he leans more towards the EU .
But it is better than our sticking with the failed boycotting policy of the past decade .
It is essential that the Council maintains a carrot-and-stick approach to Belarus : if Lukashenko is offered clear incentives for internal political reform he may well respond favourably .
But , equally , he needs to know that he cannot carry on as before and that any sign of increased authoritarianism and repression will cause rapprochement to cease and reduce support by the EU for Belarus 's WTO membership ambitions .
At this stage , inviting Lukashenko to Prague for the May Summit to launch the Eastern Partnership , to which Belarus belongs , could be a step too far in my view .
We need to link closer relations to tangible commitments on the regime 's part to change its ways .
Belarus must also be persuaded that recognition of the Georgian regions of Abkhazia and South Ossetia as independent states - as at present is the case only by Russia - is unacceptable .
I believe that Belarus is seeking to distance itself from Russian control and we need to take advantage of this window of opportunity .
Undoubtedly , promoting genuine change in Belarus demands patience and commitment on the part of the EU , but the prize - Belarus back in the European family of nations - is well worth aspiring to .
on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( NL ) Mr President , we , too , are happy to support the continuation of the European Union 's policy of bringing about dialogue and closer cooperation with the Belarusian regime .
We have been working on this for six or seven months already and we need to see whether what the European Union is aiming for also bears fruit over the coming period .
That does not change the fact that we will continue to have our doubts about the intentions of a government that is not known for being democratic .
I have personally had the honour of being in contact with the regime on a number of occasions and , believe me , Mr Lukashenko has not become a democrat overnight .
The fact that he wants more involvement with the European Union has to do with other factors , but the fact that that is what he wants is something that we can use in order to put pressure on him to move further along the path that he has now embarked on by taking a number of positive steps in the area of human rights .
Like Mr Tannock , I think that it is still too early to speculate whether he should be rewarded with an Eastern Partnership .
A real dialogue on human rights still needs to be brought about and violations of human rights are still taking place .
When it comes to dialogue on human rights , we believe that the opposition must be allowed to play a fully-fledged role .
We have supported the opposition in all kinds of ways in recent years , including by means of awarding it two Sakharov prizes .
Minsk thinks that it is not acceptable to support the opposition like that .
There are precedents , however : for six or seven years I was personally involved in an attempt , along with the Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe ( OSCE ) and the Council of Europe , to bring about dialogue involving the government of Belarus and the then opposition .
That attempt did not succeed , but it does represent a precedent for that kind of gathering .
The European policy that we want must clearly contribute to greater freedom and openness .
The points that we think are important are also mentioned in the resolution that is currently on the table .
If progress is made on these points over the next few months , we believe that further EU restrictions can then be lifted .
There are a couple more points I would like to add .
Firstly , we believe that the Commission also needs to take account of the fact that there is so little knowledge about the European Union in Belarus and that a satellite TV station will not change that .
More must be done from the country itself and in the country itself .
Secondly , I urge that the authorities in Minsk be asked whether it is not finally time to lift all the restrictions on travel by the children of Chernobyl .
My final comment is on a somewhat more personal note .
The new situation has , at least , delivered one thing , and that is that , for the first time in six or seven years , I have been granted a visa , making it possible for me and a delegation from Parliament to travel to Belarus for a few weeks , an opportunity that I will be happy to seize upon .
When sanctions against Belarus were lifted we hoped that the process of softening the system would go a little further .
It turns out , however , that this has not happened .
Those who have already spoken today have mentioned this , but I would like us to remember that no other political parties have been registered , the threat to cancel the registration of parties which already exist has not been lifted , newspapers which might have been granted the right of distribution have not been granted that right , and web-based attacks on Internet sites , such as the Radio Free Europe site , have been renewed .
Furthermore , President Lukashenko decided to leave Minsk and so Mrs Ferrero-Waldner 's visit could not go ahead .
I do not think this was a friendly gesture , and neither does it show that he respects and understands the significance of contacts with the European Union .
It is true that President Lukashenko has not recognised Abkhazia and Ossetia , but he has visited Abkhazia and it seems that there is to be close economic cooperation between these two partners - I will not say states , because of course for us Abkhazia is not a state .
As for the opposition , President Lukashenko calls it a ' fifth column ' , and we cannot see any readiness whatsoever to recognise it , as is the case in every country , as an important element of political opposition .
I think that in this connection we should , however , maintain some kind of dialogue .
I agree with what Mr Tannock said , that President Lukashenko should not be present in Prague .
That would clearly be going too far , but really we should make significant and more effective use of another instrument which we have at our disposal , namely a financial instrument in the form of the funding for democratic and economic development .
In connection with this I would like to ask a question - not what sums were allocated , but what sums were spent on support of democracy in Belarus last year and in 2007 , not including support for radio ?
Commissioner , the experiment with suspending sanctions against Belarus must continue , so that we can try every possibility of dialogue with that country .
The Belarusian authorities must , however , be aware that the time allowed for this experiment is limited , and that we are not going to wait with our proposals indefinitely .
We must also be very careful .
The first months have given us only a vague picture of the intentions of the authorities in Minsk .
At the same time repression continues against the Association of Poles in Belarus , Catholic priests are being expelled , and Belsat Television , the only independent television which broadcasts to Belarus , has been refused registration of an office in Minsk .
This is sufficient cause not to invite Alexander Lukashenko to the EU summit , in response to the appeals of the Belarusian opposition .
- ( PL ) Mr President , Prime Minister , Commissioner , I agree with the Commissioner that the Council decision to extend sanctions against Belarus by a year and simultaneously to suspend them for nine months was a sensible solution .
We are inviting Belarus to cooperate with us , but we have not forgotten that it is still the last undemocratic country in Europe .
Despite the positive changes which have taken place recently in Belarus and which Mr Vondra spoke about , it cannot be said that fundamental human rights are respected there , such as freedom of speech , the right to express political views , or respect for national and religious minorities .
In spite of this we are offering Belarus participation in the Eastern Partnership , because we believe that this will bring benefits , first and foremost to the people of Belarus .
The Eastern Partnership means the chance for cheaper visas , better economic cooperation and financial support for civil society .
These are ways in which Belarus can profit from the new policy , after many years of isolation .
On the cost side , however , there is undoubtedly a cynical abuse of our good will in order to lend credibility to undemocratic rule .
The Belarusian Government , which controls the main mass media and uses them not for information but for propaganda , is already announcing triumphantly that the European Union accepts the ' Belarusian model ' , in which democracy and freedom can be restricted .
In this Chamber we must state unequivocally that Belarusians have the same rights as the citizens of other free European countries , and this includes the right to demonstrate freely in Minsk today , on the 91st anniversary of Belarusian Independence .
Participation in the Eastern Partnership is intended to help them realise those rights , and if the Belarusian authorities stand in the way of this they will not be able to count on partnership and good relations with the West , especially not at the high level which Mr Vondra mentioned , and especially not when we are thinking about the Prague Summit in May , which is about the Eastern Partnership .
As long as political activists remain under arrest in Belarus , as long as young democratic opposition activists are forcefully conscripted , and as long as demonstrations are forcefully broken up by the militia and independent journalists are fined for their words and publications , the leaders of Belarus do not have the right to expect partnership and a conciliatory approach from European leaders , from the Council , the Commission and our Parliament .
- ( LT ) Belarus is at the centre of Europe and I believe it should be interested in having good relations both with the European Union and its other neighbour Russia .
Participation in the European Union 's Partnership Programme offers such opportunities .
An independent , stable Belarus , which is taking steps towards democracy , the spreading of human rights and a social market economy , is in the interest of the European Union and in particular Belarus ' immediate neighbours , Lithuania , Latvia and Poland .
I am convinced that the people of Belarus increasingly want this .
The policy of isolation with regard to Belarus was unjustified , and this must be said loud and clear .
On the other hand , as long as there are restrictions on freedom of speech and opinion , the activities of parties and the opposition , there can be no true dialogue or understanding between Brussels and Minsk .
I am not sure whether the time has come to roll out the red carpet in Brussels for all the leaders of Belarus .
Belarus is the only state in Europe which still carries out executions , although the number of these , according to calculations by organisations defending human rights , has fallen dramatically .
I believe that all Members of the European Parliament , regardless of the group they are working in , are very unhappy about this situation and would demand that Minsk abolish the death penalty at the earliest opportunity .
In seven years time Belarus is planning to build a nuclear power plant quite close to the Lithuanian border .
I would like to remind you that the European Commission pledged to follow carefully how the Belarusian government adheres to the rules of the IAEA and other international organisations , and to ensure that the nuclear power station complies with all the latest safety requirements .
- Next is the ' catch-the-eye ' period .
I have too many requests to speak , a large number of which are from the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats .
I will give the floor to just three Members .
- Mr President , the ' catch-the-eye ' procedure agreed by this House does not lay down that the President may select Members according to which group they belong to .
The ' catch-the-eye ' procedure , as I understand it , is for each individual Member to catch the eye of you , the President .
I think it is regrettable that you have just said you will only allow three members of the PPE-DE Group to speak .
That is not in accordance with our Rules of Procedure .
- Mr Beazley , this has always been the procedure , and always will be while I am in the chair .
As there are simultaneous requests , because virtually all the Members are asking for the floor at the same time - and as I am limited to five requests to speak - I cannot extend this period without encroaching on other debates .
Moreover , this is the practice that has been followed in the past , and to change it now would be to create differences from previous sittings .
Mr Beazley , the point of order has been clarified .
There is no point in insisting as I will not give you the floor .
I will not give you the floor .
The point of order has been clarified .
- ( LT ) Today the people of Belarus are marking Independence Day .
I would like to remind you that Belarus declared itself a republic on 25 March 1918 .
Right now , as our discussion is taking place , in Minsk in the square opposite the Academy of Sciences , there is a demonstration initiated by the democratic opposition .
Five thousand people have gathered in the square .
I hope that repressive measures will not be used against them .
Therefore , as before , and especially today , I would like to show solidarity with all Belarusians throughout the world , and above all with the Belarusians who have gathered in one of Minsk 's squares , those who hold dear the spirit of independence and freedom .
As for dialogue with Belarus , this is necessary , but not at any price .
What we , the European Union , can do without making concessions to the regime , but by encouraging dialogue with civil society , is to solve the question of the price of Schengen visas as soon as possible .
The Schengen visa , which costs EUR 60 , is too expensive a treat for many Belarusians .
I would like to remind you that for Russian citizens the Schengen visa is half this price .
- ( PL ) It is important to keep working on building new relations between the European Union and Belarus .
It is undoubtedly necessary to bring about a situation in which the fundamental rights of Belarusian citizens are respected , and it is not acceptable today that rights such as freedom of expression , freedom of opinion or the right to elections or an independent judiciary are not respected .
Therefore I agree with the philosophy of encouraging Belarus to make every effort to move towards democracy , and I am pleased with the decision to include Belarus in the new programme for strengthening the EU 's Eastern policy through the European Neighbourhood Policy .
I believe this will help Belarus to achieve stability and security , and to raise the standard of living of its citizens .
The Community should continue to give financial aid to the deprived in the region , and to intervene when citizens ' rights are violated .
I repeat : intervene when citizens ' rights are violated .
- ( HU ) European policy on the Belarus issue was unambiguous .
Human rights and the process of democratisation were the most important .
We did not reject rapprochement , but our conditions were also unambiguous ; today , however , the situation has changed significantly .
It is true what the Belarusian political activists and independent experts state : that the regime has not altered fundamentally , only cosmetic changes have been made .
Although a few political prisoners have been released , new ones have taken their place , and the young activists are sent not to prison but to the army .
Other things have changed , not the regime .
Many in the EU believe that the success of the Eastern Partnership depends on Belarus as well .
Brussels needs to fill the gap left by Ukraine 's uncertainty , and for this purpose even President Lukashenko may prove acceptable .
The EU institutions have succeeded in killing off their own set of conditions .
The Commission 's work over many years has been torn down by a single visit by Javier Solana .
President Lukashenko thought he was strong enough to cancel the visit of Mrs Ferrero-Waldner .
Instead of accepting the conditions , Minsk has found a partner in the compromise-loving Javier Solana .
- ( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , Commissioner , Mr President-in-Office , I have listened to you very carefully .
The Greens are in favour of dialogue , but we are only in favour of critical dialogue , in other words dialogue which does not pay a dictator lip service .
Dialogue must be used to achieve progress in human rights policy in this country , for example so that the European University for Humanistics can legally return or so that freedom of expression is no longer restricted or so that demonstrations such as today 's can take place unimpeded .
Dialogue must strengthen the democratic forces .
Only then does it make sense .
It should not stab the democratic forces in the back .
Human rights issues must be addressed as the core issue at this point and the EU 's human rights instruments must be permitted in this country .
I too believe that a partnership is premature .
That notwithstanding , visa costs should be reduced .
- ( FR ) Mr President , all the measures listed by the Council and the Commissioner have been approved because they improve the situation of the people .
Is it right to let a dictator take his place at the top , however ?
Is it not an affront to those who have been imprisoned again recently and who are still being imprisoned ?
Commissioner , Minister , I should like to ask you a very frank question : might there have been some pressure put on the European authorities by Belarus so that it could secure this invitation to the Prague summit , an invitation that I consider to be disproportionate and inappropriate ?
- Ladies and gentlemen , as there is some spare time , I can give the floor to some of the other speakers on the list .
This has nothing to do with what was said earlier .
It is simply a case of the balanced management that I always practise during this ' catch-the-eye ' period .
- ( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , ( ... ) with satisfaction of Belarus ' new willingness to collaborate with the European Union and the international community .
We are very cautious in our dealings with President Lukashenko , but a new direction in this area is welcome .
We will not tire of pointing out the need for a comprehensive and substantial shift in relation to respect for human rights .
On one point I believe that the Commission could require clearer and more consistent behaviour from Minsk : I refer to the situation of the tens of thousands of children who stay with European families for a few months .
For many years , the Belarusian Government has acted absurdly , sometimes incomprehensibly , often cancelling children 's visits at the last minute , mortifying the host families and giving another loud slap in the face to children who , often orphans from somewhat complicated family backgrounds , resented the whole affair .
Let us try and come to a change of course on this as soon as possible .
- ( SK ) Slovakia is today commemorating the 21st anniversary of the Bratislava Candlelight Demonstration .
On 25 March 1988 Christians who had been demonstrating peacefully for a free press and freedom of religion were brutally dispersed by the police and the army .
The candlelight demonstration marked the historic beginning of Slovakia 's long-awaited freedom and I therefore well understand the fears expressed by my colleagues regarding the EU 's changed attitude towards President Lukashenko .
I firmly believe that President Lukashenko should not come to Prague .
Based on my personal experience with the totalitarian regime in Slovakia , I do not believe that a totalitarian leader is capable of transforming himself into a democrat in heart and mind .
This can happen only when he is motivated by pragmatic reasons to do so .
Ladies and gentlemen , we should listen more to the Belarus opposition , to Alexandr Milinkevich , and only if we can be sure that Belarus has become genuinely democratic should we lift all sanctions against Belarus .
- Mr Beazley is also on the list , but apparently he has left the Chamber in a huff with me .
I am therefore unable to give him the floor .
President-in-Office of the Council . - Mr President , I should like to thank you for all your contributions .
As I said in my introductory remarks , in the last months we have seen steps made by the Belarus authorities that go towards the expectations formulated in the October 2008 Council conclusions .
These steps are significant in the Belarus context .
At the same time , the picture is mixed , and I think the debate here confirmed that .
We would like see further steps , such as the changes to the criminal court , registration of other media outlets and NGOs in Belarus .
During the future review of the restrictive measures , the situation in Belarus and steps made by the Government will be taken into account .
The progress in areas listed in the October 2008 Council 's conclusions will be evaluated ; we are already doing this on a permanent basis , and also discussing progress with the members of the opposition - for example , I met Alexander Kazulin in Prague just a week ago .
Subject to progress made towards democracy , human rights and the rule of law , we remain ready to deepen our relations with Belarus .
I believe that we can offer Belarus concrete incentives within the Eastern Partnership , but not only .
Now let me turn to the lively debate here on the Eastern Partnership launching summit and in particular the level of participation of Belarus .
Listen carefully : no decision has yet been taken on this issue , which requires consensus within the EU .
It will be addressed closer to the summit and I do not want to speculate at this stage .
But the pressure itself is simply the fact that no invitation has yet been issued .
I should like to thank you once again for this interesting debate and your valuable input .
We very much appreciate the interest and active involvement of the European Parliament on Belarus .
We are also encouraged by your support for the EU 's policy of engagement .
Belarus is an important neighbour of the EU and , therefore , developments there are of concern to all of us .
It is important that we send a clear and consistent message to Minsk and I am pleased that Parliament has been able to support us on this .
Engagement is important since it offers us the best way of securing the sort of changes which we wish to see in Belarus and which are important to the EU 's wider interests .
As I said in my opening remarks , I stand ready to keep this Parliament informed of developments , and I am sure that also goes for the future presidencies , not least in relation to the future in-depth review agreed by the Council last week .
Member of the Commission . - ( FR ) Mr President , honourable Members , once again I will be very quick .
As we know , Belarus has made some progress but , naturally , much remains to be done .
It is also clear that the policy of isolating Belarus has had its day , and that dialogue is the only effective way in which we can influence this country 's democratic future .
Of course , Mrs Schroedter , this is a critical dialogue ; that is absolutely clear .
The European Union has made a commitment in this regard to monitor very closely developments concerning the following five key issues : political prisoners , electoral law , freedom of the media , freedom of NGOs and freedom of assembly .
Regular reports are currently being drafted and will be instituted by our heads of mission , in Minsk , and the human rights dialogue will supplement this process .
Naturally , other issues remain , not least the university issue .
We have asked to assess the progress made in relation to the aforementioned five points , and I believe that this is necessary .
It is also important that we give our word , by which I mean , if we see progress being made , then we will also take some first steps .
From our perspective , in fact , this is a necessary process that is still in its infancy and that requires our ongoing attention .
To that end , monitoring is required .
I should also like to say at this point - and I hope we have realised that this is absolutely fair and genuine - that bilateral agreements have been concluded in the meantime between Belarus and certain countries , in particular Italy , on child-related matters .
I believe that this is very important , and we are all the same observing some progress .
On the issue of visas , the situation is equally clear .
Individual Member States can reduce the cost of visas for specific categories , including citizens .
However , a general visa facilitation agreement cannot be created as yet because it would require the entire Eastern Partnership or Neighbourhood Policy to be implemented .
Lastly , on the issue of nuclear energy , I can tell you that , last November , a Commission delegation travelled to Belarus .
We held a dialogue on energy and exchanged views on the issue of international safety and security at the highest level .
Naturally , we shall maintain this position .
- The debate is closed .
The vote will take place during the next part-session .
European conscience and totalitarianism ( debate )
- The next item is the statements by the Council and the Commission on European conscience and totalitarianism .
President-in-Office of the Council . - Mr President , I am very grateful to you for the opportunity to speak to you on a subject which has particular significance both to the Presidency and to all of us .
It is also a subject which touches the heart of what it means to be part of the European Union .
Twenty years ago , much of Central and Eastern Europe , including my own country , succeeded in throwing off the shackles of Communist rule .
It was a turning point for us and for Europe .
It opened the way for the rediscovery of individual freedom : freedom of speech and freedom of action - and also freedom to improve the quality of our lives .
The Czech Presidency considered that the 20th anniversary of this event should be commemorated as an important milestone in European history .
It is an opportunity not only to remember the fall of the Iron Curtain , but also to draw lessons from the totalitarian past across Europe as a whole .
It was subsequently agreed that 2009 be designated as the 20th anniversary of democratic change in Central and Eastern Europe .
The Czech Presidency is particularly pleased that this has been included as one of the communication priorities agreed between the institutions for 2009 .
In fact it was our proposal .
The Member States have been encouraged , and have agreed , to include this theme as appropriate within their communication activities for the year .
I am grateful to this Parliament for its support for the Czech Presidency and its willingness to participate in a number of events linked to this theme .
I would like in particular to thank many Members for their support in organising a public hearing on the issue of ' European Conscience and Crimes of Totalitarian Communism ' last week in Brussels , where we were together with Commissioner Figeľ .
This Parliament has proposed that a day be set aside to remember the victims of Nazism and totalitarian Communism .
It is for individual Member States to decide whether and how they might wish to associate themselves with such an event .
Speaking for the Czech Presidency , I can assure this Parliament that we are willing to give our support to such an initiative .
The Presidency has also launched an initiative to establish a Platform of European Memory and Conscience , with the aim of raising public awareness about European history and the crimes committed by totalitarian regimes .
I am pleased that this initiative has given rise to considerable interest among Member States , many of whom have underlined the importance of focusing on democratic values and respect for fundamental rights as key principles underpinning the European Union .
There are several reasons why there is value in commemorating such an event and in establishing a permanent communication and research project such as the platform proposed by the Czech Presidency .
Firstly , we owe it to those who suffered as result of totalitarian crimes not just to remember their experience at the hands of overbearing and unaccountable state regimes , but also to confront the past collectively .
Only by reconciling ourselves to history can we truly break away from the bonds imposed by the regimes of the past .
Secondly , it is only by appreciating fully the suffering brought about by such regimes that we can fully understand the present .
The European Union stands for everything that is the opposite of totalitarianism .
For those of us who emerged from the grip of Communism , membership of the European Union is one of the main guarantees that we will never again revert to totalitarianism .
This is a guarantee which we all share .
It is something to be valued and never taken lightly .
A collective conscience and memory of the past is a way of reinforcing the value of the present .
Thirdly , we owe it for the sake of our children .
There are lessons to be learnt from our totalitarian past .
Perhaps most important of these is the need for respect for human rights and fundamental values .
Human rights and freedom cannot be taught in a vacuum .
The seeds of human rights violations lie in history , sometimes in distant history .
Knowledge of history , and an understanding of the dangers of totalitarianism , are essential if we are to avoid repeating some of the more terrible events of the past .
It is not just cynicism and manipulation which have to be avoided : apathy and insensitivity have also to be overcome .
The European elections will be taking place in a few months ' time and I hope that they will be marked by lively and vigorous debate .
That is the hallmark of democracy .
It is something we should value .
I very much believe that the subject of our debate today rises above party politics .
It is about values more important than party differences .
It is about how we organise our societies in a way which ensures that everyone has a voice and an opportunity to express their views .
Given the recent history of my country I have focused in particular on the tragedy of totalitarian Communist rule .
But there are relatively few countries represented in this Parliament today which have not been touched by totalitarianism in one form or another over the past century .
Any system which places the state above criticism and challenge , any system which places the creativity of people at the mercy of the regime , any system which diminishes the individual has no place in the sort of societies which we seek to build within the framework of the European Union .
I therefore offer my support , and that of the Czech Presidency , for the initiatives presented by this Parliament , and look forward to working together in supporting them through greater public awareness and recognition .
Member of the Commission . - Madam President , a year ago , in April 2008 , a hearing was held for the first time in the European Union on the crimes committed by totalitarian regimes .
The hearing , organised jointly by the Commission and the Slovene Presidency , marked the start of a process , and the Commission is determined to pursue this process step by step .
This is a difficult but necessary process , as it is not just an important issue which will help us to understand the European Union 's common history , the past , better , but also one which affects the future of European integration - a process which is not just economic but of course also has cultural and historical ramifications .
It is of course for the Member States to find their own way forward in taking decisions to deal with victims ' expectations and promote reconciliation .
The European Union 's role can only be to facilitate this process by encouraging discussion and furthering the sharing of experiences and best practices .
The Commission regards Parliament 's written declaration on the proclamation of 23 August as a European day of remembrance for the victims of Stalinism and Nazism as an important initiative , which it supports in the interests of preserving the memory of totalitarian crimes and raising public awareness , particularly among the younger generations .
The hearing of 8 April 2008 showed that the Member States in Western Europe need to be more aware of the tragic history of the Member States in the East , which is also part of our shared , common , European history .
We must respond to this lack of sensitivity if we are to avoid the Union being divided on a serious issue which should instead unite us .
The Commission hopes that the parliaments of the Member States , to which this declaration is addressed , will implement this declaration in the manner most appropriate in the light of their own history and sensibilities .
The Commission is now focussing its attention on the report which it will submit in 2010 - next year - as the Council has requested .
This report will provide the opportunity for further political debate on the need for new EU initiatives .
To prepare the ground for this report , a study has been launched with the aim of providing a factual overview of the various legal instruments , methods and practices used in the Member States to safeguard the memory of totalitarian crime .
The study will be completed by the end of this year .
We are also drawing on the contributions made at the hearing and published by the Slovene Presidency .
The Prague Declaration of 3 June 2008 on European Conscience and Communism contains a number of ideas and propositions that will also be taken on board when preparing this report .
The Commission is willing to examine what scope it has to contribute to projects such as a European Memory and Conscience Platform , which was just mentioned by Deputy Prime Minister Vondra , which is designed to promote information exchanges and networking between national organisations active in this field .
More generally the Commission will examine how Community programmes , for example , the one I am responsible for - Europe for Citizens - might help heighten European public awareness on these issues .
I am looking forward to the debate .
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - ( CS ) Madam President , Mr President , Commissioner , it is a great honour for me to have the opportunity to speak today .
In 2005 we adopted a resolution on the 60th anniversary of the end of the Second World War .
We discovered that the European Parliament and the EU lacked the political will to pursue a common understanding and evaluation of European history .
While the victims of Fascism and Nazism have received decent compensation , millions of victims of Communism have been forgotten .
I am therefore delighted to announce that the resolution on the European Conscience and Totalitarianism , on which most political families in this house have been working this afternoon , is almost ready .
Europe will not be united as long as West and East do not agree to joint studies , recognition , dialogue and understanding of the shared history of Fascism , Communism and Nazism .
Therefore , in order that we in Europe can live with a common understanding in the future , we have drafted a question for the Council and the Commission .
The question is based on the Council of Europe resolution and the Council Against Racism and Xenophobia 's framework decision and it is also based on the Prague Declaration process .
I would therefore like to ask the Council and the Commission : ' What concrete steps will you be taking to set up platforms of scientific institutes in the East and in the West for studying the crimes of Communism , Nazism and Fascism ?
Is the Commission providing funding from the Europe for Citizens instrument ?
How are you supporting the establishment of 23rd August as ' Victims of Totalitarianism ' day ?
How are the Council and the Commission approaching the question of equal symbolic acknowledgement for the blameless victims of totalitarian Communism ?
What steps are the Council and the Commission taking to reconcile us with the inheritance of totalitarian Communism as a crime against humanity that is comparable in its consequences with Nazism and Fascism ?
Finally , will the Czech Presidency pass on its special task to the Swedish Presidency ? '
on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( NL ) Mr President , my group is not against the debate that is being held today per se , but we do have a great deal of difficulty with summarising the result of this debate in a resolution .
It gives the impression that we can lay down in a resolution how we should deal with Europe 's history , and specifically with the totalitarian past .
As was apparent in the negotiations that have just taken place , they were all too quickly bogged down by what wordings we could or could not use in such a resolution .
Let us , please , leave it to historians to decide how precisely our history should be interpreted , knowing that objectivity is impossible .
Obviously , politicians can help ensure that sufficient attention is paid to the past , and that certainly also applies to the crimes perpetrated by Hitler and Stalin .
Those crimes must never be forgotten and we must honour the victims .
We must also all be aware that our fellow Europeans in Central and Eastern Europe suffered under two totalitarian systems and that that is not the experience of people like me , born , as I was , in the Netherlands .
Mr Geremek , a former Member of this House , quite correctly once commented that we have not yet achieved the reunification of our memories .
As politicians , we have a responsibility when it comes to organising what it is that we want to commemorate specially , but let us do that in collaboration with historians .
A day of commemoration for all the victims of the totalitarian systems in Europe in the 20th century is a good suggestion in itself , but let us work with historians to consider what the proper format and the right date for such a day should be so that everyone can support it .
I , myself , am a historian . I think that if we were to link the day solely to the Molotov-Ribbentrop Pact it would not do justice to everything that happened in the 20th century .
It is important to debate this .
What are the dividing lines between politicians and historians ?
What do we want to commemorate , and how ?
The debate will undoubtedly rumble on .
We , as a group , will certainly get involved .
As an example of that , I want to show you this book , which will be coming out in two weeks ' time under the title The politics of the past , the use and abuse of history and in which we especially left the floor to historians , and we hope that this will really contribute to the quality of the debate in this Parliament and , of course , elsewhere .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - ( HU ) The European Union was born in the shadow of two totalitarian regimes .
It was a response to the horrors of World War II and the atrocities of the Holocaust , but just as important was its mandate to halt the territorial expansion of Stalinism and Communism , and to keep alive the hope that Europe may one day reunite in democracy and peace .
The European Union , as one of the most successful ventures in human history , has been able to fulfil both of these mandates .
There followed a long period of peace and prosperity such as has never been seen before .
It is no coincidence that Greece , Spain and Portugal , emerging from authoritarian rule , chose to join , and neither is it a coincidence that after the collapse of Communism , every Central and Eastern European country opted for the European Union and not for a third way .
Another sign of success is the fact that the Balkan states are also looking to the EU for their future , as are certain countries in Eastern Europe or the South Caucasus that in many cases are still living under oppressive regimes .
When we talk of totalitarianism , we do so not because we want to live in the past .
No , we wish to look ahead , but we can only escape the errors and sins of the past if we familiarise ourselves with the past , if we process the past .
Pacification is not possible without processing the past and acknowledging the truth .
This is one of the most important lessons of the history of the past decades , and this is why it is important that we remember the horrors of totalitarianism .
There is still much to be done .
In certain Member States - unfortunately my country , Hungary , is one of these - there still is not complete access to the archives of the secret services of the oppressive Communist regimes .
It is simply outrageous that people cannot get to know their own past .
The European Union has an important task , namely , to call upon these countries to rectify this unacceptable situation .
Secondly , unfortunately in quite a few Member States , including my home country , those holding extremist positions are increasingly gaining ground .
Today it is mainly the extreme right , at least in our country , but there are other states where it is the extreme left that is pushing forward .
It is important that we make clear to them as well the horrors of both regimes .
Among our closest neighbours as well there are oppressive regimes - one of these , Belarus , was just discussed - and thus talk of oppression is not at all limited to past history .
Europe 's conscience cannot be clear without fully examining and remembering the past .
When we remember the victims , then we are truly fulfilling our obligations , because it is our common obligation and responsibility to make the 21st century different from the 20th , so that the terrors of totalitarianism may never return to Europe .
Madam President , in the discussion on the subject of the crimes of totalitarian regimes a great deal of time is devoted to the victims , while surprisingly little is said about those who sacrificed their lives fighting against Nazism and Communism .
I would like once again to recall a man who should become a symbol of an unshakeable attitude and resistance to totalitarians - Cavalry Captain Witold Pilecki .
He voluntarily entered the Auschwitz extermination camp to organise the resistance movement and gather information about mass murders .
He managed to escape , only to die several years later from a bullet in the back of the head , dispatched on the orders of Soviet butchers .
I therefore also appeal once again for 25 May , the date of his execution , to be designated the International Day of the Heroes of the Fight Against Totalitarianism , because many unknown people , who just like Pilecki lost their lives in the fight for fundamental rights and freedoms , deserve to be remembered .
I should like to add one further comment .
Yesterday in Parliament we celebrated the European Day of home-made ice cream .
I repeat , we celebrated the European Day of home-made ice cream .
I do not therefore understand why 25 May cannot be the day when we remember the heroes of the fight against totalitarianism .
on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - ( HU ) It is 20 years ago that the uprising of Temesvár ( Timişoara ) began that would lead to the collapse of the ignominious Ceauşescu dictatorship .
We cannot think back without emotion or subjectivity to the enthusiasm with which Romanians , Hungarians , Germans of Temesvár , people of diverse ethnic groups , religions and communities , joined together bravely to resist tyranny .
It is no arbitrary party political option but above all a moral question for us to condemn unambiguously the disenfranchising , oppressive Communist dictatorship .
It is intolerable and unbearable that in twenty years this has not happened .
Last week Romanian , Hungarian and Bulgarian speakers took part in the public hearing that , in connection with the Prague Declaration , placed the crimes of Communism on the agenda .
The resolution subsequently adopted states the following : the European Community must abandon the double standard that is evident in the different ways in which Nazism and Communism have been judged .
Both inhumane dictatorships deserve equal condemnation .
I ask the European Parliament to stand in solidarity with the victims of Fascist Communism and to help defeat the enduring legacy of Communism in accordance with the aforementioned moral , historical and political exigencies .
Only in this way can a divided Europe be truly unified and become that which Prime Minister Gordon Brown spoke of yesterday , in relation to the 20th anniversary , as follows : ' My friends , today there is no Old Europe , no New Europe , no East or West Europe , there is only one Europe , our home Europe ' .
So be it !
on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group . - ( CS ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , the efforts to assert that Communism equates to Nazism or Fascism and to create new so-called institutes or platforms for research smack of political opportunism .
The radical right needs it also because of the forthcoming elections .
It has nothing to do with objective , genuinely independent assessments .
There are already enough historical institutes and centres dealing with that .
I am not blind of course and under so-called Communism there was repression , injustice and coercion .
Yes , it is necessary to investigate and justly condemn the crimes .
Yet even Jan Zahradil of the ODS commented at the hearings : ' The identification of Communism with German Nazism is and is not correct .
It has to be done in a way which takes account of relationships and analyses them ' .
If someone does not want to see the difference between Communism and Nazism , between Communists in the past and Communists in the present , who like myself represent significant numbers of Communist voters here in Parliament after democratic elections , then they are perhaps simply trying to lump me together with the Nazis .
- ( NL ) Madam President , it is good that a number of initiatives have been taken to pay due remembrance to the victims of totalitarian systems .
However , there is no sense in remembering the victims of defunct regimes such as those of Communism and National Socialism , of course , whilst disregarding the victims of current totalitarian threats such as that of Islamism .
Condemning totalitarian Islam does not in any way imply condemnation of individual Muslims in Europe who observe the rules , values and standards of a democratic state under the rule of law , and for whom faith is a private matter .
Yet we do have to have the courage to recognise that political Islam , totalitarian Islam - not only Islamic states , or some such states , but also terrorist organisations such as Al Qaeda and related movements - continues to claim many victims worldwide .
The appropriate course of action , therefore , is for the European Union to take a number of strong initiatives to remember those victims , too , and to ensure that the number of victims of such totalitarian Islamic organisations and countries is reduced as far as possible , preferably to zero .
After all , we must have the courage to admit - and this , too , is a problem in the European Union - that criticising totalitarian Islam is not always welcome because the spirit of political correctness prevails here .
What is more , totalitarian Islam was not even mentioned in the Commission and Council statements just now , when what we should in fact be doing is having the courage to contemplate that problem , too , and to take the necessary measures .
- Madam President , in 1948 President Truman wrote , ' Now we are faced with exactly the same situation with which Britain and France were faced in 1939 in dealing with Hitler .
A totalitarian state is no different , whether you call it Nazi , Fascist , Communist or Franco 's Spain .
The oligarchy in Russia is a Frankenstein dictatorship worse than any of the others , Hitler included ' .
So the question is why , 61 years later , we still have to argue about the same problems .
I think that today what we need is not only the economic and political enlargement of Europe but the enlargement of European awareness of the massive crimes against humanity which occurred everywhere in Europe in the 20th century .
We need the integration of European historic perception - the integration of prejudices and different views of history - as only in this way can we proceed to the better Europe of the future .
No , we have to deal with , not argue about , the question of dictatorships .
We must start with the victims - with the equality of victims - because every victim of any totalitarian regime is to be considered equal in human dignity and deserves justice and remembrance as well as Europe-wide recognition and guarantees of ' never again ' .
Therefore I would say that it is hypocritical to shun or postpone this debate on these questions and the reaching of conclusions .
It is not a matter for academic study .
We have enough testimonies of mass crimes . We need political and moral will to proceed .
I am very thankful , both to the Czech Presidency and to Commissioner Figeľ , for their statements , which give hope that we can reach an all-European understanding .
- ( PL ) Madam President , Commissioner , I would like to begin my speech by quoting from a poem written by Osip Mandelstam , one of the greatest Russian poets of the 20th century .
I will quote the words in the language in which they were written , and so in Russian :
( the Member then spoke in Russian )
They are terrible words .
For that poem Osip Mandelstam was sent into exile .
He died near Vladivostok , on the way to his destination .
In December 1938 his body was placed in a common grave .
Osip Mandelstam symbolises the millions of victims of 20th-century totalitarian regimes in Europe .
The Europe of today should remember the victims of 20th-century totalitarian regimes worldwide .
Those victims are today the foundation of our memory , the lasting spiritual basis of European democracy .
At the same time we see the entire history of the 20th century .
We remember the victims of authoritarian systems , the victims in European countries , in nationalistic and militaristic regimes , in Spain , in Portugal and in Greece .
I would like to draw attention to a seminar held in our group , the Socialist Group in the European Parliament , and to a book devoted to problems of history and politics which our group is going to publish .
We want to face up to this problem seriously .
We are opposed to the manipulation of that memory , and to the insulting of that memory , where it is used today in an ideological battle , in a party fight in the European political system .
We remember the victims .
The victims of 20th-century totalitarian regimes must be the foundation of today 's democracy in Europe .
. - ( LV ) Ladies and gentlemen , unfortunately , Europe 's common values still do not contain a requirement to make a comprehensive and truthful assessment of the crimes of various totalitarian regimes in Europe and their consequences .
Half-truths , one-sided interpretations and the denial of historical truth weakens Europeans .
The framework decision on racism and xenophobia imposes criminal liability only for the gross trivialisation of Nazi crimes , but remains silent about the crimes of totalitarian Communism in Europe .
It is high time to apply an objective method to the assessment of totalitarian crimes .
We can make use of the experience of the European Court of Human Rights .
It bases itself on universally recognised infringements of international rights and principles , which are well-known to all and have been applicable at least since the Nuremberg trials .
We must , at last , truthfully reflect Europe 's recent totalitarian history in the name of Europe 's future and Europe 's common values !
- ( DE ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , nearly 20 years after the fall of the Iron Curtain , this is the first debate in this House on an issue which could drive a wedge between people in the East and in the West , even in our European Community .
Why ?
The view of a totalitarian regime from the outside is very different from the view from the inside .
The way in which 20th century European history was dealt with and retold differed greatly , especially in the individual Member States .
Moreover , in some Central and Eastern European Member States , people who disregarded human rights or sent people to camps or to their death without following the legal procedure are still in office and held in esteem .
It poisons our common future if we fail to acknowledge this properly .
Europe should therefore not remain inactive .
I welcome the fact that we have now given this issue a European platform .
I trust that it will not stop with today 's debate and that we and the Commission shall together begin a process to implement the projects which you mentioned .
I hope that we shall manage through this process to bring perpetrators who are still alive to book and to commemorate the victims , in order to develop greater understanding for each other in the interest of a common future .
- ( EL ) Madam President , the escalation in the European Union 's wretched anti-Communist strategy is a brazen insult to the people : with the counterfeiting of history , slander and lies , Fascism is being equated with Communism .
The most reactionary and barbaric regime to which capitalism gave birth , namely Fascism , is being equated with the most progressive idea conceived by man , namely Communism and the abolition of the exploitation of man by man .
It is an insult to the memory of twenty million Soviets who sacrificed their lives to conquer Fascism .
This vulgar anti-Communism is targeted not so much at the past ; it is targeted mainly at the present and at the future .
Its aim for today is to reduce grassroots resistance and to shift the burden of the capitalist crisis on to the workers and its aim for tomorrow is to anticipate the inevitable general challenge to and overthrow of the capitalist system .
That is why it is hitting out at Communists and ruining socialist / Communist prospects .
It also wants to coerce the Communist parties , who stand firmly by their principles , into abandoning them and integrating .
You deceive yourselves .
Communists have no intention of bowing their heads .
They have defended their ideology even with their lives .
We will not be signing any declaration of repentance for the imperialists .
Their overthrow is a social need and we shall serve it consistently .
We are not afraid of you .
The social evolution will continue ; that is what terrifies you and why you are waging this campaign .
- ( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I think that today we can in fact identify those who practise totalitarianism .
The first country that comes to mind is China ; China is at present a country where forced abortions are performed , a country containing Laogai , a real concentration camp where people work for the big multinationals or the Chinese state and where priests and political opponents are incarcerated .
China is therefore the first country of which I think .
The second I would say is Islamic totalitarianism , above all in connection with Sharia law .
Here , Islam effectively becomes totalitarian law , so that the rights of other religions or of women or of all are in fact suppressed .
Then there is a resurgence of a certain kind of totalitarianism even in Europe , and I would like to take a moment to look at this .
Hungary was mentioned before - I was personally present at demonstrations in Hungary at the remembrance of the national uprising in 1956 and I saw acts of repression by the police towards demonstrators and I myself was searched and asked for identification when they knew perfectly well who I was .
There is therefore a kind of totalitarianism emerging there , but there is also another emerging totalitarianism in the declarations made by Prime Minister Zapatero , but also Chancellor Merkel and President Sarkozy , on the subject of the Pope 's statements in Africa and other events connected with the Catholic Church .
These Heads of State or Government have never spoken out against other religions , but are quite radical when it comes to intervening to attack the Catholic Church .
This results in an atmosphere of intolerance in certain countries , as we saw the other day at Notre Dame for example , when worshippers were attacked by anti-Catholic activists .
- ( HU ) Christianity and the doctrine of universal human rights presents us with a single measure , that of human dignity and unconditional respect for human life .
For this reason we must condemn all attempts , so fashionable today , to calculate which inhumane dictatorship killed or humiliated more people .
A democrat , a European cannot accept the fact that even today , even in this Parliament , there are people for whom the crimes of the Communist dictatorship are excusable and forgivable .
A double standard distinguishing between victim and victim , crime and crime , suffering and suffering , death and death , is unacceptable .
Those who try to justify the crimes of Communist dictatorship argue that all those horrors were committed by those regimes in the name of noble ideals , in the name of equality and fraternity .
Ladies and gentlemen , Madam President , this is an enormous lie , and all they have done is to be counted not in their favour but against them , for it was with the promise of noble aims that they deceived people , as the writer István Örkény said on Hungarian Radio at the time of the 1956 Revolution : ' We lied by night and we lied by day , we lied on every wavelength ' .
For this reason , in the name of freedom , democracy and a common European principle we ask , we demand that there be a common European day of remembrance and a monument to the victims of Communism , that a European museum , archive and research institute be established to document the crimes of Communism .
Let us exclude from the ranks of democrats those who continue to this day to justify the actions of Communism and let Europe back wholeheartedly the condemnation of every inhumanity .
May as many of us as possible support the Prague Declaration .
- ( ET ) I am certain that no one in this hall - not even those who have something better to do at the moment - would condone what took place 60 years ago in the Baltic States , when nearly 100 000 people , mostly women and children , were deported to Siberia .
This is made all the more regrettable by the fact that in the context of the already ongoing election struggle , some are pointing their fingers at the social democrats , claiming that we do not understand the criminality of these events .
The words ' socialism ' and ' Communism ' may indeed mean different things to different members of our party , but no one could justify the crimes that were perpetrated .
Why is it necessary for us to talk about this - not just for historians , but also for politicians ?
Because without giving a fair assessment of the past , we cannot be certain that we have done everything possible to prevent it from being repeated .
This is important , because the shadows of the past have not disappeared .
While it is difficult today to imagine Hitler being raised onto a pedestal , Stalin 's monument stands proudly in the main square of his home town Gori .
In Russia last year , Stalin was voted one of the 12 greatest individuals in history .
- ( PL ) Madam President , it is sometimes said that Nazi totalitarianism originates from the Right and Communist totalitarianism from the Left .
This is not very precise .
Racial hatred and class hatred are only two varieties of the same thing - hatred - which devastates the human conscience and social relations .
We heard one such statement here a moment ago , the statement by Mr Pafilis .
Hatred gives birth to oppression , and oppression is the negation of a republic , a democracy and a country ruled by law .
Left and Right are both found in a democratic system .
Nazi and Communist totalitarianism destroyed democracy .
Therefore it was not the case that Nazism was on the Right , and Communism on the Left .
Nazism and Communism were all around .
Whoever today relativises the criminal character of totalitarianism , be it Nazi or Communist totalitarianism , stands in opposition to the traditions of a country ruled by law and to democracy .
It is , by the way , characteristic that while the European Right does not relativise Nazi crimes today , the European Left does relativise Communist crimes .
This is abundantly clear from the attitude of the socialists and Communists to the draft resolution on the matter which we have been negotiating today .
In this Chamber we are not voting on the truth about history , we are voting on the truth about ourselves , and about our moral judgments .
( Applause )
- Madam President , why is it that democrats feel so restrained about naming dictators and those who dedicated their careers to combating democracy , enslaving countries , persecuting those who dared to speak against them and are responsible for crimes ?
This evening , we are not talking about totalitarianism , we are not talking in euphemisms : we are talking about Hitler 's Fascist , criminal dictatorship and Joseph Stalin 's Communist criminal dictatorship .
When I was 16 years old I lived in Frankfurt am Main , which is two hours ' tank drive away from Prague .
Minister , Alexander Dubček , whom we honoured in this House , tried very hard to liberalise the system .
He spoke about the human face of Communism .
The inhuman face of Communism was Leonid Brezhnev and his predecessors and successors .
I believe , Commissioner , that if we are to stand by our beliefs we should honour the victims of Communism and Fascism .
We should make no distinction between these twin criminals - that is what they were .
The only difference is that Hitler lost the war and Stalin won the war .
Today the President of this Parliament honoured the memory of those deported from three Baltic States - Estonia , Latvia and Lithuania .
But , Minister , your country suffered : Jan Palach lost his life .
He tried desperately to demonstrate the limits to which he would go to show that the regime under which he lived was unacceptable .
I remember listening , aged 16 , to Radio Prague as the tanks occupied your capital city in Wenceslas Square .
' Don 't forget us ' is what your brave countrymen said .
This evening , Commissioner , we do not forget those who suffered .
We should have the courage to name those who were responsible , but we should look to the future to ensure that never again this continent suffers from Hitlerism or Stalinism .
( Applause )
- ( ES ) Madam President , let us not forget - I agree - and let us not make too many subtle distinctions : from the political viewpoint , all forms of totalitarianism deserve condemnation and Communism and Fascism did irreparable damage to this continent .
Today we are a united continent of 27 nations and 500 million people who share values of freedom , democracy and human rights , and we ought to condemn equally the totalitarian Communism that destroyed Central and Eastern Europe and the Nazi-Fascism that years before had destroyed many European countries , including my own .
I lived for 32 years under Franco 's dictatorship and I shall not forget that , and nor will some of the speakers , from Greece or Portugal for instance , have forgotten their past .
I never forgot , even when I was young , the suffering that people were experiencing under Communist dictatorship .
I was never a Communist and I have always condemned Communism .
This was not an obstacle to my being an anti-Franco fighter and condemning the Franco system .
The struggle is the same .
We must fight for the same principles , the same values and retain a permanent memory of the victims of all these forms of totalitarianism .

- ( LV ) Madam President , Mr Vondra , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , those who have studied history in Europe , the majority I believe , know that the Second World War began on 1 September 1939 , when Hitler invaded Poland .
A much smaller number of people know that Hitler was able to do this because on 23 August 1939 he and Stalin had signed an agreement : a non-aggression pact .
Even fewer people know that for two years Stalin 's regime supplied Hitler and Hitler 's army with fuel and industrial materials so that Hitler could conquer Western Europe .
Even fewer people know that for the whole of the 1930s offensive weapons , tanks and parachutists had been prepared for Stalin .
While Hitler had 400 parachutists ready , Stalin had prepared 1 million parachutists , ready to conquer .
Furthermore , this foreign policy had been supported in the decisions of the Communist Bolshevik party of the Soviet Union .
In various closed sessions of the Communist party , resolutions were passed to the effect that the countries of Western Europe should be set at loggerheads so that the Soviet Union would then be able to liberate them .
There is still more : in relation to domestic policy , on 5 December 1937 those Latvians who had remained living in Soviet Russia began to be arrested and exterminated in their entirety .
Over a two-year period , 70 000 Latvians living in the Soviet Union were killed solely because they were Latvians .
So , how should we refer to this regime , where foreign policy was aggressive , and where domestic policy was directed towards exterminating the country 's own residents ?
It was a totalitarian , criminal regime , just like Nazism . Thank you .
- ( HU ) It is difficult to write a common European history , since after World War II , the western and eastern halves of Europe lived through different histories .
Central and Eastern Europe and the Baltic states were victims equally of both Nazi and the Soviet dictatorships , yet we cannot equate Nazism with Stalinism .
No one can dispute that millions fell victim to the Stalinist dictatorship , entire peoples were dislocated , and no one can exonerate or relativise that .
The Shoah , Nazi Germany 's organised industry for the extermination of the Jewish people solely on the basis of origin , was an atrocity unparalleled in human history .
In Western Europe it is often not understood that for us , liberation from Nazism heralded at the same time a new occupation , the beginning of Soviet oppression .
For that reason , 9 May is felt differently by old and new Member States , especially the Baltic states , which lost their independent statehood and whose intelligentsia was wiped out .
It would be good to acknowledge the past without politics , without present-day political bias , and to formulate a common historical narrative .
In the words of the Hungarian poet Attila József , ' it is a great enough struggle to admit the past ' .
- ( LV ) Madam President , several of my fellow Members have already mentioned that today we are remembering the deportations of 60 years ago carried out by the Soviet regime , when it transported people to Siberia .
We also know , however , how difficult it is express condemnation for the Communist regime equal to that for other totalitarian regimes .
This is because we are talking not only about the past , but also about the future .
This week it became known that in Latvia the leader on the list of European election candidates for the Harmony Centre association , whose newly-elected representatives are to join the socialist group here in the European Parliament , will be Alfrēds Rubiks , the former leader of the Latvian branch of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union , who was tried in Latvia for the crimes of the regime .
This is a person who is a supporter of Communist ideology and resisted the restoration of Latvian independence to the very last ; now he is to be elected by a country which he himself has disavowed .
This also provides the answer as to why in the future it will continue to be difficult for the European Parliament to condemn crimes equally , and why good and bad totalitarian regimes will always exist . Thank you .
. - ( RO ) Communism is a deceitful philosophy .
In theory , it talks about well-being , equality and respect for human rights , while in practice , it has meant lies , discrimination , hatred and even crime .
Communism must be condemned with all the means at our disposal .
This was done in Romania in 2006 through the words of the country 's president , as a result of a report compiled by a presidential commission set up for this purpose .
Communism nullifies everything that stands for liberty and makes people dependent on a system .
Anyone who has never lived under Communism cannot understand how much a person 's life and way of thinking can be affected by a totalitarian system .
If I could turn back the clock , I would make those who have lived their whole lives under capitalism , but yearn for Communism , live in the Romania of the 1980s .
In Romania the Communist regime was imposed with the help of Russian troops , at the cost of hundreds of thousands of lives lost in labour camps and prisons .
With their only crime being not to submit to the totalitarian system , politicians , intellectuals , peasants , representatives of different religious denominations and , in general , citizens who were model members of the community disappeared .
While the major problems caused by a bankrupt economic system can be resolved through adequate measures , human beings need time to forget , forgive and adapt to a new way of life , even if it is incomparably better .
Democracy has provided freedom of thought , expression and movement .
It must also provide security for tomorrow .
There is no difference between poverty caused by the lack of material goods and poverty caused by a lack of resources for buying goods .
The day when we successfully get rid of poverty , the spectre of Communism will disappear for good .
Fellow Members , Romania and the other countries in Eastern Europe ended up under this system as a result of the decisions made by the world 's leaders , only one of whom was a Communist .
The remainder represented democratic systems .
Do not forget this historical truth when evaluating , assessing or deciding on the current situation or on the future of the former Communist states , whether members of the European Union or not .
- ( SL ) I note with regret that none of the former Communist countries has yet fully investigated and recognised the crimes of Communism in the period following the Second World War .
Because these regimes were in power for decades after the war , they managed to destroy most of the evidence .
This is why the criminals , or the perpetrators , have not even been named , let alone convicted .
History was written by the victors .
The European Union must call upon all of the countries which were previously ruled by Communist regimes to enable their historians to carry out research and include the whole truth about the post-war era in school textbooks .
They should also write about the culpability of the Western allied forces which returned or extradited exiles into the hands of the Communists .
The European Union should also call upon all of the Member States to consider renaming those streets and squares which are named after controversial heroes , such as Tito in Yugoslavia , who were accountable for many post-war killings , by virtue of their roles at the time .

- ( PL ) Madam President , when I hear in this Chamber that the Communists are not prepared to hang their heads , despite the tens of millions of victims of the construction of the White Sea-Baltic Sea Canal , the millions of people deported to Siberia from many nations ( including Russians , but the Poles alone have to be counted in millions ) , and the sentencing of entire nations to death , for example the Crimean Tartars , I am astounded and outraged .
Cavalry Captain Pilecki , who went into Auschwitz as a volunteer , and was later also imprisoned by the Communists , told his wife ' Auschwitz was only a game ' .
My country was affected by both totalitarian systems , and the wounds are still healing today .
No such system has the right to exist .
We should honour those who fought against totalitarianism , and we should honour the memory of the victims .
- ( PL ) Madam President , the European Community must make every effort to keep alive the memory of heroes and not to allow the trivialisation of totalitarian crimes .
The fate of those who resisted , of those who , like Cavalry Captain Pilecki , were murdered , should always be in our minds , especially because the idea of European integration arose among people opposed to Nazism and Communism .
Furthermore , it was this idea which prevented future conflicts and the emergence of totalitarian regimes after the end of the War .
The establishment of an International Day of the Heroes of the Fight Against Totalitarianism would be a step in the direction of a common understanding of 20th-century European history and part of the common fight against mutual prejudice and ignorance concerning historical facts .
Keeping the crimes of totalitarian regimes - Nazi and Communist - in the minds of Europeans can make us hope that our continent will never again be the scene of such tragic events .
- Madam President , there is a further dimension to this debate .
It is not only a united Europe that needs urgently to look at the entirety of the past , but the same is particularly true of the European Left .
Without a thorough scrutiny of its past , the Left in some of the former Communist states is obliged - compels itself - to live with a false past , a past from which all sorts of painful events are screened out .
This further forces the Left to protect this false past and thereby its democratic credibility is eroded .
Seeing as the Western Left fully accepts this unreconstructed post-Communist Left as a legitimate partner , it too finds itself obliged to defend an indefensible past .
Consequently , its own commitment to democracy is , to that extent , weakened .
- Madam President , Europe has a turbulent history with regard to totalitarianism and the restriction of basic freedoms .
In some parts of Europe the 20th century was hallmarked by such totalitarian regimes .
It is our moral obligation today to make sure that every citizen of the European Union enjoys the same rights .
It is highly important that the EU should also support the rights of minorities , especially since many countries all around the world do not respect very basic rights in this sense .
At the same time I would like to point out that , while the EU speaks out against discrimination and violation of human rights in cases like Tibet , it is clear to all of us that even within the European Union there are ethnic and linguistic minorities which are very often targets of cultural and linguistic assimilation .
This practice of some nation states in the EU is an aspect that should be seriously reviewed and reconsidered .
The Hungarians in Romania , the people I represent , are such a case .

- ( PL ) Madam President , the suggestion by Mr Szájer to establish a day commemorating the history of the victims of totalitarianism is quite right .
I believe it is right because whilst the Nazi horror is fairly well known , and even some Germans have tried to take it in , paradoxically little is known about Stalinism .
The paradox lies in the fact that even the Siberians , from Stalin 's own country , thought that he was a good man and that the cause of Russia 's misfortunes lay elsewhere .
We cannot hear the millions who lost their lives in Siberia , and we will never know how they suffered , but I know of one of the victims who is still alive .
That person still feels , even when just walking down the street , that he is no longer alive .
That is a symptom of having been sent to Siberia .
Those who survived know what that suffering was like .
There is a Russian saying ( the Member then said some words in Russian ) - which means ' if you have not been there , you will be , and if you have been there , you will not forget it ' .
I think we should speak openly about both of these forms of totalitarianism .
- Madam President , we should do everything we can to halt Europe 's moral decline .
Opportunism is most evident when gross crimes against humanity committed during the last century are neglected .
Unfortunately , such negligence of crimes of Communist totalitarianism brings with it an appeasement of all neo-Nazis in Germany , Russia or anywhere : any of them could ask , if the Soviets are forgiven , then why should not our ancestors also be forgiven ?
The roots of that bad phenomenon lie in Nuremberg , where Nazis were simply acquitted of initiating a conspiracy with Stalin in the Second World War .
The greatest crime was ignored because of due process .
Why ?
Because the shadow of Stalin - Hitler 's homologue - was cast over the tribunal for two crucial years .
Even at that time , the West capitulated morally to the Soviets . But there is no reason to stay limited of mind and fearful forever .
President-in-Office of the Council . - ( CS ) Ladies and gentlemen , today I will complete my speech here in Czech .
I will try to summarise and at the same time to answer some of the questions that have been raised here .
I think there are three issues .
Firstly I would like to thank everyone participating in last week 's hearing and in this plenary debate .
If it has been the first debate of its kind for a long time then that can only be a good thing and I think that the first conclusion is that we must lead the debate and we must continue with it .
That is the aim of the Platform of Memory and Conscience .
Why is it important to have such a platform at the European level ?
It is important as an instrument against forgetting .
If we forget the past , of course , we create an opportunity for it to return through the back door in the future .
This is also a chance to combat the relativisation of past crimes .
Hitler and Stalin are two of a kind .
Of course there were countries where Nazism enabled or helped to bring about the subsequent establishment of Communism and its associated crimes .
Any kind of relativisation , however - and I do not want to politicise here - any kind of relativisation is extremely dangerous .
Secondly we must retain historical awareness as part of European education .
And here I think we must boost the financial instruments in order to ensure that awareness of Europe 's totalitarian past has a place in the area of education .
This was one of the findings of the hearing that was held last week .
This requires resources and I would like to thank the Commission and Commissioner Figeľ specifically for the fact that the Commission is willing to cooperate in this matter .
Last but not least is the question of where the debate should lead .
The Presidency is short , lasting just six months .
We are at the half-way point and of course I am not pretending that when this Parliament breaks up shortly we can achieve the impossible , but I do think that the idea of creating certain Europe-wide institutions , whether museums , research institutes or foundations , is what we need .
The hearing last week was presented jointly by the representatives of several similar institutions that exist at the national level and in my opinion there is a very urgent need to have such institutions at the pan-European level .
However , that task belongs more to bodies that are responsible for continuity than to the six-monthly rotating Presidency .
If our task was to contribute towards initiating certain debates then I would like to thank you once again for responding to this debate and I challenge those of you who will be responsible for continuity in the future to continue the debate and perhaps one day it will lead to such institutions really being set up .
Member of the Commission . - ( SK ) I have already explained the essence of the Commission 's mission in my introduction and I can only confirm once again that we are both ready and willing , which is also a factor .
If the European Commission is willing to assist in this process , then I have already mentioned the next stages , which would involve completing studies of various methods and mechanisms of Member States in this area and submitting the awaited report next year .
However , I also have something to add which is rather at the margins of the debate .
Some speakers have made the point that it is the 20th anniversary of the collapse of Communism , the fall of the Berlin Wall and of the Iron Curtain in Europe and that a lot of time has passed .
In my opinion it is never too late and it would be remiss of this Parliament , this recently expanded Parliament , not to make a statement about the crimes of totalitarian Communism and not to initiate a discussion , because this is an experience that many people have brought to this place and indeed a majority of those in the debate were from the new Member States .
I too lived most of my life under the totalitarian system in Czechoslovakia and it is from the personal and general experience of all concerned that we should create a European memory , a European fellowship , and at the same time bolster the processes which prevent the return of totalitarianism and the trivialisation and denial of its crimes , or denial of the truth .
The denial of these crimes actually amounts to a relativisation not only of the truth but also of ethics and morality , leading to further and further problems and to the idea that eliminating people means eliminating the problem .
The idea that problems can be eliminated by eliminating people is one of the principles of Stalinism .
I view the expansion of the EU in a broader sense and precisely for that reason I am able to identify the different forms of totalitarianism that have been mentioned , the different forms in different countries .
We have a responsibility to identify them , to remember and to take adequate steps from the standpoint of restitution , rehabilitation , establishing justice , upholding the supremacy of truth , respect for human dignity and everything else that stands for freedom and democracy .
I would also like to say that we often feel as if threats come from far away and from outside , and that the dividing lines of today 's world have nothing to do with religion or civilisation or culture , but rather with respect for life and human beings on the one hand ( defined through human rights ) and fanaticism of whatever kind on the other .
There are many different kinds of fanaticism .
We are familiar with them even in the world of today and that is precisely why the education mentioned by Alexander Vondra is so important , so that both the young and also the not-so-young will be able to distinguish human respect from extremism , populism , nationalism or fanaticism in any of its many different forms .
I would like to end by stressing that the European Commission genuinely supports this process and that it will be looking for ways to assist it .
This debate is just one step but other matters will follow .
We must do much more at the Member State level .
I would also like to end by saying that today 's expansion of the EU is possible thanks to the sacrifice of many people and that it has not happened through some kind of automated process .
Neither a united Europe , nor democracy , nor freedom nor the legal state came into being automatically but instead as a result of enormous efforts and frequent bloodshed .
We must remember this .
I would finally like to end with what was said by - I think - Mr Tunne Kelam about the expansion of the Union involving not only geography , markets and numbers of countries but also an expansion of awareness , an expansion of memory and an expansion of respect and responsibility .
If we can include this in the process that we are now celebrating , the five years since expansion , then we will be ready for further processes and for the future .
If we fail to include it then the path will be much more difficult .
Thank you very much and my best wishes for an expansion not only of memory but also of responsibility .
- The debate is closed .
The vote will take place during the next part-session .
Written Statements ( Rule 142 )
in writing . - ( BG ) Justice is one of Europe 's fundamental values .
I support my fellow Members from UEN and resolution which they have tabled , by emphasising that the EU is founded on the rule of law , which is one of the basic features of democracy .
This is precisely the principle on which the parliamentary elections must take place .
However , the problem in Bulgaria of vote buying indicates the exact opposite .
After the previous local elections were repeatedly compromised by the blatant buying of votes of GERB ( Citizens for European Development of Bulgaria ) , DPS ( Movement for Rights and Freedoms ) and BSP ( Bulgarian Socialist Party ) , ordinary citizens were left feeling that they had no right to choose .
As a result , this makes them much less willing to vote again .
In spite of the existing criminal code and the numerous signs of violations of the law , not a single person mentioned in the Commission 's report has yet been convicted of these crimes because the relevant law enforcement authorities are clearly unwilling to stop vote buying .
In Bulgaria the judiciary still shows a lack of determination and the well-known culprits are again preparing pre-election campaigns , while those who sold their votes are now looking for new buyers offering the best bid .
I want to stress that as long as these violations of the law are allowed in Bulgaria and the state continues not to take any action on the issue , honest voters are in actual fact being deprived of their basic human right - the right to choose !
I urge Parliament not to sit back and do nothing .
Ladies and gentlemen , the problem with totalitarianism in Europe stems from the fact that the experiences of particular Member States in this area are very different .
Many Europeans simply do not know what life was like under totalitarian systems , and someone who does not understand totalitarianism has a natural tendency to disregard crimes committed under such systems , seeing them instead as events which took place in the course of history .
However , Communism and Fascism not only actively fought against most of the values of Europe , but were ready to break all the principles of ethics in the name of sick and degenerate ideas - and these systems really did break those principles , bringing pain , suffering and death to millions of people .
The more Europeans know about the true face of totalitarianism , the better it will be for the future of the European Union .
This is not a matter of celebrating the sufferings of millions of people .
It is about understanding the dramatic consequences which came from and are still coming from totalitarian practices in many countries in Europe .
Solidarity , freedom , empathy , toleration , dialogue - all of these values look somewhat different if we look at them from the perspective of experiences with totalitarianism .
Let us remember this .
Establishing an International Day of the Heroes of the Fight Against Totalitarianism would undoubtedly help raise the level of knowledge about a painful past .
That in turn would contribute to a reduction in prejudice , a limiting of stereotypes and a growth of the hope that never again will we in Europe experience totalitarianism .
( The sitting was suspended at 8.15 p.m. and resumed at 9 p.m. )

Strengthening security and fundamental freedoms on the Internet ( debate )
- The next item is the report by Stavros Lambrinidis , on behalf of the Committee on Civil Liberties , Justice and Home Affairs , with a proposal for a European Parliament recommendation to the Council on strengthening security and fundamental freedoms on the Internet .
rapporteur . - ( EL ) Mr President , we live in an age where everyone - governments , private companies and even criminals - seek the greatest possible access to our electronic data , to our private life .
The Internet in particular provides details about our private lives , something which was unimaginable a few years ago .
At the same time , it is clear that it enhances the facility for us to exercise our fundamental rights , such as freedom of speech , freedom of political action , freedom of knowledge and education and freedom of association .
It is less clear that we are in danger of these very freedoms being violated as a result of using the Internet , with secret surveillance by governments , private companies or even criminals of what we do or look at on the Internet .
It is therefore even less clear how we can strike a balance here , how we can regulate the Internet in such a way that allows us to draw on its benefits , while limiting its obvious dangers .
My report attempts to answer these questions .
Among other things :
firstly , it calls for a European initiative to create a global Internet Bill of Rights ;
secondly , it signals the need for an effective but proportional fight against old and new forms of cybercrime , such as identity theft and the protection of intellectual property rights , while pointing out that legislation must not result in the systematic surveillance of all citizens , suspects and non-suspects , right and wrong , because this would , of course , be a blatant invasion of their privacy ;
thirdly , as regards citizens ' right of access to the Internet , it calls on governments to ensure such access to the poorest citizens in the remotest regions ;
fourthly , it emphasises that e-illiteracy will be the new illiteracy of the 21st century , just as not knowing how to read or write was in the 20th century and that access to the Internet is therefore a fundamental right which is equivalent to the right to access to schooling ;
fifthly , it calls for measures to limit consent from users , a major issue which I shall now discuss .
The question of consent is extremely complicated and , if we do not resolve it right now , it will come back to haunt us .
Let me give you an example : a few decades ago , no-one knew which newspaper I read ; only my family and perhaps a few of my friends .
That is why - and this is especially true during a dictatorship - the secret services tried to find out , so that they could put me on file .
So that they could say Mr Lambrinidis reads such and such a newspaper , so he must be a Communist or he must be pro-American .
Today , every time I read a newspaper , I leave a trail .
This means that private companies can compile similar ' files ' , can create a profile for me , of the policies in which I believe , of my eating habits and even of my health .
Does the fact that I visit these websites mean that I consent to my society going back 40 years ?
We urgently need to pass sensible laws which strike a balance between combating crime and protecting rights in the electronic age .
This balance appears difficult but it is not .
It is feasible .
We need to stop dealing with cyberspace as if it were something outside our daily life , something separate .
It is our life .
That means that any rights or barriers which apply to the police and private companies inside the Internet must also apply outside , otherwise we run the risk of abolishing freedoms for the sake of security and , ultimately , of having neither freedoms nor real security .
To close , my warmest thanks to the shadow rapporteurs of all the political groups whom I see here in the House for their very considerable support .
My thanks to all the MEPs in the Committee on Civil Liberties , Justice and Home Affairs for the unanimous support which this report received from all parties .
I look forward to its being approved by plenary .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , I would like to thank not only Parliament in general but especially Mr Stavros Lambrinidis for his important report , which provides very timely input to the promotion of fundamental freedoms and security on the Internet .
Whilst the Internet has acquired a stronger and stronger weight in modern societies and economies , impacting in many areas of our lives , the tremendous pace of technological development raises , at the same time , significant challenges which need to be duly addressed if we want the full opportunities of the Internet and the information society to unravel .
We particularly share Mr Lambrinidis 's concerns on the protection of personal data , an issue which is of utmost relevance to Internet users .
Let me assure you that the Commission continues to be committed to strengthening citizens ' fundamental rights and fundamental freedoms , and in particular to ensuring a high level of protection of privacy and personal data , both on the Internet and in other contexts .
I firmly believe that the pursuit of adequate privacy protection does not stand in opposition to the need to ensure greater security .
Indeed , these two objectives can and should be pursued in synergy .
The stability and security of the Internet were our priorities during the World Summit on the Information Society in 2005 , and we are continuing with these objectives .
These issues and will shortly be presented through a new strategy for the protection of Critical Information Infrastructures and in order to enhance Europe 's preparation against large-scale cyber attacks and disruptions .
This strategy includes an action plan which defines a road map to promote principles and guidelines for the stability and resilience of the Internet .
Strategic cooperation with third countries will be developed within the strategy , notably in information society dialogues , as a vehicle to build global consensus in this area .
At the same time , the Commission is convinced that it is necessary to ensure respect for fundamental freedoms such as freedom of expression on the Internet .
Again , these two goals are not mutually exclusive .
Your report further elaborates on the possibility of working on global standards , data protection and freedom of speech .
The Commission participates in the yearly international conferences of Data Protection Commissioners and follows the ongoing work on possible future international standards on privacy and personal data protection .
We are strongly committed to promoting the high standards of protection which EU citizens enjoy at present .
Regarding freedom of speech , the Commission will continue to promote this fundamental right in international forums .
New legislation in this area would not be considered as the way forward for the time being .
We already have a number of binding international instruments on this subject .
At this point in time , I believe that it would be useful to engage in effective reflection on the proper ways to enforce the existing legislation .
So it is about implementation .
This reflection should also include and help global commercial players to better define their roles and their responsibilities in the promotion and strengthening of the fundamental freedom of expression in the global online environment of the Internet .
Let me conclude with a general comment .
I believe we should tackle the serious challenges that this report brings to light and make sure that the concrete exercise of rights and freedoms is not unduly limited on the Internet .
For example , an essential element of the Commission 's strategy for a secure information society , since 2006 , has been to have a holistic approach , ensuring coordination amongst stakeholders but also recognising that each of them has specific roles and responsibilities to fulfil .
We all have responsibilities to make sure that our actions on the Internet do not unduly limit - and , if possible , that they promote - the security of others on this medium .
It is , therefore , in the spirit of cooperation that the Commission welcomes and supports this report .
draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on Culture and Education . - ( EL ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , first I should like to thank the rapporteur , Stavros Lambrinidis , for the important report which he has handled and for his objective in endeavouring to protect personal data , a principle which the majority of us respect , including me personally .
As draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on Culture and Education , I consider that the Internet is an exceptional platform for the dissemination of culture and knowledge ; I point this out in order to congratulate and thank all my honourable friends in the Committee on Culture who voted in favour of my opinion .
Examples , such as digital museum archives , electronic books , music and audiovisual material , can be accessed by people in every corner of the world .
Unfortunately , however , in the vast world of cyberspace , cultural material is not adequately protected .
Piracy tends to be the rule rather than the exception and it is authors who lose out from the illegal distribution of their intellectual property .
In other words , poets , songwriters , composers , producers and everyone involved in creativity in general .
There are three things which help piracy to spread : technological facilities and the cheap cost of copying , adverse economic conditions and the penetration of the Internet .
Amendment 4 restores the recommendation of the Committee on Culture for there to be a fair balance between the rights and the freedoms of all parties concerned and for all the fundamental rights of persons , based on the Charter of Fundamental Rights of the European Union , to be safeguarded and protected within the framework of the broad use of the Internet .
That is why we support this amendment , which reiterates that fundamental rights are all of equal value and must all be protected in the same way .

on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - ( RO ) This report is the result of collaboration between the members of this Chamber .

This is why I would like to thank my fellow Members , especially Mr Lambrinidis , as well as Mrs Gacek , Mr Alvaro , Mrs Segelström and Mr Mavrommatis , whom I had the pleasure of working with , also as shadow rapporteur .
I think that the report covers the main topics of interest on strengthening security and fundamental human rights on the Internet , referring to the protection of the rights stipulated by the specific regulations in force , including their digital aspects , and to the acknowledgement and development of new principles for controlling the Internet .
The text maintains a good balance between the protection of the freedom of expression and of privacy and the need to continue the fight against cybercrime , also highlighting the major problem of excessive monitoring of Internet activity , which can degenerate into a new form of censorship .
The report also deals with the issues concerning the Internet 's educational aspect , e-learning , the definition of digital identity and the recognition of users ' rights over the content they have posted on the Internet , as well as the protection of data of a personal nature , in the sense of offering the opportunity for users to delete their own posted content permanently .
These are sensitive subjects in the current climate where social networks are increasingly populated by young people , but not exclusively .
This is why I have urged fellow Members to vote for this report with complete conviction .

Mr President , I would like to begin by thanking Mr Lambrinidis and everyone else in the Committee on Civil Liberties , Justice and Home Affairs who has made this such a constructive and well thought-out report .
I would also like to express my thanks for the support I received for my amendments .
This constitutes support precisely for strengthening the rights of users and consumers .
The section on the applications of the technology - monitoring Internet traffic , for example - is very important .
It is good that the European Parliament is now saying emphatically that privacy and the human rights of citizens take priority .
The report makes clear that Internet traffic may only be monitored where there is suspicion of a crime and as part of a legal process following a court ruling .
This will be an important basis for the monitoring of civil rights .
The report brings necessary measures not a moment too soon .
I am surprised at the amendments tabled by Members from the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats and the Group of the Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe .
Their proposals weaken civil rights and the privacy of citizens .
They have not looked critically at what technical progress could bring if we do not pay attention .
Of course crimes on the Internet and crimes that exploit children and young people must be combated .
However , the key issues in this context are , for example , the fact that the Swedish Conservative Government has adopted the so-called FRA law , a law that deals with the scrutiny of citizens who are not criminals and have not committed a crime , whereas it should instead be the citizens who scrutinise us .
The report is a strong criticism of the Swedish Conservative Government , which defied all criticism and introduced this FRA law in Sweden .
The authorities in Sweden now have the right to monitor Internet traffic without there being either a suspicion of crime or any risk to the safety of individuals or society .
Following the decision tomorrow , I assume that the Swedish Government will reconsider and ensure that the law is changed .
Otherwise they will be in opposition to the European Parliament and the elected representatives of the 27 countries of the EU .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , I should like to start by congratulating Mr Lambrinidis on a job well done .
He fully involved all the shadow rapporteurs during the drafting of this report and did his very best to reach compromises .
This report , which addresses the important questions of the information society , is an important step towards creating an Internet which guarantees both security for our citizens and their fundamental freedoms .
The borders between freedom and security do not end at the borders of the virtual world .
He has taken account in his report of the fight against cybercrime , child pornography , identity theft and fraud , as well as copyright violation .
He has tried to involve Europol and makes clear that the current laws of the physical world must also apply to the virtual world .
At the same time , he has managed to strike a balance between the protection of civil rights , freedom of expression , data protection and the right to the complete deletion of data on the Internet .
Up to the present day , the Internet does not forget .
Some of us can be glad that the Internet did not exist when we were still 13 , 14 , 15 or 16 years old , when we committed the sins of youth which we would not now want to find on YouTube or Facebook .
He has highlighted the need for access to information and , more importantly , access to the Internet and respect for intellectual property .
I am well aware that for many Members the report does not go far enough in respect of the protection of intellectual property and copyright .
Let us work on that with the IP enforcement directive and highlight these points in that directive .
This report makes clear that censorship on the Internet or blocking access to the network , as planned or already implemented by some Member States in Europe , are measures not worthy of our enlightened society and it also makes clear that the European Union is not following the example of totalitarian states and cutting its citizens off from information or feeding them information on a need to know basis .
I am delighted that we have a balanced report here which takes account of the demands of an information society and I would be delighted if both my and other groups gave this report the broadest possible support tomorrow , so that we can develop an Internet in the interests of society .
on behalf of the UEN Group . - ( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , other Members have already said this , but I would like to reiterate that the Internet should not be criminalised or censored because it provides opportunities for communication , socialisation , information and knowledge , but there is nonetheless a need to develop a global strategy to combat cybercrime .
In particular , we must protect children and educate and inform parents and teachers about the new potential dangers of the web .
These are objectives on which Europe must be able to act effectively and I would like to congratulate the rapporteur on a good job well done .
However , despite the penalties and fairly high level of protection afforded by Member States ' legislation against online abuse and sexual exploitation of children and child pornography , the standard of child protection must be raised further , not least because of the ongoing development of new technologies , especially the Internet , and the use of new forms of online grooming of children by paedophiles .
It was for precisely this reason that I chose to table an amendment to the report , explicitly calling on Member States to update their legislation on the use of the Internet by minors , in particular by introducing the offence of grooming , as defined by the Council of Europe Convention on the Protection of Children against Sexual Exploitation and Sexual Abuse , of October 2007 .

Mr President , I would like to thank Mr Lambrinidis very much for succeeding in respecting safety on the Internet while at the same time protecting and respecting the invaluable fundamental rights .
I assume that protection of our fundamental rights as per this report will also receive support when we take a decision on the telecom package .
There is a clear connection between this report and the telecom package .
I hope that we are also in agreement at that time that it is important to protect civil liberties .
As several Members have already said , the Internet has brought with it greatly increased opportunities for the freedom of expression .
Citizens who do not normally have access to the discussion forums of the large-scale media can stir up opinion and pursue issues .
It is a new arena for the exchange of opinions that is sorely needed for political mobilisation .
It provides greater opportunities for citizens to scrutinise the decision-makers .
What is important is that citizens have the opportunity themselves to scrutinise legislators and other holders of power .
It has brought about increased knowledge .
Most of all , we also have the opportunity for exchange and to make contact with people from different cultures and different parts of the world .
When we discuss this issue it is also important to ensure that we have real freedom of expression and guarantees against censorship and control of opinions , information and opinion-forming , for example .
Fundamental human rights , the freedom of expression and privacy , are important elements of democracy and must be both protected and respected at all times .
The Internet is therefore an important factor in our democratic society today and so should it remain .
I would therefore like us to vote against Amendment 5 , which seeks to remove the text ' ensure that the expression of controversial political beliefs through the Internet is not subject to criminal prosecution ' .
If this amendment should get through it would represent a setback for democracy .
Who decides what constitute controversial political beliefs ?
It is a democratic right to be able to express different political views .
The right of Internet users to be able to delete permanently personal data found on websites is also important .
Of course we must combat crime on the Internet , like all criminal activity , but it must also be done in a legally certain manner in accordance with criminal law , as with other types of crime .
Internet crime committed against children is particularly serious .
In this regard we follow the Council of Europe Convention on the protection of children against sexual exploitation and sexual abuse .
Other groups have also been affected .
I am thinking , in particular , about women who have fallen victim to the sex slave trade .
The sex industry today uses the Internet and the sexual violence that many women and children suffer .
In this context I would like to remind my fellow Members of the fact that they can support a written declaration that is seeking to put a stop to this violence , and that is Written Declaration No 94 .
Finally , I would also like to mention the danger that we have seen with regard to the so-called war on terror .
This has , on occasion , led to unreasonable government restrictions on the freedom of expression and the privacy of individuals .
These restrictions have resulted in a security risk for citizens .
The security services of various countries have traded the personal data that they have obtained by monitoring the Internet .
This has put people 's lives at risk , for example where someone is forced to flee from their home country on account of political oppression .
I urge you to give great backing to this report tomorrow .
Mr President , I am fascinated on a daily basis by how fantastic a tool the Internet is , but , however much the EU might contest it , a global network of computers is not a European one .
To believe that a decree from Brussels or Strasbourg could change that is quite incredible and very detached from reality .
It may justifiably be argued that the EU is the wrong forum to solve the type of problem highlighted in this report .
Allow me to give you a couple of examples .
The report compares the right to the Internet with the right to attend school .
That is a bit rich when we know that the right or opportunity to attend school is not a foregone conclusion in many EU countries .
Protection and the promotion of the rights of individuals on the Internet and the balance that should be found between privacy and security are extremely important , but these are likewise not issues that should be resolved at EU level .
This is an international problem that must primarily be dealt with at international level .
Another issue that is close to my heart is file sharing .
Here we are urged to apply common criminal measures to protect intellectual property rights .
I firmly believe that it is the Member States that should decide what constitutes a crime and what , if any , consequences it may have .
For the EU to completely follow the music and film industry 's line is utterly unacceptable , particularly in view of the fact that we are attempting to criminalise an entire generation .
Finally , I would like to say that any attempt to legislate in these areas is going to be difficult , as technology changes much more rapidly than politics .
- Mr President , I would like to thank the rapporteur for taking on my suggestion , encouraging computer software manufacturers to take additional measures blocking access to pornographic and violent websites .
This is a matter of particular concern to parents .
It is a fact of life that our children are often more computer literate than we are .
Parents may be vaguely aware of the fact that they can activate filters in Internet browsers , but this demands a modicum of knowledge of browser software , as well as a conscious decision to activate the system .
If , by default , the filter was pre-installed in the ' on ' position , it is probable that many more children - including the youngest , who increasingly use the Internet unsupervised - would be protected from unwittingly stumbling on sites which have a damaging influence on them .
I appeal to manufacturers to respond to our suggestion .
They should not see this as an imposition or a restriction but rather as a marketing opportunity .
If I had the choice between buying two comparable computers and saw one displaying a child-friendly label , confirming that filters had been pre-installed , I as a parent would choose that product .
In time , parents making such a choice would ensure that this became the industry standard .
I truly hope that we can achieve this with the cooperation of the industry .
. - ( RO ) The Internet has now reached a new phase , being regarded not only as a vital tool in business , but also as a global forum for expressing different opinions .
However , this development has generated ambivalent attitudes .
On the one hand , the Internet continues to offer fantastic opportunities , acting as a catalyst for educational , cultural , economic and social development , while on the other hand , it is perceived as a platform which can be used to promote violent behaviour which has an impact on people 's freedom and security .
In addition , because of its global nature , the Internet has also become a danger to privacy , as citizens ' Internet activities are often subject to monitoring by governments , police authorities , companies and even by criminals and terrorists , sometimes even resulting in identity theft .
In this situation , the legal line must be identified which distinguishes between protecting citizens ' security and fundamental freedoms on the Internet and unrestricted monitoring of their activities by various authorities so that the legislation becomes effective and not excessive in the measures taken to combat crime .
This is why it is necessary to define global standards for data protection , security and freedom of expression through continuous cooperation between Internet operators and Internet users .
It is also important , and in this respect I fully support the rapporteur , to examine and establish the limits of consent requested of users , whether by governments or private companies , in terms of giving up part of their privacy in return for certain Internet services or privileges .
Last but not least , I believe , Mr President , that Member States must make efforts to bring their national legislations into line on protecting fundamental rights on the Internet , as this is something which may also help outline a joint strategy for combating cyber crime or terrorism .
I wish to extend my congratulations to Mr Lambrinidis and the whole team who contributed to producing this report .
- ( NL ) Mr President , I should like to add my compliments to those already paid to the rapporteur , who has prepared a fantastic report .
I wish briefly to pick out a couple of points .
First of all , in recent years we have seen the storage of personal data by companies and governments increasing hand over fist .
Governments make use of company databases , but we still see different levels of protection applying to the first and third pillars - which I find extremely worrying .
The second point - and I am pleased that my amendment on this has been adopted - is that criminals too , of course , turn the Internet to their advantage in all kinds of ways .
Identity theft is growing alarmingly , and so we must ask the European Commission to create a contact point for this kind of theft - not only as a way of exchanging information but also for the benefit of victims .
Thirdly , global standards are indeed necessary .
Work is also under way on these , but such standards must be drawn up in the course of an open democratic process and not by European Commission officials negotiating with officials from the United States .
Finally , whilst the European Commission often speaks fine words about freedom and civil rights , I have noticed that , led by Commissioner Frattini and also with the help of the Council , countless measures have been taken in recent years that make it possible to spy on citizens round the clock and to restrict their liberties .
It is high time we evaluated what has been happening and the kind of consequences being produced .
Therefore , I wish to conclude with a suggestion to the Commission : I would urge it to introduce a separate Commissioner for civil rights and liberties in the coming term .
- I gave Ms in 't Veld a little bit of extra time because she has 400 followers on Twitter .
I have only got nine .
Four hundred and fifty now .
- ( FR ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I speak on behalf of our fellow Member , Mr Toubon .

I should like firstly to thank Mr Popa , who has done an excellent job of trying to reach a compromise that is acceptable to us all , despite the extreme positions adopted on this issue by some members of the Socialist Group in the European Parliament and the Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance .
The report raises the important issue of finding a balance between security and fundamental freedoms on the Internet .
Indeed , while for many this new technology is synonymous with progress and opportunities , it is not without its risks .
For example , it is essential to guarantee freedom of expression and of information on this new medium , while ensuring at the same time that respect is shown for other fundamental freedoms , such as the protection of people 's private lives and of personal data , and for intellectual property .
The rapporteur , Mr Lambrinidis , who has done an excellent job , has thus taken into account the new types of Internet crime and the dangers they pose , especially for children .
Unfortunately the report remains more ambiguous and even dangerous on other points .

The aim of the amendments tabled by Mrs Hieronymi , Mr Mavrommatis and Mr Toubon , is to make it clear that attacks on fundamental freedoms should not be supported in the name of freedom of expression and of information .
The Member States and Internet operators should keep some room for manoeuvre so that they can find the best solutions for ensuring that the rights of some do not completely prevent those of others from being exercised .
Laws must apply to the Internet as they do everywhere else .
The Internet cannot be a virtual space where an act that constitutes an offence in the real world is deemed permissible , and even protected simply by the effect of technology and the way in which it is used .
The rule of law in our democratic societies is at stake .

- ( ES ) Mr President , I would like to congratulate my fellow Member and friend , Mr Lambrinidis , on the report that he has drafted and , in addition , on the fairly balanced oral explanation of what he is trying to do with this report .
I have brought along a book , which is the Treaty establishing a Constitution for Europe .
This book was approved by 90 % of the Spanish electorate and by the majority of the national parliaments of the countries to which we MEPs belong .
It did not enter into force because of certain difficulties of a political nature , but this text is a key one , because it incorporates - and personally I see this as a mandate from my voters - the Charter of Fundamental Rights of the European Union .
I believe that the charter brings together the principles set out by Mr Lambrinidis in his report .
Firstly , the Internet is an area of freedom , modernity and equal opportunities , where people communicate with each other , mix with and provide information to each other , exchanging ideas and sharing knowledge .
This right is recognised by Article II-71 of the Treaty establishing a Constitution for Europe .
Secondly , the Internet ought to protect freedom and the development of the information society in a way that is compatible with respect for intellectual property and protection for users ' privacy .
Specifically , the right to intellectual property and also users ' rights to privacy are recognised by Article II-77 of the draft European constitution .
Thirdly , we need to seek an appropriate balance between the protection of rights , the fostering of content on offer and the legal market in digital content on the Internet , and development which is open to the new corporate models appearing on the net .
We also have to deal with the protection of personal data , which is recognised by Article II-68 of the draft constitution .
I therefore believe that the Lambrinidis report covers these concerns .
Clearly , it does not dwell on the details of the conditions , requirements , consequences and sanctions arising from the misuse of the Internet , but I believe that that would be appropriate for a legislative document , and at the moment that is not what we are debating .
- ( FR ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , as an artist , I am saddened , I am very shocked by the lack of interest shown in the cultural sector by Mr Lambrinidis 's report .

I would stress that we should at all times safeguard and protect individuals ' rights as a whole , in accordance with the Charter of Fundamental Rights of the European Union , and should guarantee the rights and freedoms of all parties concerned .
The information society is an increasingly important economic sector , but also a major source of innovation and creativity that underpins the modern-day economy .
This means , among other things , that access for all to a diverse culture and to education must be guaranteed within a context of respect for Community law and that the value of the creative work of authors and performers , including in the digital economy , must be duly recognised .
However , such recognition means remunerating them for all the ways in which their creative contribution is used so that they can make a living from their profession and can be completely free to devote themselves to it .
In this context , intellectual property rights must not be seen as an obstacle but indeed as a driver of creative activities , especially in the context of developing new on-line services .
On the other hand , I believe that , even on the Internet , racist , hate-filled or revisionist discourse must be prosecuted .
Freedom of expression must be exercised responsibly .
The right balance must be struck between freedom of access to the Internet , respect for privacy and protection of intellectual property .
I therefore call on you , ladies and gentlemen , to endorse my Amendments 2 to 6 .
- ( EL ) Mr President , it has almost become a habit for us to examine a report on the Internet in every plenary .
This is a good thing , because it gives the Member States and the European Union an opportunity at last to address effectively these topical issues relating to the use of the Internet .
I congratulate my honourable friend Mr Lambrinidis for agreeing to include the members ' amendments in his very extensive report , thereby adding several new aspects to the issue at debate .
Last time , Parliament examined questions relating to video games on the Internet and the dangers to minors and the financing mechanism of the European Union for a safe Internet for minors .
Today 's debate is convincing me more and more that , in the final analysis , everything comes down to a question of legal approach .
That is why I think that the only thing that we should call for is a study at legal level into the multiple problems which arise from the use of the Internet .
The report will therefore be useful as a catalogue which needs to be examined in depth by the legal experts , who will then implement the research work which will provide the various stakeholders mentioned in the report with the tools to draft legislation which will safeguard the principle of the rule of law as regards the use of the Internet in a democratic manner .
Naturally we cannot speak of democracy when not every citizen has the right , regardless of their financial standing , to use the Internet .
That is not how things stand today , but we hope that one day it will be .
- ( ET ) Ladies and gentlemen , can you imagine life without the Internet ?
I , for one , no longer can .
I come from Estonia , which is a world leader in Internet availability .
This is probably also why we have greater experience of the dangers of the Internet , from the cyber-war that targeted our country two years ago to the fact that , according to international research , our children have fallen prey to cyber-persecution more than children in many other countries .
Through several of the reports it has passed in recent years , the European Parliament has actually sought to answer the question ' What is the Internet ? '
A more relevant question today would be whether the Internet world is a separate space , as it were - a virtual world - that is not part of real life , or whether it is a part of the public sphere .
This is also discussed by Mr Lambrinidis in his report , in which he states that our main task is to find a suitable balance between privacy and security .
Freedom of expression is immediately brought up whenever the restriction of Internet freedom is mentioned - freedom of expression is the right to disseminate ideas , opinions , convictions and other information , but it also involves responsibility .
I would like to thank the rapporteur and hope that we will all have the strength to find the answer to this question : what is the Internet ; can it be regulated , and if so , how should that be done ?
Since the Internet is one of the clearest signs of globalisation , our approach to the issue must also be international .
- ( BG ) Ladies and gentlemen , the content of this report fully lives up to its title .
It covers the rights in the Charter of Fundamental Rights of the European Union and the UN Convention on the Rights of the Child and aims to protect children from crime .
Congratulations to the rapporteur .
The Internet is a world where facts appear which are not explicitly defined as violations of rights and freedoms or as crimes against them .
Opportunities for expression , finding out information and social contacts are often replaced by the direct opposite of these .
The Internet provides fertile ground for bypassing regulations and having no restrictions on expression .
In conditions offering anonymity and without any controls , the upshot of this is disclaimed responsibility when it comes to choosing and using linguistic terms .
These terms are often infiltrated by slang , cynicism and even vulgarity .
They evolve into a language of distrust and hatred , pass into everyday usage , become a model to imitate and mould a certain attitude .
Such language does not contribute to a child 's social , spiritual and moral welfare and does not lead to culture and values .
This is why I am focusing my attention on the need for a separate analysis of the language used on the Internet and its influence on the personal development of the child .
- Mr President , I am one of those people who would like to ensure the continuity of Internet freedom .
The creators of the Internet had great faith in the basic goodness of humankind , and I tend to share that faith .
Unfortunately , very often with the Internet , just as in any human society , we have to face the sad fact that regulations are needed to make sure that those who cannot protect themselves are protected too .
The safety of an individual is a fundamental right , just as much as the right to free speech and to self-expression .
Abominations such as child pornography and paedophilia , as well as Internet fraud , must be stopped .
We cannot tolerate Internet predators of any kind , and while we are discussing this topic of great interest I would like to draw your attention to a much less discussed fact : the Internet is also full of sites that incite hatred , violence and intolerance towards all kinds of minorities , among them ethnic minorities .
It is an aspect of the Internet that needs our attention .
We have to make sure that minorities also feel protected .
It is unacceptable that many extremist groups use the Internet to instigate hatred and xenophobia .
- ( PL ) Mr President , I would like to draw attention to several problems associated with the Internet .
Firstly , I wish to refer to protection of personal data and protection of confidentiality in connection with e-voting , which enables people with disabilities to exercise their rights as citizens .
Secondly , I should mention protection of intellectual property in connection with artistic material which can easily be passed on via the Internet .
Another matter concerns the protection of children from harmful content , such as scenes of brutality and pornography , through appropriate filters and educating parents .
The fourth matter is the problem of protecting children from paedophiles and kidnappers , and also the opportunity to track down criminals using traces they have left on the Internet , such as a paedophile 's address , or recordings of crimes made using mobile telephones and then posted on the Internet .
If the statements made on the Internet by a young man in Germany had not been disregarded , his victims would still be alive , namely the pupils and teachers he shot .
The next question , which is in fact the most important , concerns respecting freedom of speech , and here the law should be respected just as it is in every other area .
Some of these problems require new technical solutions .
I congratulate the rapporteur .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , I should like to thank all the speakers for their committed and interesting contributions .
I just want to add two points about what I said at the beginning .
We share , for example , concerns on intellectual property rights and the balanced approach which is needed here .
This is important for the overall evolution , or development , of the information society .
Enforcement of these property rights must be duly balanced with fundamental freedoms or rights , which are enumerated in the report , including the right to privacy , protection of personal data and the right to participate in the information society .
Many of you mentioned children - minors - protection of those who are probably most facing these challenges , and they are sitting at computers daily .
Here I would not only recommend but would strongly invite partners , Member States and institutions to cooperate with the Safer Internet Programme 2009-2013 .
There is quite a significant budget for this .
Action has already been taken on undue or illegal content but also against harmful behaviour or conduct such as grooming or bullying , which have been mentioned .
There are many issues , but I would advocate implementation of serious policies on commitments , whether national or international .
We have a directive on privacy and electronic communications , a lot of concrete action or action plans , a European programme on protection of critical infrastructures .
So that is why I said we do not need more legislation , rather due and appropriate implementation , and then , of course , further evolution and improvements .
Somebody rightly mentioned the telecom package .
Yesterday 's trialogue gives a lot of hope for final agreement .
I want to conclude by saying that this year was declared the European Year of Creativity and Innovation and the motto is : imagine , create , innovate .
So we maybe cannot imagine the world without the Internet but it is important to imagine and create and innovate to make it safer and closer to humanity and human responsibility .
rapporteur . - Mr President , I would like to thank the Commission .
To make the interpreters ' lives easier - as I am speaking off text - I will , as an exception , do this in English .
I respect the sensitivities of those who are concerned about the protection of intellectual property .
But I have the impression that they are fighting a battle on the wrong report .
My report is not a single-issue report ; it is a report that talks generally about protecting fundamental rights and security on the Internet and , indeed , that is why it received unanimous support .
However , to the extent that it does refer to intellectual property rights , one would think by listening to some of the speeches that it ignores them .
Let me read , in particular , how balanced we have attempted to be with this report .
In paragraph 1 ( k ) , we urge the to Council to ' proceed to the adoption of the directive on criminal measures aimed at the enforcement of intellectual property rights , following an assessment , in the light of contemporary innovation research , of the extent to which it is necessary and proportionate ' .
This is what the report states .
The amendments , however , are anything but balanced .
Amendments that delete what the report calls for - which is a prohibition to the systematic surveillance of all users , whether or not suspect and whether or not guilty , to protect any security right - are anything but balanced .
They call on us to totally abandon fundamental rights to protect something else .
Secondly , amendments that delete or water down a very precise and specific reference in the report - that controversial political speech should not be criminalised - are amendments that I oppose , and I am glad to hear that many others in this room do as well .
Political speech has to be protected , especially when it is controversial .
If everyone in this room agreed with each other , we would not need freedom of speech legislation .
It is when we do not - and especially to protect the speech that may particularly be angering to people like me or others - that we have those laws .
This reference in the report does not talk about ' criminal ' speech .
It talks specifically about ' controversial political ' speech .
Therefore , I urge everyone to support this particular paragraph in the report and to support the report in general .
I am deeply grateful to everyone - even those who disagree with me - who was here tonight .
I know it is not easy .
Thank you for your support during all these months leading up to this report .
I look forward to working with you on your reports in the future and showing you similar understanding and support .
- Thank you , colleagues .
Thank you , Mr Mavrommatis , for your opinion and special thanks to the rapporteur , Mr Lambrinidis , for his success and for an important and interesting report .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place on Thursday , 26 March 2009 .
Written statements ( Rule 142 )
in writing . - I congratulate the rapporteur on this report .
I believe the Internet has enhanced Europeans ' lives in countless ways .
It has increased our ability to access knowledge , aided our understanding of the world around us and reinforced our social connections to other people .
But constituents tell me they are also concerned about the dangers of the Internet .
We have remarkable technology at our fingertips , but the very freedom it gives us has also left criminals free to abuse the technology .
This report , in its focus on fundamental rights , will go a long way to making the Internet safer .
We spoke during the last part-session on the need to tackle child pornography .
Through balancing liberty and security , the proposals we have voted on today will form a further vital tool in the fight against that threat .
The report also raises concerns about e-literacy .
We cannot move forward as a society together if , by promoting new freedoms for some , we restrict the rights of those who are less familiar with the Internet .
We have gladly taken on board the profound changes the Internet has wrought .
To move even further forward , our focus should now shift to dealing with the negatives of this revolution just as willingly .
It is well known that the Internet is increasingly difficult to control , but protecting the fundamental right to privacy on the Internet and ensuring the Internet is more secure must feature among the priorities of Member State governments .
Using the Internet offers countless benefits , but we must not forget the danger of the abuses which some Internet users are exposed to .
This is why , in order to limit these abuses , it is our duty to define standards for data protection , security and freedom of expression at both European and Member State level .
On the other hand , urgent measures must be taken to combat cyber crime and , on this subject , I would like to emphasise the importance of devising a global strategy .
I insist that in the battle against cyber crime there must be active cooperation between the police authorities , Internet service providers , users and other operators involved .
I must finish by saying that the right to education and Internet access , as well as the security and the protection of the rights of those who use Internet services must be guaranteed .
Follow-up to the Declaration of the Sports Ministers of the European Union at their meeting in Biarritz in November 2008 ( debate )
- The next item is the debate on the oral question to the Commission on the follow-up to the Declaration of the Sports Ministers of the European Union at their meeting in Biarritz in November 2008 by Katerina Batzeli and Doris Pack , on behalf of the Committee on Culture and Education - B6-0223 / 2009 ) .
author . - ( EL ) Mr President , Commissioner , the informal council of Sports Ministers in Biarritz in November 2008 was the first real European sports forum at the level of transnational cooperation .
It is a first substantive and important step .
Principles such as subsidiarity , autonomy and self-regulation in sport are broadly applied at national and regional level .
However , they cannot answer the basic question of whether sport ultimately has a social role or a purely commercial dimension which inevitably turns a sporting activity into a product of the internal market .
Today , the intense commercialisation of sport and the fact that it has been opened up to purely commercial sectors , such as advertising through the mass media , have lent it purely economic attributes .
The Court of Justice of the European Communities has already been petitioned several times to rule , in specific cases , on whether a sporting activity is a service of purely social benefit or if , on the contrary , it also encompasses economic aspects which imply that it is a service of general economic interest .
Even though the specific social role of sport does not warrant its general exemption from the rule of Community law , it continues to be recognised and to allow limitations , provided that such exemptions are warranted by the social role of sport per se .
Commissioner , there are certain questions which are also asked in the question by our committee :
firstly , the same concern about the autonomy of organisations ; the autonomy of sports clubs and federations must be safeguarded .
However , there are clear cases in which self-regulation does not safeguard equal treatment of all stakeholders ;
secondly , the Commission urgently needs to give us the necessary guidelines on the question of the definition of the concept of a service of general economic interest in sport and the criteria by which the freedoms of the internal market and the rules of competition are imposed and
thirdly , one issue which may not be mentioned in the oral question but which is an issue of major importance is that which has arisen at national level , namely how to manage the rights of state or private radio and television stations to cover sporting fixtures .
The emergence on the market of numerous new private service providers using new technologies and telecommunications was what basically lured many sports federations into making preferential sales of these rights .
However , it should be emphasised at this point that it is precisely because of the social role of sport that it would be a mistake to promote a system from which solidarity between clubs is missing and economic competition is strengthened .
Collective bargaining , a matter which Mr Mavrommatis also addresses in his report , should be promoted as the most suitable and fitting solution for the sport sector .
Whatever the solution , Commissioner , it must respect not only the legal procedure of the market , but also the public role of sport and the fact that it is a social commodity and must be accessible to every section of society .
The role of and the way in which sports clubs are organised are important factors in how they negotiate with the European Commission and with the Committee on Culture and Education and the European Parliament .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , I welcome the statement by the EU Sports Ministers at their meeting last November in Biarritz .
They are important in driving the political debate on sport forward step by step and also in strengthening dialogue structures on sport , as was recommended in our white paper in 2007 .
This White Paper on Sport is making good progress in implementation .
The recent European Council Declaration on Sport , in December , is also a very important step forward and calls for strengthened dialogue with the IOC and the sport movement as a priority .
The Commission has moved swiftly to follow up both calls from the political side .
However , dialogue in sport remains a challenging task , given the diversity of sport and the complexity of the sport structures .
In January , in Lausanne , I met with the IOC President , Mr Jacques Rogge , and representatives of international sport federations .
The meeting confirmed that sport organisations are really moving away from insisting on general exemptions - ' block exemptions ' - from the ' acquis communautaire ' for sport , and are ready to address sport-related topics with legal implications on a theme-per-theme basis .
I think this is the appropriate way to achieve more clarity regarding the application of European Union law to sport , in addition to guidance provided in the white paper .
We are also exchanging views with team sports .
My services met last week with the main international and European team sport federations to discuss free movement of athletes and non-discrimination aspects in sport .
I intend to follow up on these discussions by convening a further meeting at this high level in June .
Finally , good progress has been achieved in setting up EU social dialogue structures in sport .
It started in football and I believe it will continue in other sectors .
Regarding the shape of the dialogue framework , there simply cannot be a single , formal framework for consultation with the sport movement .
Given the specific organisation of sport , the dialogue must take account of the different levels of sport .
I am committed to a constructive partnership with all actors in sport respecting the autonomy of sport , subsidiarity principles and national and EU legal frameworks .
I think this is crucial in shaping the future EU policy framework for sport , which - without prejudging developments regarding the Lisbon Treaty - we might have to implement as early as next year .
Here I also would like to thank the European Parliament , and especially the Committee on Culture and Education , for its support .
You also , notably , approved the specific line , or budget , for a preparatory action , which we will soon start to implement .
This is an important opportunity and will help us to frame our ideas for the way ahead .
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - ( EL ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , as rapporteur on the White Paper on Sport , I had the opportunity of presenting the position of the European Parliament at the meeting of the Sports Ministers of the Member States of the European Union in Biarritz .
The White Paper emphasises the need to respect the autonomy and specificity of sport .
The political debate on sport in Europe often attributes great importance to the so-called ' European Sport Model ' .
During discussions with European sports stakeholders about the White Paper on Sport , the Commission and the European Parliament agreed that , come what may , the specificity of sport must be protected .
There are two approaches to the specificity of European sport :
firstly , the specificity of sporting activities and sporting rules and
secondly , the specificity of the sport structure .
As far as the second specificity is concerned , the European Union recognises the autonomy of sports organisations and of representative structures such as organisations which organise professional championships .
However , in order to achieve improved and more effective coordination , there must be minimum regulation at European level .
Thus , both the Commission and European sports stakeholders believe that most of the challenges can be addressed through self-regulation within the framework of respect for the principles of sound management and compliance with Community law .
Generally speaking , the European Union is particularly careful when it comes to its approach to and regulation of sports issues , provided that they are in keeping with European law .
on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( NL ) Mr President , Parliament has worked hard on the White Paper on Sport and has thrown its full support behind the request to the European Commission to produce clear guidelines on the application of European law to sport .
Not only Parliament but also sport organisations from throughout Europe have called for clarity .
It is inhumane that they are left in the dark because , as things stand , the courts are having to decide time after time on the application of European law .
The European Ministers for Sport repeated the request to the Commission in Biarritz .
It is time we heard from the Commission itself whether it has yet started to develop these guidelines .
Can it tell us when they will be available ?
Is it prepared to organise a stakeholder conference involving , among others , representatives of the world of sport and of the European Parliament , in order to launch or accelerate this process and to increase clarity for European sport organisations as quickly as possible ?
This brings me to another , closely related , point .
Experience has shown that there are currently few or no good mechanisms for dialogue in sport .
The clearest example is the discussion on the amended Anti-Doping Code of the World Anti-Doping Agency ( WADA ) .
They cling desperately to unworkable rules , and there is absolutely no scope for real dialogue with the European institutions and the sportspeople themselves to seek solutions with the potential to produce an anti-doping policy that is effective and does indeed respect the civil rights and privacy of sportspeople .
I have many conversations with sportspeople and stakeholder organisations who complain that there is a lack of consultation and that WADA and the International Olympic Committee lay down requirements but are not themselves receptive to input .
WADA 's response to yesterday 's proposal by UEFA and FIFA alone indicates that an open attitude is completely out of the question .
With regard to anti-doping policy , to what extent has the European Commission taken it upon itself to establish a consultation on the protection of the civil rights of European sportspeople , and how does it believe a consultative framework for sport should be established - both in general and in this kind of matter ?
Does the Commission also take the view that this consultation must by definition be mutual ?
Mr President , the oral question about further steps to be taken following the Declaration of the Sports Ministers of the European Union at their meeting in Biarritz in November 2008 is justified .
Dynamic changes in society are being accompanied by changes in sport .
Increasing numbers of problems in contemporary sport remain unanswered , and there is no reaction from employers .
We are going through a specific crisis in sport . Among other things , doping and trade in youngsters are on the increase .
Treating sportspeople , especially youngsters , as if they were goods to be traded denies them the opportunity to continue a career outside sport as adults .
The Ministers rightly call for young men and women athletes to be given access to a dual curriculum of education and sports , and for efforts to provide the relevant facilities and structures to be increased .
The proposed improvements relating to competition among young sportspeople are good , but they must not cause the exclusion of other sportspeople whose performance is better .
There are , therefore , a considerable number of threats and doubts .
The threats have a global character , and so reasonable coordination by the Community in the form of consultative frameworks is acceptable , as long as it is not compulsory .
There always remains , however , a question about details .
Referring directly to the second part of the oral question it can be said that all top-down , institutional coordination seems to supplant national governments .
We must not succumb to that temptation .
- ( NL ) Mr President , UEFA President Michel Platini recently presented to the European Parliament excellent proposals for curbing the scourge of trafficking in youngsters in football .
There is a clear link with the question tabled by Mrs Batzeli .
The UEFA proposal is clear : end international transfers of young players , of children under 18 years of age .
Of course , this is a delicate matter , as many see it as an infringement of freedom of movement in Europe .
The question is which interest and which principle prevails here .
The answer , we all agree , is proper training for young people and children both at school and in sports clubs .
Trafficking young children , sometimes from one side of Europe to the other , either with or without their family , cannot be conducive to a balanced upbringing .
Hence my question to the Commissioner : do you intend to take up the defence of this UEFA proposal , and do you also mean to start up a dialogue on the subject with stakeholders - players , clubs , leagues and federations - in the short term ?
I have a second question , too : it concerns the ' six-plus-five ' rule , which is also intended to protect young players and to encourage clubs to invest more in training their own youth .
The German Institute for European Affairs ( INEA ) , a research institute , recently carried out a study on this at the request of FIFA and found that six-plus-five is indeed acceptable and compatible with European law .
Commissioner Figel ' , what is your view on this ?
We should also like for you , for the European Union , to enter into dialogue on this with the sports governing bodies in the light of the specific nature of football on which we all agree , and also , of course , looking ahead to the Treaty of Lisbon .
- Mr President , I thank the Commissioner very much indeed for his opening statement .
What everyone is asking about is legal certainty .
I have a couple of questions based on that and also one on the Treaty of Lisbon , should it be ratified .
As a good Conservative Euro-sceptic , I should say that I hope it never is .
But I was just wondering , what will this mean - if it is ratified - for sporting organisations and governing bodies ?
Many of these governing bodies believe that it will recognise concretely their specificity , the specificity of sport .
So , Commissioner , could you tell us how this recognition in the new Treaty will help sport ?
Will sport then get derogations from different aspects , like employment law or other laws , that they actually want to try and achieve ?
On legal certainty , there are so many questions that the Commission should and could be helping sporting organisations with now .
Should companies from overseas be investing huge amounts of money into sporting clubs within Europe ?
I have no problem with this .
I actually see it as direct inward investment and , therefore , a very positive thing .
But sporting organisations and many governing bodies think this is a bad thing .
So , what is your interpretation of a sporting organisation banning such a practice ?
As my colleague , Mr Belet , said , UEFA is currently proposing to ban transfers of under-18s across borders .
European law recognises a worker as someone essentially with the minimum age of 16 , so what happens when a 17-year old challenges the fact that he was not able to move to a big club in a country that was not his own , in the current situation that we find ourselves in ?
Home-grown players ; ' six plus five ' with FIFA : what is the clarification of those two points ?
Also , football is always very interested in these subjects and it seems to drive the agenda .
However , all of these matters actually affect polo and rugby union and table tennis players - all sports are affected .
Are we looking at a wider range of sports ?
Will the Commission actually open up a forum where sport can come and talk to the Commission openly about some of the problems it has and get some of these questions answered on a regular basis - no matter with the Treaty of Lisbon or without ?
- Commissioner , you have the floor - bearing in mind that we have had many questions , but there actually only two on the oral question .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , that is true .
Usually questions are easier than answers and usually there are more questions than answers , but I believe that together we can find more and better answers .
This is all about cooperation , not only between Parliament and the Commission , but especially with the world of sport associations , federations , Member States and stakeholders .
If they are responsible and responsive they come together and look for solutions which are acceptable and compatible with the law .
Otherwise we adapt and change the law , whether at national or European level .
So that is how we should proceed .
I look forward to maintaining this approach .
I think much has changed since 2007 .
I do not want to repeat myself or to once again recommend reading the white paper .
There is a shorter version and also a version with annexes .
The first time we tried , we put together descriptions of all cases and all decisions related to sport , which made a kind of map showing how sport relates to European Community law or policies .
Of course we are proposing further guidelines .
We have proposed - and in Biarritz I introduced - physical activity guidelines , which could help to promote the volume , intensity and quality of physical education training in our societies and especially in schools .
It should be adopted by the Council of Health Ministers .
We do not have a Sports Ministers ' Council , but in fact the main reason is that it is related to public health .
We cannot have one large specific set of guidelines for everything .
I have said that we can address specific concrete issues theme by theme rather than case by case .
Next I hope we can deal with licensing - how to make a more transparent and more sustainable system and create a set of principles for our licensing policies .
Of course UEFA or its partners should have the concrete responsibility for this , but we can help .
It is in our interest to promote principles such as self-regulation , transparency and sustainability , and we can make several other important contributions to improvements in licensing .
We will support the Anti-Doping Conference .
This offers a great opportunity to say much more on this , but I am against the establishment of another agency or a European WADA .
I have also said publicly that there is NADAS , the European network of cooperation between national anti-doping agencies in our countries , whether they are public or private .
Europe needs to be more active and more united .
There are lessons to be learned from WADA and we should do so quickly .
There are disputes .
We have spoken to Ms Bozkurt about this code of conduct .
Today I saw on television Sepp Blatter and John Fahey , the Chairman of WADA , discussing how anti-doping and football competitions could go hand in hand after the code of conduct has been adopted , and there is a problem .
So on anti-doping I think we need more internal cooperation in order to make Europe more credible .
We have the Council of Europe , we have a convention on this .
We have many reasons to be more coherent in our contribution to the world of anti-doping or a world which fights more efficiently against doping .
You have said that dialogue is not easy in this area - I mean not just regarding anti-doping but sport issues in general .
It is true that sometimes it is difficult , even at international and Europe level or between different disciplines or segments , but I can assure you that a culture of dialogue and openness and a readiness to engage in dialogue is growing .
I took part in the opening of the EOC office in Brussels , which is very close to Rond Point Schuman and to the Commission , Council and Parliament .
This means the permanent presence of the European Olympic Committees and the IOC in the European institutions for the purpose of dialogue and cooperation .
It says something about the importance of this and the mutual readiness to work in dialogue to find solutions .
With regard to international transfers , I am also in favour of the protection of youngsters and the promotion of training and education .
In 2001 we adopted decisions or agreements on international transfers .
The general age level is about 18 years , but in Europe there is a specific arrangement for the period between 16 and 18 years of age .
Unless severe or very critical problems become evident , we do not need to change but rather to promote better and more training and to work with talent in Europe .
That is why , for example , we supported the home-grown player rule because this mainly promotes this sort of treatment .
Of course it is not an absolute rule but it concerns specific arrangements .
We give preference to , or promote , specificity under certain rules .
We have said that we will come back to this decision in five years ' time to see what the real impact has been - not just the theory - of this new rule .
' Six plus five ' , as it stands now , is simply non-compatible with EU laws , as has been shown in a study .
We have spoken to them and have read the papers but there is nothing new there .
In substance we cannot say that we agree with the study .
But I have to say that dialogue - especially following recent events in Biarritz and Lausanne - is real and very concrete between the European Commission and its partners , including FIFA .
On this specific matter of ' six plus five ' we will continue further .
Even FIFA says that there is no reason for a hurried approach but rather a need for very concrete and credible answers .
They do not want to get into formal disputes .
We agreed to make room for more expertise and for more exchange .
I think that is very beneficial .
On the Lisbon Treaty and the recognition of specificity , two special clauses are included in Article 149 of the Treaty on European Union regarding education , youth and sport .
It also concerns the level of competence .
This is only supportive action so the Union will not have any power to decide but only to support Member States in the promotion of the integrity of sportsmen and sportswomen .
It could be helpful to organise a Sports Council as we have for education and youth , which will perhaps be the enlarged format .
It could help to build the first EU sport policy and sport programme but will not mean a change of architecture or a general derogation .
Theme-by-theme specificity , which is real and does not mean business as usual , must be defendable vis-à-vis the system or the European Court .
My opinion only reflects the Commission 's opinion .
Our opinion is not the final one when it comes to explanation of European Union law .
Especially in this area many issues are interlinked .
We would like to promote an increased legal certainty , which is why we started the process .
The white paper is there and the Pierre de Coubertin Action Plan helps to make it more readable and more concrete but it is a process .
With the Treaty we can help even more but , without it , we will have to stay only at the level we have reached now .
I spoke about transfers under 18 years of age .
With regard to this , FIFA made a very good decision , not only on transfers but on the promotion and protection of minors in sport - in football - and I think this is the right approach .
So in some areas UEFA sets a good example , for instance concerning home-grown players , and in some areas FIFA sets a good example , for instance concerning the protection of minors .
I think we can help both and it is important that this is also compatible within the world of football .
Last but not least - and I am sorry to have given a long answer - with regard to a forum on sport , which Mr Heaton-Harris mentioned , we have actually established this .
In Biarritz we had a ministerial conference with major partners , but before that there was a forum with more than 200 stakeholders from very different areas of sport .
It was a very positive , communicative and open forum and we want to continue with this .
I believe that , under the Swedish , or especially under the Spanish , Presidency , we can hold another one to reflect on the progress we have made and to make a commitment to go further .
That is where I was when I started answering the questions - working together in a transparent , regular and credible manner .
If that is the case , Europe is a leading area where sport is protected and promoted , and where we fight against negative phenomena such as doping , corruption , violence and racism around sport .
I would like to invite you to share this approach because we do not have a better one .
We do not want to impose anything again but rather to propose , protect and support .
That is my answer .
- The debate is closed .
Safe and Environmentally Sound Recycling of Ships ( debate )
- The next item is the debate on the oral question to the Commission on the negotiations taking place in May 2009 under the auspices of the International Maritime Organisation ( IMO ) on the conditions for the entry into force of the Convention for the Safe and Environmentally Sound Recycling of Ships by Johannes Blokland , on behalf of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety - B6-0224 / 2009 ) .
author . - ( NL ) Mr President , back in the plenary of May last year , the European Parliament took a clear stance against the humanly degrading and environmentally destructive situations involved in the dismantling of ships .
Yet , on various shores in South Asia , enormous seagoing ships for scrapping are still being dismantled under conditions that are both environmentally damaging and humanly degrading .
In Bangladesh , for example , not one of the 36 dismantling sites complies with minimum environmental and safety standards .
One good thing is that , for this reason , the High Court ordered the Government of Bangladesh a week ago to close these ' dismantling yards ' within two weeks .
At the same time , the same High Court banned all ships containing hazardous substances from entering Bangladeshi territory .
In addition , the Bangladeshi Minister for the Environment has three months to lay down rules , complying with the Basel Convention , for the recycling of ships for scrapping .
These are the very same important measures advocated by the European Parliament in last year 's resolution .
One could almost be forgiven for thinking that the Bangladeshi High Court had read our resolution .
I see this ruling as an important victory in the fight against the unacceptable practices mentioned earlier .
It is essential that the Government of Bangladesh duly follow up on the court rulings .
This goes not only for Bangladesh but also for other Asian countries .
I have already remarked that the efforts of individual states will not suffice .
A global solution to the problem of ship dismantling is still urgently needed .
In May of this year , the International Maritime Organization ( IMO ) is holding a global conference in Hong Kong , the aim of which is to conclude a global agreement on the recycling of ships for scrapping .
The resolution by the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety must ensure that a clear signal is sent to the Council and the Commission for the negotiations , with the objective of achieving the best possible result .
With regard to last year 's resolution , it is important to add the following five points .
Firstly , it must be made clear that ships for scrapping that incorporate hazardous substances should be regarded as hazardous waste and hence should fall under the Basel Convention .
Continuing to debate the definitions is not in the interests of environmental protection .
Amendment 1 , proposed by the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats , weakens this position somewhat , and thus I cannot support it .
Secondly , running ships aground for on-site dismantling must be regarded as unacceptable .
Thirdly , there is a need to take measures - particularly on the phasing out of single-hull tankers - before the end of the lengthy ratification period .
Fourthly , certification of dismantling yards is to be welcomed .
Fifthly , the measures should continue to include a mandatory fund within the framework of producer responsibility - as the European Parliament stated last year .
However , the European Commission appears to be reconsidering this position .
I should therefore like to hear Commissioner Figel ' tell us that the Commission is still prepared to set up a scrapping fund .
With this resolution , in combination with last year 's , the European Parliament is charting a clear course towards a solution to the problems referred to .
I welcome the high level of agreement on this issue in the Committee on the Environment and the Committee on Transport and Tourism .
It is my hope that the Council and the Commission will make an equally concerted effort to conclude a sound convention in Hong Kong in two months ' time , one that safeguards the interests of safety , public health and the environment well .
I should like Commissioner Figel ' to tell us whether the European Commission will be using this clear course as a key asset in the negotiations at the IMO conference , and also what measures the Commission means to take to ensure timely implementation of the convention to be concluded .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , first of all I would like to thank Parliament for the very strong interest it has expressed and its continuous involvement with regard to ship dismantling .
I would especially like to thank Mr Blokland .
This is a very good starting point for further action at EU level to ensure that the European Union plays its part in solving this international problem .
These questions are also timely , in the light of the recent ruling of the Bangladeshi High Court that you have just mentioned and the situation in that country .
As a consequence of this ruling , all ship recycling yards will be closed within two weeks as they have not been authorised by the Ministry of the Environment .
The import of dangerous ships that are on a list will be banned and all imported ships will have to be pre-cleaned .
Finally , Bangladesh will start developing a national law on ship breaking in line with the Basel Convention .
Now , let me turn to the situation closer to home by answering your questions .
Your first question concerns the phasing-out of the beaching method - the method of dismantling end-of-life vessels directly on the beach .
I share your concerns about the serious risks this presents to human health and the environment .
We considered the question of introducing an EU ban on beaching in the impact assessment of our strategy .
There were some concerns regarding the effectiveness of any such ban since it would be only applicable to EU-flagged ships and could be easily and legally circumvented by changing flag .
We believe it will be more effective to put our efforts into ensuring that the technical guidelines currently being developed to support the future IMO Convention really do lead to safe and environmentally sound ship recycling .
The progress in the development of these guidelines is , so far , very encouraging .
It is very doubtful in any case that the traditional beaching method would be able to comply with the forthcoming guidelines .
And , regarding your second question , I am pleased to confirm that the Commission is fully committed to working towards an effective and early transposition of the Ship Recycling Convention into EU legislation .
The Environment DG has already launched several studies and is working on assessing the impacts of the key elements of the Convention .
I believe that it is extremely important for the European Union to show leadership and the high priority that we attach to this issue .
This will encourage the ratification by third countries and consequently speed up the entry into force of this convention .
But I share the concerns highlighted in your third question regarding the importance of not undermining the existing Community acquis .
We need to safeguard the existing requirements in terms of workers ' rights and environmental protection when transposing the IMO Convention .
And in our study , we will therefore carefully compare the requirements of the IMO Convention with our Community acquis .
And I would like to stress that we will , in particular , ensure that the 2006 Waste Shipment Regulation is not undermined .

on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - ( ES ) Mr President , Commissioner , this question , as explained by Mr Blokland , is very timely , given the diplomatic conference on the convention for the recycling of ships , to be held in May .
I would therefore like to congratulate Mr Blokland not only on the question but also on the resolution that he has drawn up .
In the Partido Popular , we are in favour of combating the bad practices and methods in use in relation to the scrapping of ships and we therefore support Mr Blokland 's motion for a resolution ; there are , however , certain points that worry us .

The first is paragraph 3 - to which Mr Blokland himself has also already referred - which states that ships should be considered in their entirety as hazardous waste and should therefore fall within the scope of the Basel Convention .
We have tabled an amendment on this paragraph , because there are differing interpretations , both within and outside and European Union , and we believe that the Basel Convention should be taken into account and that there should be no conflict with it .
It ought to be the future international agreement on the scrapping of ships , however , that defines the details of its application .
Paragraph 14 of the motion for a resolution also calls for a funding mechanism that is based on mandatory contributions from the maritime transport sector .
It really seems to us a little premature to be talking at the moment about mandatory contributions when there has so far been no decision , within the International Maritime Organization , as to what the system is to be that is to be adopted through this funding , and it seems to me that the European Commission does not have a clear response on this subject either .
Finally , in paragraph 15 there is a call for the Commission to establish clearly that the state with jurisdiction over waste is the responsible state .
We do not believe that this is a matter for the Commission to decide ; on the contrary , we think that this ought also to be decided in an international agreement .
What is important is to safeguard consistency between the future agreement on the recycling of ships and the Basel Convention on the Control of Transboundary Movements of Hazardous Wastes and their Disposal , while taking into account not only the Basel Convention but also all the existing legislation .

Member of the Commission . - Mr President , thank you for the comments both from Ms Ayuso and Mr Blokland , and especially for the latter 's committed work .
As I said before , especially regarding waste or hazardous waste , here we need to ensure that implementation of the Convention will be fully in line with Regulation ( EC ) No 1013 / 2006 on shipments of waste , which was adopted relatively recently .
Regarding funding , there is no fund or mechanism for the time being .
We have launched a study in order to prepare the potential options or solution , and we will soon start public consultations on this issue .
So your comments , now and then , will be very welcome , particularly on the establishment of the dismantling fund .
- The debate is closed .
The vote will take place on Thursday , 26 March 2009 .
White Paper on damages actions for breach of the EC antitrust rules ( debate )
- The next item is the report by Klaus-Heiner Lehne , on behalf of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs , on the White Paper on damages actions for breach of the EC antitrust rules - .

rapporteur . - ( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , first may I thank the shadow rapporteurs , especially Mr Sánchez Presedo on behalf of the socialists and Mrs Bowles on behalf of the liberals , who worked very successfully with me on the compromise text being tabled today as a report on the Commission 's White Paper .
We have managed this time to achieve a very large , cross-group majority and a really viable compromise , which can also be used as a guideline for future work by the European Commission and later , during the law-making process , by Parliament and the Council .
We have made clear in this report - and rightly so - that , where competition rules are infringed , Parliament stands by the view that , according to the European tradition , it is primarily the task of the authorities - both the national competition authorities and the European competition authority - to take action and that this is not creating a second arm , as it were , on an equal footing with official action in the fight against cartels .
We have deliberately chosen a different path in Europe from the US , with which the situation is often compared .
There is political consensus in the House that we need a solution for so-called mass claims .
If the illegal conduct of individuals damages a very large number of persons who suffer comparatively minor losses , then a separate solution is needed for such proceedings , for which normal procedural law is simply not effective enough .
The creation of such an instrument is also part of providing access to law and further developing the internal market .
On this we are agreed .
There was also consensus that we do not want a litigation industry to develop in Europe as it has in America , with turnover of USD 240 billion , which is ultimately of no advantage to consumers and , as we all know from simply reading the relevant books , mainly profits American law firms .
None of this has much to do with the rule of law , nor do we want it to .
We agreed that the procedural torture instruments of the American system should not be adopted in Europe .
This applies in particular to the taking of evidence and costs .
That is a very important point .
We also agreed that we were basically of the opinion that , from a point of view of principle , legislation at European level can only be an opt-in solution and that an opt-out solution would only be permissible here where the Member States already have a similar solution and national constitutional law so allows .
An opt in is not allowed under every country 's national constitutional law and it also contradicts the principle of the adult consumer .
As we insistently complain , the European Commission has completely forgotten to deal with the question of out-of-court settlements in its White Paper .
The Directorate-General on Competition and the Commission have gone straight for litigation .
However , as we have known for years from the debate in this House on legal policy , that is not always the ideal way forward and , as a rule , out-of-court settlement mechanisms are often much more suitable for resolving problems .
Moreover , parallel work by the Directorate-General on Consumer Protection on the same issue has progressed much further .
This Directorate-General used a broad margin for these alternative settlement instruments in its Green Paper , which is one consultation stage before this .
We are convinced that the European Commission urgently needs to rework this question .
One last point , which is also crucial : we do not want fragmentation of the law .
Now competition law is going off and creating such an instrument .
Consumer protection is coming along on the same issue .
We know that at some point something similar will be considered in relation to capital market law , environmental law and social law .
We consider it absolutely necessary for a horizontal approach to be considered as well and for us at least to support the procedural instruments which are more or less the same in all areas with a horizontal instrument .
That is also of decisive importance .


Member of the Commission . - Mr President , I welcome , on behalf of the Commission , Mr Lehne 's report , adopted by the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs ( ECON ) and adopted as a sign of strong consensus across the political groups .
We are also pleased that this report strongly supports the white paper .
The Commission notes that the report agrees with the findings of this paper , that victims of European Community competition law infringements currently face considerable difficulties in claiming compensation for the harm suffered by them .
We agree that measures must be taken to ensure full compensation of those victims .
We also share the view that collective redress is crucial for consumers and small businesses in order to give them a realistic and efficient possibility to obtain compensation in cases of scattered damage .
The Commission also fully agrees with the ECON Committee report , that excessive or abusive litigation must be avoided .
To this end , therefore , collective redress mechanisms must include appropriate safeguards .
Finally , we fully agree that its approach to collective redress must be consistent and that compatibility must , therefore , be ensured between initiatives targeted at various areas , such as competition law or consumer protection laws .
At the same time , the Commission welcomes the acknowledgement that a consistent approach to collective redress does not necessarily mean that all areas would have to be dealt with in one single horizontal instrument .
The call for consistency must not unduly delay the development of measures identified as necessary for the full enforcement of the European Community competition law .
rapporteur for the opinion of the Committee on Internal Market and Consumer Protection . - ( RO ) The Committee on Internal Market and Consumer Protection has formulated its position based on a certain reality : the negative effects resulting from the breach of antitrust legislation can be felt economically very often at the end of the commercial chain , affecting end consumers and small enterprises .
In this case , damages for the losses suffered are important but , at the same time , they are difficult to obtain , as many have been affected and small sums are involved .
As a result , we have requested a package of legislative and non-legislative measures to provide the tool which all European citizens affected by such a situation can use to defend their right to full , proper damages .
We support all measures designed to eliminate difficulties in achieving this objective : facilitating access to documents , reducing the costs of legal procedures and reversing the burden of proof .
We welcome the Commission 's proposal to combine representative actions brought by qualified entities with collective actions , with explicit agreement expressed .
However , we consider that ' opt-out ' collective actions must continue to be discussed , given the benefit they provide : a ' once and for all ' settlement and less uncertainty .
Although the EU Treaty clearly prohibits cartels and other infringements of competition law , it is still difficult for affected consumers in the European Community to claim their rights to compensation .
In Romania , for example , a cartel set up in the cement industry was recently fined several million euro .
However , the current legislation in force does not oblige authorities with the powers to monitor competition to get involved in compensation for victims .
I would like to stress the need for these authorities to take into consideration the compensation paid or which should be paid when they calculate the fines imposed on companies which are found guilty of abuses , so as to prevent discrepancies between the harm caused and the punitive measures applied , and especially to ensure damages are paid to those affected by such practices .
This is why I welcome the Commission 's intention to improve the methods for guaranteeing the rights of consumers affected by infringement of the law throughout Europe .
Parliament stated very clearly that there must not be any ' opt-out ' system in Europe .
Therefore , the victims must be identified as quickly as possible at the time a complaint is made .
The ' opt-in ' system guarantees that victims affected by the infringement of competition law will actually be compensated .
Parliament does not want anyone else , be it lawyers , trade associations or the Consumer Protection Office , to benefit as a result of private actions .
I also believe that Parliament is adding a new important element which the Commission 's proposal has omitted .
Alternative dispute resolution mechanisms are in many cases much more effective for victims who are entitled to compensation than judicial procedures .
I am referring to the fact that at the time when compensation is being sought , settlements must be initiated first of all outside the courts .
They are much less costly than private actions as consumers will be compensated for the losses suffered much more quickly .
on behalf of the PSE Group . - Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , this report has been approved unanimously in the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs .
Not only is this an excellent outcome , but also , given the difficult , complex and controversial nature of the issues in question , it is an exceptional one , which should give impetus to and solidly cement the new pillar of private actions , which is vital in making the policy of Community competence effective .
This is a new step in the direction of a more advanced and effective policy of responsibilities , which will be more respectful of the rights of victims and more effective in imposing liability on the infringer .
I would therefore like , firstly , to congratulate the rapporteur , Mr Lehne , who has had the principal responsibility for bringing this task to a successful conclusion .
The quality of his ideas , his open spirit and readiness to engage in dialogue , and his intelligence in extracting the best compromises have been vital in achieving this .
I would like to extend my congratulations to the draftsmen of opinions , the shadow rapporteurs and those who tabled amendments , who have made such a positive contribution to enriching the report .
The Commission 's White Paper entitled ' Damages actions for breach of the EC antitrust rules ' is a response to a request made by the European Parliament in its resolution on the Green Paper , the content of which it accepts in large part .
This is the case when , among other aspects , it endorses the complementary nature of public and private legal actions , and positions itself in favour of group actions , although avoiding the excess of US class actions , thus facilitating the claiming of damages ; when it proposes access to relevant information under judicial control , although avoiding a fishing expedition , and when it recognises and calls for the bringing of independent actions or follow-up actions and a voluntary compensation system .
The report stands up for codecision by the European Parliament in the establishment of the legal framework for the bringing of damages actions for breach of EC antitrust rules .
This position should not be understood as a denial of the policy of Community competence as a legal basis for the legislation , but as an upgrading of the requirements of the ordinary procedure in this sphere , to meet the higher values recognised in the Treaty .
When a regulation has a significant effect on a fundamental right , such as the right of citizens to effective legal protection - which forms part of the European system and that of the Member States - the democratic principle and respect for national legal traditions - which require that such matters may only be regulated by means of provisions at the legal level , or , in other words , with action by the direct representatives of the public - demands the legislative participation of the European Parliament .
It also establishes a horizontal , integrated approach for tackling the shared problems which the bringing of private legal actions within competition law may have with other realms , thus avoiding a fragmented , inconsistent approach .
Private legal actions may be brought by a public body and also by individual or group actions .
This second arrangement may be carried out directly by the victims or indirectly , through qualified entities , whether appointed in advance or designated ad hoc , such as consumer or business associations .
Where actions are brought by qualified entities , the group of victims must be defined in the submission of the application , but the identification of each one can be done later on , although it must be clearly established as soon as possible , avoiding unnecessary delays and complying with the existing legislation .
This solution is very important for cases of lower and fragmented damages .
The report raises in a balanced way the question of access to the information necessary for bringing follow-up actions .
The protection of business secrets should be safeguarded , as should the effectiveness of clemency programmes , for which guidelines are requested .
Conditions are set so that the decisions taken by an authority which is a member of the Community competition authorities network can become binding in another Member State and so that , with full compliance with the principle of liability , the burden of proof is reversed and it is presumed that fault or blame exist when the existence of a breach has been established .
It is also worth highlighting the acceptance of the ' passing-on ' defence for indirect victims and a system that simplifies and reduces the costs of proceedings .
I would also like to emphasise the positive interaction between public and private actions , both in incentivising compensation for victims and in establishing the five-year period for the bringing of actions .
I would like to end by expressing my gratitude to the Commission for the dialogue that has been maintained throughout this procedure and by asking the Commissioner to submit without delay the initiatives required for its developments .

on behalf of the ALDE Group . - Mr President , I would like to start by thanking Mr Lehne for his report and to confirm that my group will be supporting that report .
I would also like to say that I find it a little odd that we are having this debate late at night when we have a question on the same subject tabled for tomorrow morning .
It would have made a great deal of sense to have put both together .
However , in complimenting the report , let me say that my group 's starting point will be ' doing justice ' - doing justice for SMEs and consumers across the European Union , where they have to face inappropriate and anti-competitive action .
A few weeks ago my group organised a seminar at Parliament in Brussels , and I was very struck by certain of our visitors who were at the sharp end of such anti-competitive action , ironically in the cement industry .
What did they say ?
Please , please , get on with this : we need something that will allow us to pursue these inappropriate operators in the European market .
We want a European solution , and we want it sooner rather than later , because , if we do not get it , my forecast and my warning is this : some of our Member States will develop systems that will lead to forum shopping as a result of free movement of judgements .
So , please - a European system as soon as possible .
- I shall make sure that your point concerning the agenda is communicated to the Conference of Presidents , which fixes the agenda - sometimes it makes mistakes .
Mr President , the internal market is the EU 's absolute greatest contribution to freedom and prosperity in Europe .
Among other things , it requires effective antitrust legislation .
What we are now considering is the issue of damages actions for breach of antitrust rules .
There are good fundamental reasons for citizens and companies to be able to claim damages .
Mr Lehne 's report indicates , to some extent unintentionally , the problems and the risks involved .
The white paper talks of a European legal culture , but this does not exist .
We should not create regulations based on wishful thinking .
The rapporteur intends us to avoid an ' Americanised ' compensation culture .
This is also wishful thinking .
On the contrary , the risks of such a culture occurring are high .
The division of responsibility between the EU institutions and the Member States has been ignored .
There is no objective analysis of what is required by the subsidiarity principle .
The principle is quite simply not taken seriously .
There are also many other unclear points and points that are at risk of being completely arbitrary .
Paragraphs 7 and 11 together instil a sense of misgiving .
An obvious starting point must be damages actions on the basis of a breach of antitrust rules .
It requires the crime to have been established in court , after which res judicata would presumably have to apply , even in the context of an individual claim , so that judgments relating to a single case cannot be revisited .
Paragraphs 15 and 18 together allow the plaintiff to choose the legal system that is most favourable .
This creates legal uncertainty and will result in ' forum shopping ' , which will be a real threat .
The information asymmetry is to be reduced by forcing companies to provide information to the plaintiff .
This will result in the subjective handling of important business information , which can be misused .
There are far too many risks and points that are unclear at this stage .
The Chamber should therefore reject this report and request a more detailed analysis of the issue before we take a decision .
- ( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , first a very big thank you to the rapporteur , Mr Lehne , who has done a magnificent job and has found appropriate solutions to a very difficult question in agreement with the Members from the other groups .
I see from the debate that we are all agreed that we need a horizontal approach for all collective claims and I therefore ask the Commission not to table separate proposals by individual Directorates General for each separate area , but at best to give us a truly collective legal redress mechanism covering all areas for the European internal market and for European citizens and of course - as Mrs Wallis said - for European SMEs .
We are united in the thought that the interests of those damaged by a cartel must be effectively upheld and that we must subject the European economy to cartel control in accordance with the principle of the social market economy .
Nor do we want any abuse of the various national regulations in the form of forum shopping .
However , this evening 's debate has not afforded me very much information on the most effective way of achieving this , because I believe that the potential of collective claims is often overestimated .
That is why it is important to lay down again certain benchmarks against which we have to measure all collective claim procedures .
We must answer the question of whether additional legal protection for consumers or victims in mass claims , cross-border litigation and litigation which affects more than one Member State really is necessary .
We must allow for the Member States ' procedural constraints - opt out , opt in and numerous other points - in the European procedure .
If this is simply not possible , as the Commission itself has already partially conceded , then we need the Member States ' legal instruments on board and a common procedure with the Member States ' parliaments in order to serve the interests of European consumers .
We definitely want to avoid collective claims in Europe along the lines of the US model .
We want to ensure that compensation is awarded , but only to those who actually sustained losses .
We want to advise as emphatically as possible against unjustified claims and we want to promote alternative settlement procedures .

- ( SV ) Mr President , I , too , would like to thank Mr Lehne for a constructive and thorough report , which addresses important issues within competition law and increases consumer protection .
The European Court of Justice grants individuals and companies the right to damages for breaches of the competition rules , but in spite of that fact the reality is that individuals who have suffered loss as a result of a breach of EC antitrust rules rarely receive compensation .
We must therefore create mechanisms that increase trust and make it easier for individuals to be able to assert their rights across borders .
We know that consumers and small businesses are frightened of instigating proceedings because of concern about long drawn-out processes and , in particular , high costs .
Changes in this regard will promote cross-border trade .
If we are to have a functioning internal market throughout the EU where people can rely on their case being examined in a legally certain manner and on receiving full compensation for the damages caused , in other words the loss , we must also find new mechanisms to facilitate group claims .
When we talk about group claims , the subject of the US and its experiences and extremes always comes up .
We must , of course , learn from this , but we should not allow ourselves to be intimidated .
Europe must have a European system , not an American one .
If we do nothing the situation will only get worse .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , thank you all for very interesting contributions , especially the introductory exposé of Klaus-Heiner Lehne .
This was very interesting , and I now see why you are so consensual and working not only together in committee but also in plenary on these issues .
There is not much I can add , except perhaps on the legal bases .
Of course it depends on the objectives and the content of the action proposed , and I want to assure you , as a Commissioner - for another portfolio , perhaps , but I speak on behalf of the Commission - that , in principle , we seek very close cooperation with Parliament .
How to establish this with regard to a practical , concrete item or issue remains to be seen , but we will strive for close cooperation or as close cooperation with Parliament as is possible under the applicable legal basis .
On what you have said about fragmentation and a horizontal approach , I think the answer from the Commission - and it is very visible in the white paper - is a consistent , coherent approach , and I think that the European legal tradition and the roots of our legal culture are different from the oft-quoted American ones .
But I think that we can learn from the others and further build up our system .
On public enforcement and justice , of course , I think it is very important that we are not going towards lessening this enforcement , and , of course , Articles 81 and 82 are very important pillars of the EU single market and policies .
They are about justice , and damages actions are complementary to this law enforcement .
Last - but maybe not least - what was said about out-of-court settlements .
The Commission is in favour , but the precondition or the base for such an approach , which would be welcome , is an existing and functioning efficient litigation system on damages actions at the level of Member States .
So I think we need to not only encourage but help our Member States so that such issues and systems are running in the EU of 27 .
Then I think we may also come to these points .
But , in principle , thank you very much for what was , for me , too , a very interesting debate , and all the best .
rapporteur . - ( DE ) Mr President , Commissioner , first may I thank my honourable friends for their very helpful contributions .
I think that we all pulled together and achieved a good result .
However , I also want to say quite clearly to the Commission , in order to avoid any misunderstanding : from Parliament 's point of view , there is no question of your tabling a bill that is probably already fit for nothing .
Absolutely no question .
We expect the Commission to take account of what we have decided today and for it to be included in the actual legislation proposed .
The horizontal approach is not only an important aspect on the basis of the arguments which I expounded earlier ; the Commissioner personally also addressed the question of the legal basis .
With such an important project , an approach must be chosen which ultimately guarantees that Parliament is involved as a legislator on an equal footing .
If an approach based purely on competition law is chosen , that would not be the case under the Treaty of Nice currently in force .
This is also a very fundamental political argument in favour of why we consider a horizontal approach to be the right one .
I think the Commission should consider this very seriously .
Another decisive point in my opinion is that we still need something on the question of out-of-court settlements .
You spoke earlier of convergence with the work of the Directorate-General on Competition .
However , if one compares the Green Paper on consumer protection with the White Paper on competition , one does not necessarily get the impression that there is really any such convergence .
The most blatant example is the different treatment - or to be more exact the lack of treatment - of out-of-court settlement mechanisms in the White Paper .
There is still a series of other problems which we expect to be resolved .
I just want to refer briefly to the question of access to the European Commission 's files .
It is possible in all criminal proceedings in which compensation is being claimed to inspect the public prosecutor 's case files .
Why does this not apply to the European Commission ?
It is beyond me .
The same applies to the question of fixing penalties : this also needs to be taken into account from the point of view that it must be possible to claim compensation in future .
Here too the Commission urgently needs to rework the text and table more specific texts and proposals than those included so far in the White Paper .
May I say quite clearly from Parliament 's point of view , in order to avoid any misunderstanding : we expect more than what is contained in the White Paper and we also expect the Directorate-General on Competition as a whole to follow our suggestions , otherwise there will be resistance in this House .
- I should like to thank you all for your contributions on this important topic and also thank the Commissioner , the staff and the interpreters .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place on Thursday , 26 March 2009 .
Written statements ( Rule 142 )
in writing . - ( ET ) Parliament 's report emphasises the usefulness of leniency programmes in exposing cartel agreements , and I am glad to be able to say here that a draft leniency programme is presently being discussed in the Estonian parliament .
This should become an important part of the struggle against cartels , which is important both for the better functioning of the common market and in order to protect consumer rights , because consumer prices may rise as much as 25 % due to cartel agreements .
I do , however , believe that representative actions can also play an important role in the effective implementation of competition law and the improvement of consumer protection , and thus we must also devote attention to this , both at the Estonian and European Union levels .
Research has proven that representative actions would significantly improve consumers ' willingness to stand up for their rights , and in countries where consumer activeness is low because of the fear of the complexity and cost of such undertakings , measures such as representative actions are of crucial importance .
Documents received : see Minutes
Agenda for next sitting : see Minutes
Closure of the sitting
( The sitting closed at 11.15 p.m. )
Opening of the sitting
( The sitting was opened at 10 a.m. )
Food distribution to the most deprived persons in the Community ( amendment of the Single CMO Regulation ) ( debate )
The next item is the report by Mr Sierkierski , on behalf of the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development , on food distribution to the most deprived persons in the Community - C6-0353 / 2008 - .
Madam President , Commissioner , today we are discussing an extremely important subject - the programme of food distribution to the most deprived persons in the Community .
It is important because it concerns millions of people who live in poverty and need particular help .
We support the proposal of the European Commission to increase the budget by two thirds , that is from EUR 305 million to nearly EUR 500 million annually , and to extend the range of products available under the programme .
Of course , the programme will not solve the problems of malnutrition and poverty among the Community 's citizens , but it will certainly help to ease these problems .
We are against the proposal for the immediate introduction - I repeat , immediate introduction - of co-financing from national budgets , because this could limit or even exclude some countries from participation in the programme .
Countries where the per capita income is low and where there are also budget problems would be especially concerned .
This is all the more significant because of the current economic crisis .
I believe that the Council will manage to work out a compromise in this matter .
We also support the proposal that food products earmarked for distribution under the programme come from the European Union .
As far as possible this should be fresh local food , and this will mean we will support home food producers by raising demand . We will also be sure that the food distributed is of the right quality .
Much controversy has surrounded the legal basis of the programme .
As we know , the Council 's legal services challenged the opinion of the Commission .
The Commissioner can count on the support of Parliament in this matter .
I share the opinion of the Commission on setting clear priorities and long-term planning .
Extending the programme for three years will help to make the expenditure of available resources more effective .
By adopting the report Parliament will send a positive signal to our citizens .
Since the EU gives aid to the poorest countries of Africa , and of course we support that , it must also remember its own citizens .
The EU food programme for the poorest of the European Union , like the ' Fruit at School ' and ' Milk at School ' programmes , is changing attitudes towards the EU and the common agricultural policy , which have been so heavily criticised by many people .
Our citizens should know that the food which they receive comes from EU programmes and from EU funds .
The programme confirms that the EU feels responsible for its most needy citizens .
This group includes particularly the homeless , families in difficulty , the unemployed , single parents , migrants , asylum seekers and people of advanced age or with limited resources .
Often they are people with disabilities , or even children .
It should be remembered that the transformations which have taken place in the countries which recently joined the EU have produced major stratification of income in their societies .
What is more , in some of these countries disparities in income and living standards are growing all the time .
Families living in small towns and inhabitants of villages are particularly affected by poverty .
There are growing numbers of people who cannot afford the basic necessities of life .
We have a kind of stalemate in the Council , where everyone is waiting for the opinion of Parliament , and I am convinced that adoption of my report will persuade the Czech Republic , which currently holds the presidency , to renew discussion and find a rational compromise in the Council .
Let us hope that legislative work will finish in May or June this year .
I would like to encourage those Member States which do not participate in the programme to join in .
Finally , on behalf of the millions of inhabitants who benefit from the programme , the charitable organisations which distribute the food and on my own behalf I would like to thank all MEPs , and not only those who supported my report .

Member of the Commission . - Madam President , before going into the content of this proposal , I would like to thank the rapporteur , Mr Siekierski , and the members of the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development for their work on this report .
I would like to start by putting today 's debate into context , because this proposal is not about paragraphs , political power or promises : it is about people .
Millions of Europeans are hit by difficult economic times and by the rapid rise we have seen in food prices since 2007 .
There are more people than we realise for whom the lack of adequate food is a daily concern : 43 million Europeans cannot afford a meal with meat , chicken or fish every second day .
I think that is a striking figure .
The programme for the most deprived targets those in our society who are in need of food aid : people who worry whether they can feed their children tomorrow ; people who do not think about what they will eat that night for dinner but about whether they will have anything to eat ; people who enter no restaurant but the one carrying the name of Resto du Cœur .
With more than 13 million poor people benefiting from the programme , with 19 Member States participating and with the scheme being a stable outlet for intervention products , this programme has certainly shown its value .
Parliament recognised this already in 2006 , when it called on the Council and the Commission to place the programme on a permanent footing for the future and to extend the distribution of foodstuffs , without restricting it to the products for which intervention applies .
I am pleased to note that the report by Mr Siekierski endorses the Commission 's approach and agrees that it is necessary to keep the programme within the common agricultural policy .
This is particularly important at a time when some claim that feeding people has nothing to do with our agriculture policy .
Until now , the programme has been financed exclusively by the Community budget .
Our proposal now includes cofinancing .
That is a significant change , but I believe it is a fundamental improvement of the scheme .
Cofinancing will enable the total funds available for this measure to be more in balance with the real needs ; it will encourage Member States to take greater responsibility for the programme 's management , and it is also a way to strengthen the cohesive element , since cohesion countries will have less cofinancing .
At the same time , I share the view that we should not run the risk of Member States withdrawing from the scheme .
Therefore , we proposed a gradual phasing-in of cofinancing rates in order to maintain the difference between the cohesion and non-cohesion Member States .
I agree that we should do more to guarantee the nutritional quality of the food distributed .
As the rapporteur mentioned , this could mean including fresh produce , in most cases produced locally .
But it is not appropriate to outlaw foreign products or products coming from outside the European Union , as proposed in your report .
That would mean additional and burdensome controls .
It could be seen as a signal of EU protectionism , and it could even be questioned by our WTO partners .
That being said , the large majority of the food distributed will in reality be produced in the European Union , mainly from intervention stocks and most probably from the tenders that we are now making , in particular in the dairy sector .
Given that charities are heavily involved in the scheme , our proposal gives the possibility to reimburse the transport and administrative costs of the NGOs .
You suggest that storage costs should be covered as well .
I am fundamentally in favour of this idea , but I cannot agree to your suggestion of leaving it to the Member States to fix the rates of reimbursement .
We need to set the same maximum rate for all participating countries , not least to make sure that the programme remains efficient and keeps the focus on supplying food .
Finally , let me stress that the Council is waiting for the outcome of today 's debate and vote before continuing its discussions .
I hope Ministers have used the waiting time constructively .
And from today 's debate should , therefore , be sent a clear message : do not forget those waiting in line at the soup kitchen or waiting for the next food package .
So do not wait too long !
We need to put this food aid scheme on a permanent footing for the future .
draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on Regional Development . - ( ES ) Madam President , the present economic crisis throughout Europe will lead to an increase over the next few years in the number of people finding themselves under the poverty threshold .
This number has already reached 80 million , in other words 16 % of the world population .
In the face of this crisis , it is of primary importance that we ensure continuity in the provision of food to those people most in need .
The intervention stocks have so far been a useful tool both for providing the poorest people in the community with food , and at the same time ensuring stability in the prices received by European producers .
However , these stocks are being progressively eliminated .
It would seem fitting that the new aid programme for the poorest would also serve as an outlet for European Community produce .
In this way , we would be helping to keep farmers in rural areas .
The European Commission 's proposal does not demand that the food involved in the programme be produced exclusively in the Community , since it considers that to be contrary to the rules of the World Trade Organisation .
I would like to remind the Commission , however , that the United States devotes nothing more and nothing less than 67 % of its agricultural budget to food programmes for the most disadvantaged , which also has the add-on benefit of preferentially helping its farmers and cattlemen .
This percentage is in sharp contrast with the expenditure proposed in the new Community programme , which would equate to only 1 % of the common agricultural policy ( CAP ) budget .
Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I , too , wish to express my sincere thanks to Mr Siekierski for his report .
I would be so bold as to say that he has produced an extremely good piece of work .
For more than two decades the European Union has had a programme for food distribution to the most deprived people .
Thus , in 2006 , for example , it was possible to provide support to around 13 million people from 15 Member States by means of various aid measures .
I believe this programme - and this is something that both the Commissioner and the rapporteur have already said - will play an important part in maintaining and promoting solidarity within our European community , because in my opinion the EU is , and remains , not only an economic common market , but also first and foremost a community of values and solidarity .
Also in the context of a modern socio-environmental market economy with the three pillars of economy , environment and social affairs - all three being of equal importance so that all Member States can participate in this programme - I support the view of the rapporteur that , as previously , the programme should be funded 100 % by the European Union .
I would like to emphasise that , although it is important for us primarily to use products produced within the Community , it should not , where necessary , remain solely limited to these products .
Finally , I would like to say that for me , personally , it goes without saying that we should help the poorest of the poor to the extent that we are able to do so .
I very much hope that today , as the Commissioner said , a large majority will vote in favour of this report so that we can give a clear signal to the Council .
Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the first thing I would like to do is to congratulate the rapporteur , with whom we have very similar views as regards this programme , and secondly to congratulate everyone involved , because in such a time of economic crisis , it is fundamental to maintain a programme like this , with obvious positive social effects .
Although we are only involved in a consultation procedure , we must send out a clear political message from the European Parliament at this time of economic uncertainty .
We must send a message from Brussels and Strasbourg , that we are not only or exclusively concerned with the recovery of the financial system , but that we are also fully aware of the need to develop our social policies , especially those which support the people most in need , the poorest in the European Union .
We agree with the Commission that this food distribution programme should continue to be considered part of the common agricultural policy for several reasons : because European agriculture has a marked social dimension , because this programme is a tool that works , because now we need it more than ever , and because it has to continue operating .
We in the Socialist Group in the European Parliament , like the rapporteur , are against this programme being cofinanced by the European Union and its Member States , since that would mean discrimination between states according to their wealth , which could then lead to a situation whereby the programme could not be put into practice in the most disadvantaged countries .
It is difficult to comprehend why , at a time when it is most needed , the Commission wants to save Community money from the CAPs most social facet , especially since there is a budgetary surplus every year in the agricultural budget .
Full Community funding is fundamental for us .
We need to ensure that this programme will reach out to all countries , and especially those most in need .
The 43 million potential beneficiaries of this programme require that we make a huge effort and do not avoid budgetary expenditure under any circumstances .
Austerity , yes , but not where the poorest people are concerned .
This programme must cover the whole trajectory of the food distributed to ensure that it reaches citizens in all the Member States .
In order to achieve this goal , we in the Socialist Group , for which I am the shadow rapporteur , have brought forward an amendment proposing that all expenditure arising from distribution , storage and administration be defrayed from Community finances .
We also agree with the rapporteur that the food should be of high quality , and preferably sourced from the Community .
This approach is in keeping with this Parliament 's position on other similar programmes which we were recently discussing in the House , such as the plan to hand out fruit in the schools .
Many thanks , that is all . We hope that the Commission will take into account the Parliament 's position when it votes and , above all , we hope that it will put this plan into action within the Union as soon as possible .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - ( DE ) Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , let me start by making it clear that the distribution of food to deprived people is , for me , not at issue in the forthcoming vote on the report by Mr Siekierski , particularly in these difficult economic times .
I would therefore also like to make it clear at the outset that it was not easy to find a common line within our Group .
I therefore respect the personal decision of any member of the Group to deviate from this and not to support our intended rejection of the report .
Why am I unable to support the result of the committee vote as it stands ?
There are a number of reasons for this , which have absolutely nothing to do with helping deprived people within the European Union in these difficult economic times .
On the contrary , amendments tabled by my colleague Mr Busk on behalf of the Group of the Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe , although unfortunately found not to be permissible , were intended to give the existing system a future-oriented foundation .
The system in place up to now is an anachronism from the times of agricultural overproduction , which fortunately are now a thing of the past .
Due to the successful decoupling of direct payments , the intervention stocks have been constantly decreasing in recent years , with the result that , today , up to 85 % of the food has to be purchased on the free market .
However , that has altered the fundamental nature of the programme and has resulted in the loss of the agricultural dimension to the programme .
Since we are now dealing with a social programme , we need to create an appropriate legal basis for it .
In this regard , we share the view of the Council 's legal services that the only possible legal basis in place of Article 37 of the EC Treaty regarding the common agricultural policy is Article 308 , as otherwise it would clearly constitute an encroachment on the national competences of the Member States .
In view of the impermissible nature of our amendments , the only solution can be a new draft from the European Commission .
The Commission should also take to heart the principle of co-financing , as whether or not such programmes are meaningful in the mind of everyone can only be satisfactorily assessed at local level .
Madam President , in the European Union we are currently facing growing social stratification .
We have millions of people living in poverty , and their number is rising all the time .
This is happening in spite of the fact that the Socialists have been power in the Community and in many Member States for years , and they are said to be sensitive to poverty and inequality .
The EU was itself supposed to be a region of general prosperity .
Many people were naive and believed this , but the time for reflection has now come .
We must help those people in Europe who cannot cope on their own with poverty and rejection .
There are many such people in the old EU countries and many more in the new .
Besides the destructive action of the economic crisis , we can also see the effects of the colonial approach in the past of the old EU countries towards enterprises and banks in the new Member States .
Workplaces are still being destroyed , as for example the shipbuilding industry has been destroyed in Poland .
Mr Siekierski 's excellent report deals with how to distribute food to those most in need .
I fully agree with him that the Community as a whole should finance aid for the deprived , and that the food should come exclusively from EU countries .
The aid should reach orphanages , centres for the homeless and hungry children in schools , and should be distributed chiefly by local authorities , because they have the best information about what and how much is needed .
Madam President , Commissioner , the food aid programme is essential today .
As the rapporteur has written , in 2006 in the EU-25 alone 43 million people were undernourished and 79 million were threatened with poverty , which is more than 20 % of the total population of the EU .
The programme has helped one in six of the people in need .
So the problem is serious , and the phenomenon of poverty has worsened further following recent enlargements of the EU .
The statistics show that the programme only alleviates the problem of malnutrition but is not eliminating it .
It is a programme which treats the effects but does not eliminate the causes .
Is it not paradoxical that it is the inhabitants of country areas who are threatened by poverty and malnutrition ?
Those who should be producing food are in need of food aid , but rather than this being their fault , it is the effect of policy .
It is the effect of unsound agricultural policy , which causes the bankruptcy of family smallholdings and increases the number of people who need food aid .
The sustainable European Model of Agriculture of 1997 is a propaganda myth .
Family smallholdings were to be a key element in the model , but in fact it is the other way round .
It is these farms which are excluded , although they make up at least 95 % of all farms in the European Union .
Is it not paradoxical that we give most of the money in agriculture to those whose production is expensive ? To large animal farms which damage the environment , while farms which produce cheaply receive symbolic support ?
EU trade policy exposes us to sudden price rises , and competition policy has led to a monopoly on sales and to overpricing .
It is high time that these policies were changed .
It is these policies which have made food expensive , and which are the reason why the number of poor and undernourished citizens of the EU is growing .
( FR ) Madam President , Commissioner , the Lisbon Strategy is a great success in one area at least : the European Union has become one of the most competitive regions in the world where poverty creation is concerned .
We have thus been able to create 80 million poor people and 43 million starving Europeans , a figure that includes the elderly , who may die quicker and reduce public spending as a result , meaning that the Maastricht criteria can be met more effectively .
In France alone , 80 million meals are served each year by the charitable organisation Restos du Cœur .
In order to feed the poor since 1987 , we have had a food distribution programme with an annual budget of EUR 300 million .
EUR 300 million divided by 80 , divided by 12 , comes to 25 cents of food distributed each month to each of the 80 million poor .
This food was taken from the intervention stocks , but , since the 1992 reform , where the mountains of butter , the rivers of milk and the bulging refrigerators came up for criticism , these stocks have been used up .
For 2010-2012 , we shall be buying foodstuffs on the market , where non-European goods also appear , for the sake of the WTO and the fight against protectionism .
This means that , since 1962 , we have been feeding our herds of cattle imported oilseeds and , from 2010 , we shall be feeding our poor imports , too .
And all of this is cofinanced in the name of universality .
The problem , however , Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen - the real problem - is that there are still 80 million poor people after 22 years of having a food programme .
( DE ) Madam President , Commissioner , Mr Siekierski has done a great deal of work to produce this report and for this I would like to offer him my sincere thanks .
I also share his view that a lot of people , particularly now during the economic crisis , are facing the threat of poverty .
It would be an indictment of Europe if people here in Europe had to suffer hunger .
However , I have to disagree with the impression given that food has become more expensive .
That may be true in certain countries , but in Germany it is certainly not the case .
Partly as a result of erroneous decisions at European level , the price of milk and butter , for example , is lower than it has been for a long time and it has reached a level that is threatening the existence of many farms .
I have here some statistics which list the prices of food .
In 1970 , an industrial worker had to work for 243 minutes in order to be able to buy a kilogram of pork chops , a kilogram of beef , a kilogram of dark wheat and rye bread , ten eggs , 250 grams of butter , a kilogram of potatoes and a litre of milk ; in 2008 he had to work only 82 minutes .
This means he only required a third as much time in order to be able to afford this food .
In the explanatory statement it is stated that in Germany alone 9 million people face the threat of poverty .
A correction is also needed here .
In Germany , every citizen , every person is entitled to minimum benefit from the state and therefore none of these 9 million people need suffer hunger .
It is therefore important for the money that is made available here for food aid to be used in places in Europe where people are really facing the threat of hunger .
It would be a disgrace for Europe if we did not rectify this .
( PT ) Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the debate in which I should like to be taking part would be the one aiming to end all aid measures for the most deprived , due to these having become unnecessary .
Unfortunately , this is not the case at the moment in Europe and the world .
In the European Union , many families affected by unemployment or social exclusion have seen their incomes become inadequate to meet their most basic needs and , as a result , we owe them our solidarity .
The Commission proposal that we are debating merits our approval , all the more so as we must now , as in the past , find yet another way of easily disposing of our surpluses .
That is not the point today .
It is even justified for the financial allocations for this programme to be increased .
I also congratulate the Commission for proposing that this assistance should come from the agricultural budget .
No group shows solidarity more than farmers and no communities are more involved in mutual aid than rural communities .
I am sure that European farmers will take great pride in sharing part of the agricultural budget with those who are most in need .
My political group will therefore reject the proposals of the Group of the Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe , which question the legal basis of this regulation .
The Commission proposal can and must , however , be improved .
The Siekierski report , and also the amendment that the Socialist Group in the European Parliament will table in plenary , are good contributions which improve the proposal , particularly with regard to the eligibility of storage costs and the comprehensive Community financing of the programme .
I therefore call on plenary to adopt this report and on the Commission to accept Parliament 's contributions .
( LT ) The report on the amendment of the Council regulation on food distribution to the most deprived persons in the Community is being presented by the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development .
However , I would like to stress that faced with the current financial and economic crisis , support for the Community 's most deprived residents takes on a new - social policy - dimension .
EU food aid is very important in a period of crisis , as the number of unemployed increases and the subsistence level falls .
The number of unemployed in Lithuania this February was 16 times the number of jobs available .
At present in Lithuania about 20 % of residents are considered to be living in poverty .
In 2006 in the European Union 13 million residents received food aid .
It is forecast that in the nearest future 16 % or 80 million EU residents will be living below the poverty level .
Mr Siekierski 's report proposes leaving the food aid programme funding procedures currently in force , only allocating funds from the EU Budget , and disapproving the European Commission 's proposal to fund the programmes from the EU and Member State budgets .
The Commission 's proposal really does not match economic realities .
For many of the EU 's poorer countries , fighting the consequences of the crisis , it would be difficult to contribute to the funding of the food aid programme in the current period .
Funding from the EU Budget meanwhile , as has been the case since 1987 , would be effective support for poorer co-citizens , which would show true solidarity .
( IT ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , finally people are realising that with the new agricultural policy the storehouses are empty and , what is more , all funds have been transferred to direct aid and now we are resorting to the budget to feed the hungry .
Perhaps if we had used modulation to cream a bit more from those well-hidden persons who receive more than EUR 300 000 a year in direct aid , then today there would be more resources for our most deprived citizens .
Perhaps if we were to decide what to set aside for the deprived before production takes place , we would spend far less than if we purchased it on the market and we would achieve a policy for supporting certain markets in crisis , such as the milk market .
Perhaps if we could manage to use those products that are thrown away to rot because they are close to their expiry date or are left unsold on the general markets , we would kill two birds with one stone .
I do not even want to imagine that behind a noble cause a big market in aid is growing , putting its hands in the pockets of European taxpayers in defiance of those poor devils who are dying of hunger .
Madam President , feeding the hungry is a basic precept .
We rightly talk about it in the context of third countries , but rarely acknowledge real hunger in Europe .
However , gnawing hunger and severe malnutrition deficiencies , even without actual hunger , is a reality even in the most prosperous Member States .
Hunger in the midst of plenty is , and has always been , a scandal , and , in this report , we are trying to improve schemes to address it more effectively .
As an impoverished mother , I had reason to be grateful for the free milk given to families of young children in the 1970s in Ireland and for the low-cost milk my children received at school in the 1980s .
I would like to add one suggestion though , but not within the CAP .
As a result of some of the policies in the common fisheries policy , thousands of tonnes of edible fish are dumped dead over the sides of fishing boats around our coasts .
It is time we ended this waste .
We should land these so-called ' discards ' and give the fish to those who need it but cannot afford high-quality protein .
It would be very hard to find a better and more nourishing food .
Commissioner , can you speak to the Commissioner for fisheries on the extension of this scheme to include fish ?

( IT ) Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I wholeheartedly endorse the Siekierski report on a common organisation of agricultural markets and on specific provisions as regards food distribution to the most deprived persons in the Community .
This issue is all the more important given the financial crisis , the effects of which are being felt in the European economy .
The European Parliament , recognising the pressing need to meet the food requirements of the most deprived , has urged the Commission and the Council to put the European food aid programme on a permanent footing .
For the rest , ladies and gentlemen , last March , when adopting a resolution on rising prices in the EU and in developing countries , we in this House stated that the right to a sufficient and varied diet suitable for a healthy and active lifestyle is a fundamental right to be permanently guaranteed to all .
I believe that the food distribution programme for the most deprived should continue to represent a significant element of the common agricultural policy , precisely because the CAP works by stabilising prices and thus protecting those on lower incomes from price fluctuations .
I do not agree , however , with the co-financing percentages proposed in certain amendments , because they could lead some Member States to limit their participation in the programme .
Therefore I reject those amendments aimed at altering the legal basis .
I would emphasise that what is needed is complete funding by the European Union for the food aid programme ; thus I am in favour of the adoption of the draft legislative resolution .
Madam President , you have heard some diverging views around the House this morning on this issue .
I congratulate , of course , Mr Siekierski .
At a time of deepening economic recession and the tens of millions of people who are living in poverty and are hungry , of course , as a Parliament , we have to find ways of helping them and providing them with food aid .
But , as the Commissioner pointed out , there are 19 participating Member States in this project .
That means there are eight Member States not participating .
The UK is one of them , and the reason is that they use their own social policy to provide aid for the poor .
They withdrew from this scheme many years ago .
The question that many Member States and the Commission are asking is : why are we using the CAP to finance social policy ?
This used to be perfectly OK when we had massive surpluses - milk lakes , butter mountains and beef mountains - and were required to distribute this food to the poor , using the CAP budget to finance that distribution .
But now , when there is very little in intervention - and we are hearing now that we have to buy in food even from outwith the EU and use the CAP budget to store and distribute this food - this surely is becoming something that should be better handled by Member States ' social policy .
When you consider that there are people living in complete deprivation in some of the new Member States , like Romania , and many of these people , by the way , are subsistence farmers , they are the people who the poorest .
Yet we are potentially taking money from them - money from the CAP budget that could help them - to distribute this food aid , the main beneficiaries of which are actually old Member States , like France , Italy and Spain .
So there has not been a level playing field applied to this distribution of aid , and in future I think we should be very cautious about how we take this forward .
( FR ) Madam President , I believe that the issue of distributing food to the most deprived persons is extremely timely , but I do feel that , ultimately , the Commission 's proposal does not match up to the problem .
The cofinancing issue is of concern to me , and I feel that it is more the issue of liberalism , which has ruled the CAP assessments over the last few years , that should be called into question .
Food riots and sudden changes in the price of foodstuffs are constant indicators of the limits of agricultural market liberalisation .
Such liberalisation has always been to the detriment of fragile populations , fragile producers and fragile areas .
I therefore call for agricultural policy to regain its rights , to resume control at both European and international level and , from both a quantitative and a qualitative perspective , for the strategic area of agriculture and food not to be subject to strict market forces .
Of course , this is an urgent matter , and the Siekierski report responds to this urgency , which I am pleased about .
I hope , though , that , within the context of the discussions that are starting up on the future of the CAP , it will be pointed out that the main objective is to take a structural approach to combating the hunger and poverty that we are seeing throughout the EU and the world .
The rural areas are ready to meet our food requirements with sufficient amounts of high-quality produce ; they must be given the financial and human resources to assume this big responsibility .
( PL ) Madam President , food and housing account for over 90 % of expenditure in many people 's personal budgets .
Keeping food prices as low as possible has great social and humanitarian significance .
Seventy-nine million people in the European Union were affected by poverty and malnutrition in 2006 .
Now , as a result of the crisis and an increase in the number of inhabitants , the problem has grown significantly and the number of people in need of direct support in 2009 will definitely exceed 25 million .
Aid is an important element in the common agricultural policy because it releases intervention stocks while maintaining demand for food .
I support financing food aid , especially from EU funds but supplemented by particular countries depending on their ability , setting clear principles for giving aid , increasing the aid fund by at least EUR 200 million in 2009 , extending the list of food products and establishing principles of food purchase .
Aid has great political significance , because it confirms the cohesion of EU action on behalf of its citizens .
I congratulate Mr Siekierski on an excellent report .
( DE ) Madam President , Commissioner Fischer Boel , ladies and gentlemen , for 22 years the programme of food distribution to the most deprived persons in the Community has contributed to the implementation of extremely important aims of the common agricultural policy .
This is about , on the one hand , stabilising the markets by reducing the intervention stocks , while on the other supporting the poorest levels of the population in the Community with food .
In 2006 alone , 13 million people from 15 Member States benefitted from aid measures within this programme - valuable help that should be retained .
Now , however , there are justified concerns about the Commission 's proposal , which deviates from the old principles and does not want to use food from the intervention stocks alone for the programme , but also food bought on the free market .
Here , Commissioner , it is definitely a matter of social policy and not agricultural policy .
The argument that it is only with the additional purchase of food that the range of food offered will be able to provide a balanced diet , in my opinion , goes beyond the remit .
The rapporteur , Mr Siekierski , is now proposing the removal of co-financing .
However , this just emphasises once again the aspect of socio-political responsibility , which is why I would advocate co-financing .
The European Union must be clearly focussed on the well-being of the people .
There must be no hunger or want : that is something that all of the speakers this morning have once again clearly emphasised .
However , we must ensure a clear allocation of responsibilities .
It is not the case that agricultural policy wants to obstruct the aid and support for the poor .
However , with a fair and correct allocation of tasks and aid , the prospects for coordination and optimisation are also good .
European agricultural policy is currently facing , and will in future face , great challenges .
Changes to the content must always be seen in the overall context .
I would therefore ask the Commission and the Council for appropriate decisions and coordination in terms of social and agricultural policy .

( ES ) Madam President , I should like firstly to congratulate Mr Siekierski on what I consider to be an excellent report , which has garnered a lot of support within the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development .
As we all know , the Community 's intervention stocks have been used to provide food aid to those most in need for more than 20 years .
The problem , Mr Stevenson , is that successive common agricultural policy reforms have been greatly reducing the stocks .
I would also like to point out here that if we suppress or attempt to suppress this programme we would send out a very bad signal at this very delicate moment in time , when many Europeans do not have enough to eat .
In this respect , it is clear that when the stocks run out , and as I have already said they are gradually becoming more depleted , we will have to turn to the open market .
I would like to highlight here something that I see as a very positive element in the report , that when we turn to the market , there should be an obligation that the products be EU produced , locally sourced , and fresh .
It would also seem appropriate to me that the scheme should remain 100 % EU funded , since I feel that at times such as this the aid cannot and should not be dependent on each Member State 's capabilities , if we do not wish to go into those capabilities in detail .
Likewise , it would seem to be a good idea to extend the programme duration to three years .
Finally , I would like to point out that the European Commission still has time to use the interventions wherever they may be necessary or possible , and that more than one farming sector would appreciate it .
I am thinking in particular of the dairy producers in my region , Galicia , for whom such an intervention would help to solve the difficult situation that they are facing , and would at the same time help to provide food for the most deprived .

( PL ) Madam President , around 80 million people in the European Union live in poverty , which amounts to 16 % of the inhabitants of the EU .
The economic crisis threatens to increase the size of that group .
In Warsaw I see a line of people queuing for a bowl of soup every day .
That is why it is so important to maintain continuity in the Community programme of food distribution to the most deprived persons .
Direct supply of products will ensure a varied diet .
However , the Commission 's proposal includes the condition of co-financing , which in the case of the poorest Member States may lead to their withdrawal from the programme .
This would be inconsistent with the reason for introducing the programme , and in particular with the reduction of economic and social inequalities between regions , and would destroy the principle of solidarity .
I hope that Amendments 17 , 18 and 19 will remove this flaw .
I appeal to the Commission to prepare a programme which will remove the structural causes of poverty and not just its effects , and also for monitoring aimed at establishing how much of the aid reaches the poor , and how much is retained by intermediaries .
I congratulate the rapporteur .
( PL ) Madam President , Commissioner , the distribution of food to the most deprived persons is a very important area of EU activity .
I therefore thank the Commission for its proposal on this matter , and I thank Mr Siekierski for the report which we are discussing today .
Member States have made huge advances in improving the quality of life of their inhabitants .
However , poverty is still one of the most serious problems of contemporary Europe .
It is estimated that 43 million EU citizens are at risk of malnutrition - that is a shocking figure .
The distribution programme is helping many of these Europeans .
I know that not everyone likes the programme .
I understand that one may have doubts of a legal , economic or political nature , but I would like to know what alternative there would be to the programme , especially because the programme of food distribution also has a beneficial effect on the agricultural market , which is more stable thanks to the programme .
The EU is a global leader in giving aid to the poorest people of the world .
It is hard to imagine , that at the same time the Community could stop helping those of its own citizens who are facing serious problems , and therefore I hope that the Council will come to an understanding on this matter .

( HU ) I would like to congratulate the European Commission and the rapporteur , Mr Siekierski on this excellent initiative , a confirmation of the social sensitivity of the European Union and the Commission .
There are two things I would like to ask of the European Commission .
The first has to do with co-financing : I agree with the report , but I would like Mrs Fischer Boel to consider the fact that she is asking for co-financing from poorer Member States , those on tighter budgets , just where the need for food is the greatest .
My second request : transport costs should not be set at 4.5 % but , based on the principle of subsidiarity , should be left up to Member States , because lower rates may suffice to cover transport .
Finally , the EU logo should continue to be printed on product labels , since these are provided by the EU .
Lastly , as I do not think I will speak up in debates any more , I would like to thank Mrs Fischer Boel for her entire five years of diligence .
She has made her mark on the history of European agriculture .
( RO ) As a Romanian MEP , my colleagues and I support the proposals which our rapporteur made and we are going to vote in favour of them .
Families from small towns and rural areas are hardest hit by poverty .
In the current crisis , extending the food programme and financing it from the Community budget are fully justified .
We all know that the measures adopted in 2008 and the allocated budget have been insufficient .
The agricultural and social components can justify keeping the programme as part of the common agricultural policy .
In new Member States , such as Romania , the programme 's administration must obviously be improved .
Product storage and administrative costs must be managed efficiently so that they do not exceed 20-25 % of the market price .
Finally , I would like to thank Mr Sikierski and congratulate him on the proposals which he has made .
( IT ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , first and foremost this proposal - from both the rapporteur and the Commission - is an important pact to provide funding to mitigate the impact of spiralling food prices in the Community , which is putting an increasing number of people in difficulty and making the supply of food aid more costly .
This new arrangement , which has my support , will make the programme more efficient and up to date both in terms of agricultural policy and from a social point of view .
Furthermore , I agree that the initiative should be kept within the framework of the CAP , as suggested by the Commission .
As we know , the CAP currently provides food aid to those groups of the population that live in desperate conditions .
Indeed , the measure we are about to implement has always inspired broad consensus , so much so that in 2006 13 million people , and 15 countries in 2008 , actually 19 countries , I think that from this point of view ...
( The President cut off the speaker ) .
( PL ) Mr President , in this debate I would like to draw attention to three issues .
Firstly , I would like to remind you that one of the main objectives of the common agricultural policy is to ensure access to food for the inhabitants of the European Union at appropriate prices , and so for those who have low incomes or who have no income at all this means free food .
Secondly , the income of the inhabitants of the EU , and in particular of the new Member States , leaves much to be desired .
In all the new countries the number of inhabitants with incomes below 40 % of the EU average is as high as 50 % , and so almost half of the people in these countries have such low incomes .
These data come from before the crisis .
As a result of the crisis , in the next few years the situation will only get worse .
I support , therefore , continuation of the programme of free food distribution among the most deprived people , for which the EU will set aside nearly EUR 500 million in 2009 , which will include around EUR 100 million for my country , Poland .

I hope that the Czech Presidency will achieve consensus on the final form of the programme in the Council ...
( The President cut off the speaker )
( SL ) While we have been busy trying to eradicate hunger in Africa and other impoverished countries , hunger and poverty have afflicted us at home , in our own backyard .
That has been the case in my own country of Slovenia , as well , where the need for solidarity assistance is , unfortunately , increasing , despite a high standard of living .
According to media reports , humanitarian organisations ' food supplies have almost been exhausted .
Given the fact that the majority of EU Member States still have abundant amounts of food , it would really be inhumane if our citizens had to suffer , or even die , because of hunger .
Survival must definitely be given priority over any other investments , which can wait until better times .
If the Member States are unable to ensure new funds for food supplies , the most appropriate course of action would probably be for them to release their emergency supplies .
I endorse this programme , but at the same time I would like to appeal to all of us and to our citizens to be attentive to the distress of the people around us .

( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to thank Mr Siekierski for his report on the Community programme of food distribution to the most deprived , which represents a valuable tool for regulating the market and must therefore remain within the framework of the CAP .
Although the average quality of life in the European Union is among the highest in the world , some citizens are unable to buy enough food to eat .
It is estimated that 43 million people in the EU are at risk of food poverty , a figure that has risen continuously in recent years .
The rising prices that have been seen for some time on a wide range of goods makes it more expensive to provide food aid , which makes the support provided by the European programme even more urgent .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , I would like to thank everyone for all the comments .
In general , I hear a very positive approach to the proposal for the most needy .
Mr President , could I just be allowed to focus on some of the comments that have been raised here today ?
First of all , I think that we have to keep in mind that poverty is not confined to certain areas or regions within the Member States .
Unfortunately , it is an issue that all Member States have to face .
It is true that the extent of the problem and the means available to remedy it are not identical throughout the whole European Community .
The allocation of the budget to the Member States , as well as the differentiated rates for cofinancing for cohesion and non-cohesion countries , does of course already take into account the financial capacity of every country .
This means that the bottom line will be that there will more money available for the so-called ' new ' Member States than is the case today .
Regarding the budget , I would just remind you that we have actually increased the budget available for the programme for the most needy by two thirds - up to EUR 0.5 billion - and I think this , together with the newly introduced cofinancing , will help alleviate some of the problems .
I think we also have to keep in mind that this scheme is a voluntary one .
Member States that have a social system in place in their own country certainly need not use this scheme .
We do not seek to replace social policies that are already implemented in Member States and , to a certain extent , also managed by NGOs .
Our intention is to underpin them by the provision of food , which I still consider the central aim of the agricultural policy .
I believe that the changes that we have proposed go in the right direction .
I think the provisions are reasonable and well balanced .
The programme -when hopefully voted through this Parliament as well - will be able to meet the challenges of the future .
It will be difficult to be against or to oppose this programme in a situation where unemployment is currently increasing dramatically all over Europe , thereby heavily increasing the number of people at risk of poverty .
So I look forward to the votes of this extremely responsible Parliament .
I would like to respond to some of the problems which have been raised .
Firstly , I said that I am against co-financing but I also stressed that we are now in a period of economic crisis , when the number of poor and unemployed persons is rising .
We will evaluate the programme in 2011 or 2012 and we will think then about whether to continue with co-financing .
Let us give ourselves time and not do this during the crisis .
Secondly , I share the view of the Commissioner that it is difficult to restrict ourselves to distributing only food produced in the EU , because that will increase costs and enlarge the administrative side of the programme .
Thirdly , let us follow the example of the USA , where large sums , under the Farm Bill , have been set aside for the support of agriculture by financing free EBT cards .
Fourthly , I encourage the countries which do not participate in the programme to join .
The programme is open .
Fifthly , funds allocated to this programme do not limit farmers ' access to the common agricultural policy , because we have savings under the CAP .
Finally , I would like to go back to sources .
As we know , the aims of the CAP were formulated under the Treaties of Rome .
They talk about the need to ensure access for society to food at affordable prices , and to guarantee farmers an appropriate level of income .
We can say that these are , firstly , production tasks , which define the amount of production which is essential .
Secondly , they are social tasks , because we are talking about appropriate prices - so that consumers will be able to afford food products , and thus the Treaty of Rome defines certain social objectives .
And thirdly , there are also economic objectives , related to ensuring that farmers have appropriate incomes .
When we are talking about affordable prices for the poor , often unemployed , consumer , food should be accessible at significantly lower prices , or simply supplied without charge , of course under special programmes and under specific conditions .
In summary , it should be said that the CAP also includes certain elements of social policy .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place at 12.00 noon .
Written statements ( Rule 142 )
Mr Siekierski 's report on the distribution of food to the most deprived persons raises issues covered in Council regulations which refer to financing of the common agricultural policy and to specific provisions in that material .
We have here a situation which proves that there are also large areas of poverty and want inside the European Union .
Those affected are most often people living in villages and small towns , and this includes many children .
According to official statistics around 80 million Europeans live below the poverty line .
It is to be feared that the present crisis and rising unemployment will increase that alarming number .
The fact that the amount allocated to the programme of food aid for the poorest inhabitants of the EU will rise from EUR 305 million to EUR 500 million is in itself a positive sign .
However , I think that it is necessary to make changes to the systems in Member States in order to eliminate or at least significantly limit this shameful situation .
The main cause of this deprivation is unemployment and excessively high food prices ( let us only compare the remuneration received by farmers for their products with the retail price in the shops ) .
Our system of social care is also far from perfect .
Finally I would like to emphasise very clearly that it is essential that the food used for the purposes of the aid programme should be of good quality , and should ideally be fresh and come from local farms .
Collective redress ( debate )
The next item is the Commission statement on collective redress .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , since the beginning of my mandate , redress has , as you know , been high on my list of priorities .
I believe that substantive rights show their strength only when they are backed by enforcement and effective redress for consumers .
More and more often , large numbers of consumers lose out as a result of the same or similar illegal practices by a trader and do not receive redress .
The Commission has been examining the problem that consumers face in obtaining redress for mass claims .
We have commissioned studies , discussed the issue with stakeholders , conducted surveys and an Internet consultation , and recently published a green paper to which we have received more than 170 responses .
Although the consultation officially ended on 1 March 2009 , comments are still coming in and I can already tell you that , the more evidence we gather , the more our belief that there is a problem is confirmed .
This is why we need to find a solution in the interests of justice and a healthy European economy .
The green paper on consumer collective redress proposed various ways of tackling this problem .
A preliminary analysis of the replies received indicates that stakeholders recognise the unsatisfactory present situation on collective redress in the Member States .
There is consensus about the necessity of further action to achieve effective redress for consumers and thereby restore their confidence in the market .
Consumer organisations favour binding measures for a collective redress judicial scheme in all Member States in combination with other options , such as the extension of existing alternative dispute resolution ( ADR ) mechanisms to collective claims .
Business would favour ADR mechanisms .
In a few weeks ' time , once we have properly analysed all the responses , we will publish the replies , together with a statement on the feedback we received , and before the summer we will outline the different ways of addressing the problem of mass claims .
This will not simply be a repetition of the four options in the green paper .
Our thinking is developing further in the light of the responses to the green paper consultation .
Based on the outcome of all the consultations , the Commission will carefully examine the economic and social impact on stakeholders , including the costs and benefits generated by the possible options .
On 29 May we will hold a hearing to share our preliminary conclusions with stakeholders .
Let me stress that , whatever route we take , we will not go down the path of the US experience .
Instead , we will follow our European legal cultures and take into account the existing experiences of Member States .
Once the options become clear , the European Parliament , Member States and stakeholders will be convinced , as I am , that not only is there a problem but also that an effective solution must , and can , be found at European level .
Why should reputable businesses suffer at the hands of unfair competitors who profit when consumers are not compensated ?
And I stress ' compensated ' .
This is the very nature of redress that we are aspiring to .
Why should consumers give up their legitimate expectations of compensation , and why should society put up with the welfare and justice gap ?
I am confident that we will find a solution that strikes the right balance between improving consumer access to redress and avoiding unfounded claims .
Effective redress will boost consumers ' confidence in the internal market and in what Europe can do for them .
This is particularly important in the harsh reality of today 's economic and financial crisis .
As you know , the coming months will be marked by many institutional changes , and this may influence the timing and the delivery of our work on collective redress .
Concerning the initiative taken by the Commission on damages actions for breach of the European anti-trust rules , I can assure you that the Commission shares Parliament 's view that these two initiatives related to collective redress should be consistent .
Indeed , being consistent does not mean that different policy initiatives have to use the same tools to reach the same goals .
I can equally assure you that I remain personally committed to this issue and will continue to work on it until the end of my mandate with the same energy and vigour that I have devoted to it thus far , and of course with the kind help and support of Parliament .
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - Mr President , it is a pleasure to welcome Commissioner Kuneva to the House once again .
Commissioner , I only need to use your own words about your energy and vigour in pursuing the interests of consumers , which , I think from our side of the House and , indeed , for all members of our committee , we have admired , and we encourage you very much to continue that work .
As far as the collective redress proposal is concerned , I think you are approaching it in exactly the right way .
We have consistently said that this is an extremely complex issue .
It involves not just European-level measures but also very difficult issues about engagement with national law and regional law and , above all , as you indicated , the consumer has to be at the heart of it .
You have been really consistent in saying that consumer confidence in the internal market and cross-border trading is one of the fundamental issues that we have to raise , because otherwise consumers are not getting their rights of access and being able to use and exercise their choice across borders .
I think that remains at the heart of what you are discussing today .
Above all , I think the timing and complexity of solutions is important , because you have evoked a wide range of solutions here , but it is quite clear that solutions that may involve some new European-level judicial mechanisms will clearly take far longer and potentially be more controversial than picking up some of the alternative dispute resolution measures or also using the existing consumer cooperation measures that have been put in place .
I think all of us on this committee recall that , in fact , the enhanced cooperation on consumers was an aspect that was put through our committee in the last Parliament , and we would like to see that become more effective .
I think there is a vehicle there that can be used to give consumers the sort of redress that we are looking for , not just in collective claims but also in dealing with cross-border claims themselves much more effectively .
If we can get that sense of priority there and timing and speed to come up with the best solutions quickly , I think that is the way that I commend you to think about moving forward .
Mr President , Commissioner , thank you for taking up the Socialist Group in the European Parliament 's initiative and addressing this matter , as this issue is important to citizens .
I have my mobile phone here .
I have heard from many young people that they have a lot of problems because , for one contract or another that they have completely unwittingly entered into - for ringtones for example - a sum of money is deducted each month for five , six , seven , eight months .
No one goes to court for the sake of EUR 5 , but if a million citizens experience the same thing and an undertaking unduly pockets EUR 5 million , that is a case of unfair competition in relation to those competitors within the European Union that behave correctly .
For this reason , it is very important that we address this issue .
However , it is also important for the people , for the young people , for parents , who are confronted with this to be provided with legal instruments to truly strengthen their hand .
At a time when Europe is growing together , when people are shopping on the Internet , it is important that we establish these as cross-border instruments to enable them to really be used appropriately .
Therefore , in the opinion of my Group , it is precisely the group action provided for by such instruments that must clearly be examined in order to ascertain whether they can be used in the European Union .
However , as you have also said , Commissioner , we need to design these instruments in such a way as to prevent the extremes seen in the US , for example , from creeping in , and instead tailor them to our own legal system .
We must work on this and we wish to pursue this matter further in the coming months .
Commissioner , you know that we are on your side with regard to this matter .
When it comes to enforcing the rights of citizens , we Social Democrats are always involved .
( DE ) Mr President , Commissioner , thank you very much for the opportunity to contribute to this debate .
I am pleased , Mrs Kuneva , that at the request of the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats you have been instrumental in getting the proposal relating to collective redress from the DG Competition , which to start with planned to regulate this according to the practice in the US , to be developed using a horizontal approach and to actually treat everyone equally within the European Union - small and medium-sized enterprises , consumers , workers and entrepreneurs .
This is an important step forward , which we wish to support in a very constructive and positive manner .
We are aware that in many individual cases , of course , a Community claim for the enforcement of collective rights appears to be more successful than individual enforcement .
However , we remain convinced that the way of skimming off summary actions that protects the consumer the most is not collective redress , but public enforcement of such claims , for example by means of a skimming claim as in the German Law against unfair competition , because individual consumers will consider very carefully whether in fact to file a collective action with a lawyer for EUR 4.99 or whether it would actually be more helpful if , for example , these claims were continually monitored at public level by an ombudsman and enforced by appropriate means .
Thus , with regard to the question of how to link these two elements , I believe that we need to consider carefully how we can help consumers in the most effective way , as consumers often do not have the time to go to a lawyer , but instead want to find help quickly and easily .
The second point that I see as important - and here , too , your Directorate General has done a very good job - is that the most interesting element was a discussion in the Bavarian representation in Brussels , where in response to the question of whether , by using European legal means , we can actually rule out the type of collective redress found in the US , a representative of your Directorate General clearly said ' no we cannot ' .
That in our opinion means that we must not disregard this model completely .
We must continue to discuss it , but to do so with great care and to include the Member States and their legal options in the discussion so that ultimately we achieve what it is we all want , and that is a real European model that is particularly attractive to consumers and that also protects small and medium-sized enterprises .
Mr President , I know the Commissioner is aware that tomorrow 4 000 consumers will go to the High Court in the UK to seek compensation for severe allergic reactions , hospitalisation and death as the result of the use of a chemical in sofas and household goods , which has now been banned in the EU .
France , Sweden and Poland have reported similar cases and injuries .
Across Europe there are potentially many thousands of consumers who have suffered severe injuries as a result of this toxic chemical .
I believe that citizens support European intervention when it is seen to give real help to consumers to tackle real problems .
Real help in such cases means giving them the right to take action collectively , wherever they buy goods and services .
So our committee launched an online consultation on the Commission proposal for consumer rights .
We received many responses , many of which - from businesses and consumers - highlighted the need for effective access to cross-border remedies and redress .
There are , I believe , enough cases like the toxic sofa case with enough compelling evidence to prove that a range of options for collective redress is needed , not only to improve access to justice , but equally to deter illegal or unfair business practices .
Of course in our committee we want consumers to have access to cheap , affordable means , such as ADR , but I believe today 's debate is first and foremost about identifying practical ways to give real help to our consumers and citizens , to ensure they get a fair deal , real redress and real remedies .
( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to start by saying that we , too , in principle welcome the European Commission 's proposal and this Green Paper .
As previous speakers have said , there is no doubt that there is a ' mass ' phenomenon in which relatively small losses affect a large number of people .
The individual losses are small , but taken together the overall amount is large .
We need an instrument to deal with this problem .
In my opinion , it is right to consider something like this .
Staying with the positives , I also very much welcome the fact that , in its Green Paper , the Directorate General for Health and Consumer Protection has also placed a definite emphasis on the issue of alternative dispute resolution mechanisms .
That is very different to the White Paper from the Directorate General for Competition , which was also debated in this House yesterday and which has so far completely ignored the possibility of out-of-court dispute resolution mechanisms .
I think that the Directorate General for Health and Consumer Protection has come further in its Green Paper than the members of the Directorate General for Competition .
However , I would like to make two things quite clear , which in my opinion should definitely be viewed as critical comments .
In a few minutes at noon , Parliament will adopt my report on the White Paper from the Directorate General for Competition .
With a huge majority in this House we will demand that the European Commission choose a horizontal approach in dealing with this issue .
We must not end up with sectoral instruments : one for the area of consumer protection , one of the area of antitrust law , another one for the capital market , perhaps another one for the environment , perhaps another one for social affairs , all contradicting each other , all encroaching on the legal systems of the Member States and leading ultimately to legal confusion that can no longer be managed by any practitioner .
We have often seen such examples in the past .
I am just thinking about the debate on the Professional Qualifications Directive , which we later also combined in a single instrument because this fragmentation was no longer manageable .
The Commission should not make the same mistake again in this case .
It should advocate a horizontal approach right from the outset .
That is the clear position of Parliament , as will become apparent in a few minutes .
One last point : I very much welcome the fact that we have agreed that we do not want a claims industry based on the American model with a turnover of USD 240 billion a year from which ultimately only lawyers profit and the consumers get absolutely nothing .
We want the genuine rule of law in Europe and we want to keep our traditional system and our understanding of the law .
( ES ) Mr President , in a market without borders such as Europe , it is important that , as well as ensuring healthy competition , we equally zealously safeguard consumers .
Throughout the last half century , trade barriers have been breaking down for products , but largely these barriers still stand for the consumers .
Abusive commercial practices are often not reported by consumers or pursued by consumer organisations because of a general awareness that it is difficult to obtain compensation .
Collective redress saves effort when many people are affected and offers a much better chance of reaching a compensation agreement .
Due to the cross-border nature of a large part of economic transactions in the European Union , this right of collective action cannot be restricted to national limits
We need a real initiative spanning all of Europe , which would have to bring about a certain degree of harmonisation or alignment among existing national systems in order to be effective .
The model of choice must aim to provide easy consumer access to the system , and avoid exaggerated costs and bureaucracy .
Therefore , I consider that we must prioritise alternative conflict resolution procedures , since they offer more flexibility , as well as simplified and less costly legal proceedings .
( DE ) Mr President , there is a large consensus in this House that we must provide better protection for consumers , particularly where , in the case of small losses for individuals , large numbers of these losses cause a problem , because they cannot see any possibility of a meaningful individual claim .
The question is how should consumer protection and the improvement of the same be organised ?
In this regard , I think it is very important - and I am very grateful to the Commission for this - that we should quite deliberately say that we want to examine all of the alternatives and all of the aspects of this complex issue and only after careful consideration decide on the solutions .
I would like to address one aspect in this context that has not yet been mentioned .
We have already found - and in future this may increasingly be the case - that , for many non-governmental organisations and many consumer protection associations , the possibility of arranging mass claims is becoming advertising material .
This danger should be included quite deliberately in our considerations so that we do not ultimately help those who do not need help and leave those who do need help out in the rain .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , I should like to thank you for all your valuable opinions .
In a way , I am familiar with most of them because we have been discussing , point by point , the most important parts of your concerns and hopes for having collective redress in Europe .
I should like to reiterate once again that I am totally with you in not wanting US-style class actions to be introduced into European culture .
I know that is one of your most important preoccupations .
As Ms McCarthy also mentioned , this is about damages .
This is already happening in the UK , but this has nothing to do with what we are discussing and what I am proposing as our future steps in this direction .
In this respect , I would like to stress the following .
Checking to see whether there is a real need for collective redress : yes , we are doing that and we will continue to do so after the green paper .
Respecting constitutional constraints : yes .
Avoiding US-style class action : yes .
Ensuring that damages are compensated , including all costs incurred by the consumer but , at the same time , excluding any element of punitive damage : yes , that is what we have in mind .
Discouraging unmeritorious claims , as referred to by Mr Rack : yes .
Promoting alternative dispute resolution schemes : of course , because this is less time-consuming , more affordable and easier for both consumers and businesses , and also respecting subsidiarity .
With these few words , I would like to say that we are fully aware of the challenges and we are ready to face these challenges and make a good proposal , step by step , building consensus and common understanding with you .
What I really appreciate today is that all of us recognise that we have a problem and that we are ready to address this problem .
So this really is a very good starting point for the next stage of debates .
As this is a challenge we face , I would like in particular to stress what Mr Lehne referred to - the common approach , the horizontal approach with Commissioner Kroes .
Commissioner Kroes and myself , as well as our respective services , are cooperating very closely in order to ensure that our initiatives are consistent and produce synergies .
The consistency principle does not necessarily rule out that specific situations require specific solutions .
Each of the two initiatives has a distinct focus .
Whereas the consumer green paper deals with redress for breaches of consumer protection law , the competition white paper is strictly about competition law infringements .
Another major difference between the two initiatives is that , whereas the consumer green paper only covers redress for consumers , the redress mechanism suggested in the competition white paper is designed to benefit both consumers and businesses .
So my challenge is to achieve effective redress for our consumers and thereby restore their confidence in the market .
From previous discussions , I know that the European Parliament is supporting us in our efforts to achieve this goal .
Let me stress again that Parliament , together with Member States and stakeholders , will be convinced that not only is there a problem but also that an effective and balanced solution must and can be found at European level .
I should like to thank you for this fruitful debate and your valuable opinions , and I look forward to working with you on this file over the coming months .
The debate is closed .
Written statements ( Rule 142 )
I would like to congratulate the European Commission 's efforts to improve the methods which consumers can use to exercise their rights throughout Europe .
The options presented in the Green Paper must be discussed in detail .
However , one thing that is already certain is that option No 4 , which would introduce a class of ' opt-out ' type actions , offering consumer organisations a share of the compensation payments , is not sustainable ( viable ) .
If we want to boost consumer confidence in the internal market , we need to consider a combination of options 2 and 3 .
In other words , we must create a European network of national executive public authorities which will enjoy greater powers to intervene effectively in the case of international claims ( abroad ) .
Furthermore , we must review alternative mechanisms for resolving existing disputes and , if necessary , introduce a new mechanism enabling consumer rights to be applied ( exercised ) more effectively outside the courts too .
I would like to conclude by emphasising that we must ensure that we adopt a horizontal approach with regard to the collective redress mechanism , thereby avoiding the fragmentation of national legislation and establishing a single , common instrument for all Member States .
( The sitting was suspended at 11.35 a.m. and resumed at 12.05 p.m. )

1 .
White Paper on damages actions for breach of the EC antitrust rules (
2 .
Food distribution to the most deprived persons in the Community ( amendment of the Single CMO Regulation ) (
- Before the vote
Mr President , by adopting today 's report on the programme of food distribution to the most deprived persons in the Community we will send a positive signal to our citizens that the European Union is supporting the most deprived and the poorest inhabitants of the Community with free food .
The programme of food distribution , like the ' Fruit at School ' and ' Milk at School ' programmes , is changing attitudes towards the EU , and because of this the EU is becoming friendlier and closer to two important social groups - the deprived and young people .
Therefore I ask for a vote in favour of this report .
In doing so we will show that the European Parliament is close to the people and their problems .
( Applause )
3. on an EU-India Free Trade Agreement (
4 .
Social responsibility of subcontracting undertakings in production chains (
5 .
Food prices in Europe (
- Before the vote
Mr President , it would be most interesting if we could compare the vote on the report by the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development and the alternative motions for resolutions by 40 members and the Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe group .
We would find :
firstly , that a total of 15 proposals have been amended without sending out any message ;
secondly , that over and above the quantitative issue there is also the political issue , with the alternative proposal deleting every reference to the role and responsibility of the large commercial retail and wholesale chains ;
thirdly , that the written statement by the European Parliament with its 439 signatures by members who want branches to be controlled and to operate properly lapses by default ; and
fourthly , that every unfair trading policy has been deleted or embellished and that it even goes as far as to refuse the recommendation to create a Europe-wide database on farm gate and consumer prices which is accessible to all citizens and consumers .
The objective of the Committee on Agriculture and of the High Level Group is to examine competitive practices and the transparency of the internal market in the food sector .
Today we are all being judged .
( FR ) Mr President , it is all the same astounding , that statement .
I simply wished to say to my fellow Members that I am one of the authors of the alternative resolution .
We are in the European Union , not the Soviet Union .
( Applause )
I am sure , Mrs Lulling , that this detail had not escaped the Members of this House , but I gave the floor to our rapporteur because she did not have the opportunity to speak during the debates .
As you know , she is entitled to two minutes ; therefore , for two minutes the rapporteur has total freedom .
This has been respected .
6 .
Impact of extensive urbanisation in Spain on individual rights of European citizens , on the environment and on the application of EU law (
- Before the vote
Mr President , I wish to inform the House that , on a matter of principle , I wish to withdraw my name from the Socialist Group 's alternative motion for a resolution on the Auken report .
Furthermore , after five years of working on this issue , I wish to inform Members that I will be voting against both alternative motions for resolution and voting in favour of the Auken report .
( Applause )

rapporteur . - ( DA ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , citizens of the EU , this report is the result of extensive work in the Committee on Petitions , involving Members from all political groups .
I would like to thank both the Chairman and the shadow rapporteurs for their sterling work .
As draftsman of the committee 's opinion , I have personally been wholeheartedly committed to this matter .
It has , of course , had a huge effect on the lives of tens of thousands of EU citizens living in Spain and has affected both the Spanish countryside and the Spanish economy .
The report has now been approved by the committee after being adopted by a two-thirds majority .
It is a comprehensive text , which differentiates between the many different aspects of Spanish urbanisation .
There is the problem of the fundamental rights of European citizens , which include the right to lawfully acquired property .
The European Parliament has already committed itself to respecting these rights , and all Member States are bound by them .
There is the problem of the disastrous impact of the extensive urbanisation on the environment , particularly in coastal areas and on the Spanish islands , but also in other areas such as around Madrid .
There is the problem of the resurrection of the Spanish 1988 Coastal Law , which is now suddenly able to deny many people the right to live in their own homes - and in certain cases has even resulted in the demolition of these homes .
Then there is the problem of the consequences of thousands of allegedly unlawful houses built with the approval of the municipalities but subsequently declared unlawful , whereby the innocent purchaser becomes the victim of corrupt urbanisation practices .
Finally , there is the problem of the lack of legal certainty and appropriate compensation for the victims of the property scandals .
I have no doubt about where the responsibility for these extensive infringements lies and I regret that these violations by municipal and regional authorities have undermined attempts by many others to create sustainable development , where a healthy economy goes hand in hand with respect for the environment and for cultural heritage .
The report deserves a proper debate in which all opinions can be heard .
It is unacceptable that our new rules prevent this .
These rules must be changed as soon as possible , particularly when it comes to reports that deal with complaints from European citizens .
I ask you to reject the two alternative resolutions .
Although they are based on my report , they are not impartial .
They do not reflect the detailed and factual assessments that the committee has voted on .
7 .
The state of transatlantic relations in the aftermath of the US elections (
8 .
Interim Trade Agreement with Turkmenistan ( vote )
- Before the vote

Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , in accordance with Article 170 ( 4 ) , I request on behalf of the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats that the final vote on the resolution and the report be postponed until the next plenary sitting .
It became clear in the debate yesterday that the majority in Parliament would be able to agree to the signing of the interim agreement , even if it pains them to do so .
Many Members are hoping that , after years of deadlock , the agreement will enable a new quality of dialogue between the European Union and Turkmenistan .
However , for the majority of Members it is important that we do not give the Commission and the Council a free ride .
As Parliament , we need guarantees from the Commission and the Council that , if the human rights situation continues to worsen , at the request of Parliament serious consideration will be given to the suspension of the agreement .
Yesterday , the Commission unfortunately only conditionally agreed and the Council did not agree at all to this demand .
I therefore request , on behalf of my Group , that both final votes be postponed until we have the corresponding commitments from the Council and the Commission .
( Applause )
In accordance with Rule 170 ( 4 ) of the Rules of Procedure , it was a political group that just spoke .
The procedure asks whether a speaker wishes to speak for or against .

on behalf of the PSE-Group . - Mr President , I totally agree with our colleague , Mr Caspary , that we should postpone not only the final vote on the resolution but also the vote on his report - the assent report - because it was very clear in yesterday 's debate that the Council in particular was not prepared to give the European Parliament sufficient opportunity and the possibility to really monitor the situation in Turkmenistan and have an impact on the situation there on the basis of such an agreement .
Since we did not get sufficient guarantees , we also support Mr Caspary 's proposal to postpone these votes .
I shall put the request for postponement to the vote .
( Parliament decided to postpone the final vote )
( DE ) Mr President , the request was for the final votes only to be postponed , not the vote on the amendments .
We in the services were not in receipt of this information .
Only the final vote shall be postponed , then .
I should point out that we are going to vote first on the amendments .
( DE ) Mr President , my request was to postpone only the two final votes and for us to vote on the amendments so we only need hold the final votes in one of the forthcoming plenary sittings .
In fact , this is absolutely not what the services had understood , but we shall of course go along with our rapporteur .
Therefore , if I have understood correctly , we are going to vote on the amendments to the report on Turkmenistan , not to your report .
Then we shall stop before the final vote .
- Before the vote on Amendment 2
( FR ) Mr President , the excellent amendment tabled by my group and which will enable us to carry real weight in the area of human rights would be further improved if we replaced ' the prospect of signing the Agreement ' with ' the prospect of finalising the process of ratifying the Agreement ' , which is the appropriate phrase .
This is a legal point .
Can those Members who oppose it please stand up ?
I cannot see 40 Members standing up .
Therefore , we shall include what Mrs Flautre said , and I shall now record this paragraph as having been orally amended .
( The oral amendment was accepted )
9 .
Interim Agreement with Turkmenistan (
- After the vote on Amendment 1
( FR ) Mr President , I have a feeling that you have held a vote on the Caspary report , and the amendment tabled by my group has been rejected .
I myself voted against , because I was on the voting list for the previous report .
I believe that we should vote again on the Caspary report , for which there was just one amendment , and then not hold the final vote .
( Parliament approved the request by Mr Goebbels to hold the vote again )
10 .
Strengthening security and fundamental freedoms on the Internet (
- Before the vote
rapporteur . - Mr President , I am grateful to everyone for their support .
There is just one slight point of confusion for me .
The oral amendment is on the voting list but nobody stood up to support it .
Does that mean that it fell and did not come to the vote at all ?
Is that correct ?
I can confirm that , if an oral amendment is to be adopted , it must be expressed orally , which has not been the case , in spite of my request .
You have therefore understood perfectly .
11 .
EU strategy for better ship dismantling ( vote )
That concludes voting time .
Voting time
The next item is voting time .
( For details of the outcome of the votes : see Minutes )
( IT ) Mr President , just a short aside , as Members are still taking their seats .
We changed the rules of procedure because too much time was being spent on fruitless debates , and we decided not to hold a debate on the Auken report .
We have wasted a good half hour doing nothing , which we could have employed much better by debating a text that is of great importance to citizens .
Your comment will be passed on to the competent bodies .
Explanations of vote
Oral explanations of vote
( SK ) During the 22 years of its existence , the programme for distributing food to the most deprived people in the Community has contributed towards implementing two main aims of the common agricultural policy .
It helps to stabilise markets by reducing intervention stocks and it secures necessary food supplies for the poorest inhabitants of the EU .
I have therefore voted in favour of Mr Siekierski 's consultation report dealing with the new programme for providing food to the poorest people , as proposed by the Commission .
In 2009 this scheme should include a sum of EUR 500 million , with additional resources from the Member States designated for cofinancing .
Mr President , just as your own mother and father have been watching the vote today , we also have some visitors from the regions of Prešov and Nitra in Slovakia and I would like to welcome them to the Chamber of the European Parliament .

Mr President , I voted in favour of Mr Czesław Siekierski 's report and our resolution on food distribution to the most deprived persons in the Community .
The report and resolution are of great importance in the context of the financial crisis and economic recession .
Growing poverty in the EU - when in some countries poverty affects around 20 % of the population - clearly shows that the need for food assistance is quite high .
Under the present circumstances , I fully support the European Parliament 's position that the EU food distribution programme , which allocates nearly half a billion euros with the aim of diminishing malnutrition and poverty in the EU , should be fully funded by the Community .
I would especially like to stress the importance of the Commission 's proposal to improve the structure for selecting products supplied under the programme .
The food should be chosen by Member States ' authorities and distributed in cooperation with civil society partners .
Mr President , feeding the hungry is an essential duty and we have to find a way to see that no person , especially a child , goes to bed hungry .
I abstained on this report , however , because I find changes in this scheme do not really make sense .
To have a CAP policy buying in food from third countries - whose poor people are already hungry - to feed our poor , while other CAP policies prevent our farmers from growing enough food to feed the hungry of Europe , simply does not make sense .
We need to feed the poor , especially in this economic crisis , and I will be advocating changes to the scheme that will achieve this end .
( NL ) Mr President , I voted against the three alternative resolutions , as I take the view that counterfeit goods constitute a serious problem and that we must endeavour to afford the European public the best possible protection against the import of such goods .
This is to say nothing of the economic implications of counterfeit goods . European customs inspectors must indeed have the right to monitor ships from Indian ports destined for the European Union - by which I mean that this monitoring must take place in Indian ports .
I also find it regrettable that , when the serious terrorist attacks that have taken place are mentioned in this House , the phrase used is ' political groups ' , when everyone knows that the groups concerned are Islamist groups .
I believe that Mr Tannock wished to speak .
Let me just remind you of the rule .
It is not the same as under the ' catch-the-eye ' procedure .
You have to register before the explanations of vote begin , but I can be flexible .
Mr President , I was unaware of that - I thought you could just wave at the appropriate moment .
This had the makings of a great report .
I drew up the opinion in the Committee on Foreign Affairs .
India is the largest democracy in the world ; it is now coming out from many decades of protectionism , embracing global free trade ; it is surviving fairly robustly the global financial crisis .
It would have been great to have achieved a deep free trade agreement between India and the European Union , which is also a very large democratic polity , and it would also be a nail in the coffin to those who are saying that protectionism is the way ahead in global trade .
So I deeply regret that this report was so amended by the Socialists as to make it unpalatable and unacceptable to those of us who support free trade .
India also deeply regrets that : the Government of India had stored a great deal of political capital in the idea of this agreement going through in a way that would have been good for India and good for Europe .
Therefore , we had to vote against it , I am afraid to say .
Mr President , I extend a very affectionate welcome to your parents , who are present here today .
I should have liked mine to have been here too , but that is no longer possible .
We have just adopted the Lehtinen report .
This is a crucial step in terms of our legislative arrangements , and I sincerely hope that the Commission will listen to Parliament in their regard .
Indeed , we are well aware that , across the world , the development of techniques and organisations involves a growing number of subcontractors .
That being said , the employees of our businesses must be better protected , and subcontracting businesses themselves must be on an equal footing , so that we have an economy that works in natural harmony .
Therefore , Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I sincerely hope that the Commission and the competent services in each Member State will implement our own-initiative report as soon as possible , in order , I repeat , to better satisfy employees , on the one hand , and the balance between subcontracting businesses , on the other .
on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , I , too , welcome the fact that , with the alternative resolution , we have succeeded in assigning the Commission the task of submitting a directive on the liability of general undertakings throughout Europe .
The basis of this resolution was the Lehtinen report , and therefore much of the work carried out in the committee and by the Groups , the Group of the Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe , the Socialist Group in the European Parliament and ourselves , the Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance , has gone into this decision .
Just how important this is can be seen from the fact that cheap labour can be found on building sites all over Europe and it even jeopardises safety , as shown by the example of the Finnish nuclear plant , where safety standards were not met by subcontractors .
We therefore urgently need a European directive , because the laws in the eight EU Member States that have general undertaking liability , although very effective , stop at the national border .
If the present Commission does not issue such a directive , we Greens are firmly resolved to make this a matter of principle when the new Commission takes office , as we want safety for citizens and a minimum standard for workers .
This is only possible by means of a European statutory regulation , a liability scheme for general undertakings .
I hope that the Commission will comply with our request and submit a directive .
Otherwise , we need to question whether it is still worthy of its office .
( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I voted against the report by Mrs Batzeli .
In my opinion , it calls into question some of the essential cornerstones of our economic system , such as free competition and the basic principles of the social market economy .
It is clear that appropriate measures to stabilise food prices need to be found in order to ensure sustainable agricultural production .
Practices which distort competition must be stopped .
However , an EU-wide database containing reference prices for products and inputs would bring more bureaucracy and reporting obligations , the costs of which would be passed on by the trade to producers or consumers .
The result would be higher end and consumer prices and lower prices for producers .
Complete transparency of all business cost factors such as pay , energy costs , purchase and sale prices and the profit margins would lead to monitoring and dirigisme .
These are not the aims of a social and free Europe .
The position of farmers in the food supply chain can only be strengthened by cooperation and the inclusion of shared responsibility .
Mr President , I welcome this report as a shot across the bows of supermarket giants .
Tesco , for example , recently announced profits of GBP 2.8 billion , while food producers in my constituency struggle to make a living .
The major supermarkets have been abusing their buying power to suppress prices to suppliers to unsustainable levels and to impose , I must say , unfair and unilateral demands as the price of retaining the contract .
In the long run , as the UK Competition Commission has pointed out , this will equally damage consumers as choice , availability and quality are squeezed out of the market .
Thus I support the call for an investigation into the margin share in the production and distribution chain .
Someone , somewhere , is doing very nicely , but it certainly is not the producer .
( PL ) Mr President , I abstained from the vote on Mrs Batzeli 's report , but I think it is a very useful contribution to further work on the subject of food prices .
Retail prices are very different from the prices at which producers sell their products .
Retail trade , which is the most visible to the consumer , has very limited contact with farmers , and when looking for better ways to stabilise food prices we have to analyse the whole chain of costs from producer to consumer .
The proposed system of negotiation is unrealistic in view of the number of entities operating in the market , and limits competition .
( CS ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I have voted against the report on food prices in Europe presented by Mrs Batzeli .
The report is based on the idea that free price-setting on the food market is a bad solution and it calls for the introduction of price regulation in this sector of the economy .
This idea is contrary to common sense and with the historical experience of all the post-communist states , including the Czech Republic .
We have experienced 100 % price regulation and we well remember what a failure it was .
Free price-setting is the foundation of freedom and democracy and any attempt to restrict it will lead to totalitarianism .
Free price setting in the food sector has led in recent years to excellent results in the form of relatively lower food prices throughout the EU .
It has also brought extensive modernisation which has provided consumers with better quality products at lower prices .
The regulatory measures contained in the report would bring this positive development to a complete halt , resulting only in higher food prices .
The fact that there is fierce competition in this sector is excellent news for the consumer .
Those who have higher costs than market prices must adapt to the situation or withdraw from the market .
It would be absurd to cover their losses out of taxes paid by customers .
For these reasons I voted against this report .
( FI ) Mr President , first of all I wish to say that I voted against Mrs Batzeli 's report .
While I was reading it I wondered whether we were in the European Union or the Soviet Union , and I believe we are in the European Union .
Basically , then , we cannot establish regulation of food prices along these lines over Europe as a whole .
We have to remember that we must ensure that we have good , safe , top-quality food .
The local food principle is important , and , consequently , at national level these matters can be examined more closely .
I am concerned that the costs of inputs have risen .
The prices for fertilisers and feed have gone up .
The level of trade takes its share , and so when , for example , rye bread comes onto the market , it costs EUR 3 , of which the primary producer , the farmer , gets just six cents .
This is not the direction we should be moving in , and that is why we need to ponder these matters nationally , and , more than anything , establish a system in which farmers , the producers of food , can survive , and in which people can buy good quality , healthy food at a reasonable price .
Healthy food is what must be made the heart of the matter .
Mr President , of course this report about food prices fails to reflect the reality of the situation - that food prices in the EU are kept artificially high by a brutal combination , on the one hand , of excessive EU bureaucracy and , on the other hand , by the now notorious common agricultural policy .
Farm subsidies ensure that inefficient farmers are bankrolled at the expense of the European taxpayer and , at the same time , of course , ensure that the prices that we as consumers pay in shops and supermarkets for agricultural produce remain disproportionately high .
The one thing that the Commission could do to address the disproportionately high prices of food is to announce tomorrow that they are going to dismantle the common agricultural policy , but of course they will not do that because certain Member States , particularly France , benefit disproportionately from huge sums of taxpayers ' money being poured into an inefficient , grossly disproportionate farming sector .
That is the one thing the Commission should do , but of course they will not .
Mr President , Fidel Castro lies in his sick bed in his sultry Caribbean island , fading away - and not before time .
When eventually he passes , there will be only two Marxist systems of agriculture left in the world : the collective farms of North Korea and Europe 's common agricultural policy , a policy based on price-fixing , a policy based on the storage and destruction of food stocks for which there is no market , a policy which wantonly passes on costs and unnecessary suffering to the Third World , which is deprived of its natural market .
We are penalised twice over - as consumers and as taxpayers - by high prices and by high taxes , and yet our farmers are penalised too .
In my South-East region in England , farming is disappearing as a meaningful part of the economy .
Our bluebell groves and our chestnut copses and our hop fields are gradually giving way to the spread of concrete .
It has now been 50 years that our consumers and farmers have been crucified to pay for this bureaucracy .
Enough is enough .
( FR ) Mr President , we are all infuriated at the level of food prices and the way they are structured .
Products start at a value of 1 in farms , rise to 6 in supermarkets , and sole starts at a value of 1 in Africa and rises to 14 in French shops , with the result that at 8 p.m. ... the supermarkets close and Europeans rummage through bins .
However , in the face of this situation which , at the two ends of the chain , does not make farmers rich but does make it difficult for consumers to put food on the table , it is not enough to call for transparency or denounce the distribution oligopolies .
There is speculation in Geneva on the price of rice , there is speculation in Chicago on the price of maize , there is major financial crime , and there is an International Criminal Court .
Well , at the G20 , the International Criminal Court 's powers should be extended to cover major financial crime , and speculating on food is a major crime that is on a par with that perpetrated by Bashir in Darfur .
That is the real signal that must be sent out .
I did not wish to cut you off in the midst of your lyrical musings .
Mr President , I strongly support the rapporteur in her report and salute her sterling work on behalf of citizens right across Europe who have fallen foul of the outrageous property practices in Spain .
The right to own and enjoy private property is a fundamental right , recognised by the European Convention .
Yet several constituents of mine , who put their life savings into a home in Spain , now find themselves ambushed and devastated by laws and claims which would deprive them of their property or cost them enormous sums of money in order to retain it .
It appears that civic authorities in Spain , in cahoots with grasping , unscrupulous developers , have been a terror to those who thought they were buying legitimate homes and properties , and , if this report helps address that , then it can only do good .
( ES ) Mr President , I naturally voted against the Auken report , and I should like to state here that the report that has been adopted goes against the letter of the law .
It does not comply in any way with the principles of law that the European Union has declared , and it is absolutely appalling that the European Parliament has been capable of approving this document , which has been described by the Legal Services as non-compliant with the law and full of illegalities .
The report proposes the suspension of all building projects , as if that would solve the problems .
That is something that the Socialist Group in the European Parliament has been advocating for several years .
This document does not resolve the real problems faced by the people , which have largely been resolved by the changing of a law , as has already been done , and by the efforts that the Spanish authorities are making to correct mistakes that have clearly been made .
To sum up , I should like to point out that the destruction of the majority of the properties is due to poor application of the Coastal Law by Mr Zapatero 's Socialist government , who are acting in an arbitrary manner , and arbitrarily seizing properties in just one area of Spain .
( NL ) Mr President , I voted in favour of the Auken report , as I believe that all citizens in Europe have the right to proper application of all legislation and that the private property of each and every citizen in the European Union must be safeguarded by the governments of all Member States .
Many people have fallen victim to questionable decisions in Spain and many of them have addressed these to the Committee on Petitions - rightly , in my view .
All the same , I have mixed feelings , as I think that we must be wary of adopting legislation that is tantamount to introducing yet more European interference to the detriment of the Member States .
A specific example is the situation in the Flemish periphery of Brussels , where the European Union is starting to interfere in a housing policy that aims to enable young Flemish families to continue living in their local area .
Mr President , I also supported the Auken report .
I supported it because many of my constituents in the north-east of England are among the petitioners who petitioned Parliament about this disgraceful and flagrant abuse of property rights by the Spanish Government and local authorities .
Indeed they were recently the subject of a TV documentary by ITV North East , where some of these heart-rending cases were brought to life and were examined for the public of the north-east to see .
I hope even now , at this late stage , that the Spanish Government and Spanish MEPs will right some of the wrongs that have been done and will give some restitution to some of these people who have been unlawfully denied their property and recognise that , actually , what has gone on here is a scandal .
It is a corrupt scandal .
Many of the deals involving property developers and Spanish local government are , frankly , the result of corruption .
We serve nobody by failing to recognise that essential point .
The Spanish Government needs to act .
I am , frankly , appalled at some of the abuses that have gone on in this Chamber by Spanish MEPs seeking to cover up these practices .
Mr President , I , too , voted for this report as so many of my constituents - as has been the case across the European Union - have been so badly affected by this particular problem .
The requirement to have legal certainty about purchasing property is essential and is brought about by this report , which seeks to get the kinds of insurances that are necessary to see change .
It also addresses the specific issues of complaints concerning illegal practices by local builders and certain local authorities .
I voted for this report because I believe it is going to help secure a formal process ; it is going to highlight something that I regarded in the past as being just a derogatory statement , i.e.
' Spanish practices ' . I would like to ensure that term never sees the light of day again and I would like to see the Commission , the Council and the Spanish Government deal with this issue and come down hard , so that those who have lost out can get compensation or those who are there can feel secure .
Mr President , before I start , may I say how pleased I am to find out that your parents are in the Chamber , not just because it is nice to have an audience , but so they can see how your fair chairmanship of these sittings has earned you respect across the Chamber , including even from British Conservatives .
It is ' so true , funny how it seems ' that in just a few short days President Obama comes to Strasbourg .
Looking through the barricades being erected he might reflect , if he thinks at all about the European Parliament , that its two-seats policy is absolutely mad , a complete waste of money .
Indeed , he will think :
' Round and round it goes ,
And oh don 't you know ,
This is the game that we came here for .
Round and round it goes . '
But soon he will be gone , looking at the hopeless nature of the one-size-fits-all regulation that cripples EU businesses , and doubtless he will think that there is no lifeline that he can throw .
And
' because [ he has ] nothing else here for you ,
And just because it 's easier than the truth ,
Oh if there 's nothing else that [ he ] can do - '
He will fly away - ' fly for you ' , out of this place , having felt that you should ' always believe in your soul ' .
' Luck has left [ him ] standing so tall . '
And praise ring in the heavens , for Spandau Ballet have re-formed !
( NL ) Mr President , transatlantic relations are a matter close to my heart , and I largely agree with the broad lines of the Millán Mon report .
Nevertheless , I have voted against the report , as it contains a number of significant shortcomings .
For example , it expressly anticipates the entry into force of the Treaty of Lisbon - yet another instance of that happening here - when the treaty concerned has by no means been adopted yet .
The Irish voters should be respected .
The report also speaks of problems faced by Palestinians , but without mentioning Israel 's security .
Last but not least , it reiterates the call for Member States to accept some of the Guantánamo inmates , alleged terrorists .
I consider this totally unacceptable .
It is also unacceptable that the report does not clearly state that the United States cannot interfere in EU enlargement policy and that , therefore , Turkey has no place in the European Union .
( FI ) Mr President , transatlantic relations are very important for us Europeans .
We always have to remember that the United States of America , as a world leader , shares the same values as the Member States of the European Union : democracy , human rights and freedom of opinion .
I believe that these are values which unite us and which I hope will also strengthen our relations in the future .
Now that the United States has a new administration headed by President Obama , much attention has been paid to it and a lot of expectations rest on its shoulders , but we have to remember that neither Obama nor his administration can change the whole world .
Certainly they will try to do their best , but massive challenges lie ahead , and for that reason the expectations need to be realistic .
We must nevertheless extend a hand to the United States , since we face common threats .
These relate to international terrorism : Islamic fundamentalism , which is rearing its head .
We also face common environmental challenges , and transatlantic relations allow us together to face these and the other problems that are at present so acute the world over .
Mr President , while I have the opportunity , can I also pay tribute to the fair and impartial manner in which you have always chaired our parliamentary sessions ?
It is a shame that President Pöttering does not somehow follow your example in so many ways in this .
This report is about the United States and US-EU relations .
Of course America remains fundamental to Europe 's security and prosperity .
Sadly , in this House there are many examples of anti-American sentiment .
All of us in the EU should be profoundly grateful for the role that the US plays in the world and particularly the role that it has played in our recent history .
I laugh sometimes when I hear the suggestion that it is the EU that is responsible for 60 years of peace in Europe .
Everybody seems to forget about the contribution of the US , and , of course , NATO , in contributing towards peace in Europe .
America should not be a rival of the EU .
It should be a partner and a friend and we should build closer transatlantic relations .
Mr President , British Conservatives are proud of our country 's special relationship with the United States and the bridge between America and Europe .
We support President Obama 's commitment to multilateral engagement with the European Union .
However , this report mentions the implementation of the Lisbon Treaty , which we strongly oppose .
It also calls for the US to abolish the death penalty , which for us is a personal conscience issue .
Given the British Conservatives ' current opposition to the International Criminal Court , we also acknowledge America 's right not to sign the Rome Statute .
We also do not wish to be obliged to resettle dangerous terrorists from the Guantánamo Bay detention camp .
This report rightly reiterates that NATO is the cornerstone of transatlantic security and proposes a new transatlantic parliamentary assembly , which will reinforce a mutual commitment to our common values of democracy , liberty and human rights .
Therefore , overall , the British Conservatives voted in favour of the Millán Mon report .
Mr President , I particularly welcome this report and I share some of the points that were raised just now , but perhaps we should start off by formally congratulating Mr Obama on becoming President .
I do not think that we have all done that here today , but it is quite clearly a breath of fresh air for what we hope will be a very positive relationship with the United States .
We are very quick to point out how that relationship can work for us , of course , but we do not point out quite so often what we have to do to strengthen it and work within it .
For example , trade between us , according to the OECD , is the largest between any two trading blocs anywhere in the world .
It is right that it also causes us to think hard about regulation and supervision .
Anything that is decided between us , both economically and politically , is of great importance to the rest of the world and often sets the global standards .
I , as a member of the US delegation working on the Transatlantic Economic Council , hope that we can take further the work that we have already done there and transpose that into real efforts within this House , instead of seeing some of the silly efforts from some , on issues like chicken , which help blight that particular relationship .
( NL ) Mr President , it is good that Amendment 5 has been rejected .
This amendment sought to remove an essential passage from the report : essential in that it advocates freedom of expression .
After all , it is a basic tenet of democracy that the expression of controversial political beliefs must remain immune from prosecution .
Freedom of expression must be absolute and must certainly cover political views even on controversial issues such as immigration and Islam .
For the rest , I consider this a very well-balanced report , which strikes a good balance between rights and liberties and takes a stand against censorship .
I therefore endorsed this report with great conviction .

( FI ) Mr President , this report by Mr Lambrinidis on strengthening security and fundamental freedoms on the Internet is a very important , topical subject .
I share the opinion expressed in it that it is important to preserve freedom of expression .
That is one of our fundamental rights and freedoms .
We always have to remember , however , that when we speak of freedom of expression , that also incorporates a responsibility .
Responsibility in this matter is the most important consideration .
When we view Internet sites today , we regrettably have to acknowledge that there is a lot of the sort of material that is of no good to society or human development .
I am particularly concerned about children and young people , who are our most valuable asset - our future 's most valuable asset .
We need to take responsibility for them right now and must act in such a way that they can gain the best possible knowledge and skills and develop healthy attitudes , and the Internet is one key source of information for them .
For that reason I hope that we can improve children 's safety by increasing the amount of material on the Internet that might encourage , educate and develop them , and not the sort of thing we see today , which there is , unfortunately , so much of there , and which can harm the growth of the overall personality of the young .
Written explanations of vote
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , in order to ensure genuine access to justice for victims of breaches of competition rules , joint efforts must be made by the EU and the Member States .
The White Paper presents a series of recommendations aimed at ensuring that those affected by this type of infringement have access to really effective mechanisms to seek full compensation for the damage suffered .
At present in the majority of Member States there are serious barriers that discourage consumers and businesses from going to court to claim compensation on a private basis for damages suffered as a result of a breach of antitrust rules .
While there have been signs of improvement recently in some Member States , very few claims have been made over the last few decades .
The traditional laws and procedures on civil liability in force in the majority of Member States appear to be inadequate .
I welcome the drafting of a White Paper proposing a Community-level solution to the problem of ensuring access to justice for claimants , thus pursuing general policy objectives ( specifically , ensuring broader access to justice by enforcing competition policy and discouraging unlawful practices on the part of undertakings ) while at the same time preventing unmeritorious and opportunistic litigation .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I intend to abstain from the vote on Mr Lehne 's report on the White Paper on damages actions for breach of the EC antitrust rules .
I agree with some , but not all , of the points highlighted in the report and for this reason I have decided not to vote for the report as it stands .
I voted in favour of the report compiled by Czesław Adam Siekierski ( PPE-DE , Poland ) as it proposes the extension of the European food aid programme for the most deprived .
As a former mayor of Bucharest 's 5th district , I was always concerned about providing help to the poor , especially those of Roma ethnic origin .
Throughout the whole of the European Union 80 million people ( 16 % of the population ) are living below the poverty line , and their number is going to increase due to the economic crisis .
In some of the states which have recently joined the EU poverty affects roughly 20 % of the population .
Full funding is required from the EU budget for food aid programmes as some Member States will be unable to participate in the scheme when cofinancing rates apply .
We must reduce the load being shouldered by Member States with low per capita incomes or whose budgets are facing financial difficulties , which also includes Romania .
Products from intervention stocks or purchased on the market must be of Community origin , with preference given to locally-produced fresh food products , i.e. Romanian products to be purchased with European money for distribution to the poor in Romania .
in writing . - ( NL ) I voted in favour of the report on the amendment of a regulation on the financing of the common agricultural policy and the common organisation of agricultural markets as regards food distribution to the most deprived persons .
According to the data , in 2006 approximately 13 million people from the Member States benefited from this programme .
That is a good thing , but the assistance to the poorest in the EU should be greatly intensified .
To begin with , let us cut European Commissioners ' pay in half or divide it by three .
The European think-tank Open Europe has estimated that , pension schemes included , Commissioners earn on average EUR 2.5 million over five years , which is downright scandalous .
The other half of that money would be better spent on poverty reduction .
Perhaps that is a way of reconciling the European public with ' Europe ' .
I voted in favour of the proposal for a regulation on food distribution to the most deprived persons .
Poverty is one of the most serious problems currently facing the European Union .
In 2006 nearly 79 million people were threatened with poverty , which clearly shows the need for food aid programmes .
As the Commission proposal aims to distribute food to the most deprived persons and improve planning so that funds can be used more efficiently , and also bearing in mind that , since it began in 1987 , the food distribution programme has already benefited over 13 million people , I believe that the continuation of this programme is necessary and positive .
in writing . - ( SV ) We believe that the original purpose of the programme - to distribute intervention stocks to the most deprived persons - was strangely worded right from the start .
Mixing agricultural policy with social policy may be commendable , but it gets complicated .
Recently , the proportion of goods not coming from intervention stocks has steadily increased .
At the last reckoning , around 85 % of the food was bought on the open market .
We believe that the distribution of food to the most deprived persons in the Community should be abolished .
The circumstances of the most deprived persons in the Member States should be dealt with by the Member States or the municipalities .
It is these political levels of responsibility which should ensure , via their social policy , that all citizens get their right to a minimum level of subsistence .
Whether this is done via social security benefits , the distribution of food or by other means should be their decision .
The European Parliament 's Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development proposes that the food aid be funded in full by the EU .
The views that are put forward in this committee simply to get agricultural products on the market are astounding .
As usual , the June List observes that , in this situation , it is fortunate that the European Parliament does not have powers of codecision in respect of the EU 's agricultural policy .
Otherwise , the EU would fall into the trap of protectionism and of heavy subsidies to various groups within agriculture .
in writing . - ( NL ) The Dutch People 's Party for Freedom and Democracy ( VVD ) delegation in the European Parliament voted in favour of the Siekierski report , as we support food distribution to the poorest population groups in the EU .
However , the VVD MEPs do not agree with the provisions of the report that state that the food distribution programmes must be funded exclusively from the EU budget .
I voted in favour of this report because the food programme whose extension is being considered is a key instrument for helping the deprived who are suffering a great deal in the current economic crisis , even when it comes to meeting basic needs .
In addition , it is a sensible measure in terms of using the EU 's food resources effectively because it distributes the products which have been left unused to those who need them , while , at the same time , boosting demand on the EU 's food market .
I am in favour of such food aid assistance programmes receiving full funding from the EU budget as applying cofinancing rates would significantly impede the process and hamper the implementation of the measures in good time and the achievement of rapid results .
However , I think that national authorities must be granted more functions with regard to administering the aid on site because they are more familiar with the situation at local level and with the population 's specific needs .
in writing . - ( DA ) The Danish Liberal Party 's MEPs have voted against the European Commission 's proposal on food distribution to the most deprived persons because the proposal has been tabled with a legal basis in agricultural policy , even though it is not an agricultural policy instrument .
The agricultural budget should not be used to implement social policy .
This is the responsibility of the Member States .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I voted in favour of Mr Siekierski 's report on food distribution to the most deprived persons in the Community .
I believe that the problem of poverty is highly relevant as , even in affluent Europe , more than 80 million people are at risk of poverty and the vast majority of these live in the countries that joined the EU in 2004 and 2007 .
I therefore agree with the rapporteur on the need to expand the range of products provided through this food aid programme and on the fact that the primary source of supply should be represented by reserves deriving from intervention in the agricultural markets , thus constituting an important aspect of the common agricultural policy .
I also welcome the rapporteur 's call for the entire funding for the food aid programme to be provided by the EU , since the Commission 's co-financing proposal could lead Member States to limit their participation in the programme , particularly at times of economic hardship such as many states are currently experiencing .
in writing . - The EU is India 's top foreign investor and biggest trading partner .
Forging an economic alliance is therefore vital to both .
I support this report because it stresses that the agreement should ensure that increasing bilateral trade brings benefits to the widest number of people and contributes to the Millennium Development Goals , including preventing environmental degradation .
However I regret that the EPP text replaced the more comm. text which was more progressive .
India was the European Union 's 17th most important trading partner in 2000 and ranked 9th in 2007 , while between 2000 and 2006 EU trade in goods with India grew by around 80 % .
As a social-democrat , I welcome the fact that India has made considerable progress in terms of universal primary education , reducing poverty and increasing access to safe drinking water .
However , I also note that India is still off track on most of the Millennium Development Goals ( MDGs ) such as infant mortality , maternal health , child malnutrition and the battle against malaria , tuberculosis and HIV / AIDS .
I voted for this report in order to approve the EU-India Free Trade Agreement , in the belief that an FTA offers future potential for an increase in investments , trade and business opportunities arising from the FTA , with an agreement being , overall , a win-win situation for both sides .
The Free Trade Agreement with India marks another step taken by Europe and India towards opening up the world economy and expanding its benefits .
It is also a particularly significant sign in the current context .
I therefore welcome the conclusion of this agreement .
Having examined it , however , I am forced to make a few more critical remarks .
In order for free trade to function properly , a set of rules preventing counterfeiting and the use of products prohibited in the destination countries must be respected .
Indications of origin must also be clear .
In short , information must be available and transparent and international agreements must be respected .
Another important aspect is the idea that the benefits of free trade are mutual .
In other words , opening up borders does not only mean opening up the markets of developed countries to products from third countries .
The virtues of free trade consist of the mutual opportunity to exchange goods and the opening up of economies ; these virtues must be extended to developing or rapidly growing countries .
This will only happen if the barriers to trade and investment in these countries are also reduced .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I voted against the report by Mr Karim on an EU-India Free Trade Agreement .
This is because I believe that the conclusion of such agreements should be entirely subject to respect for fundamental human rights and democracy , which is far from being the case in the country in question .
The insertion in the agreement of a human rights and democracy clause is clearly not enough to ensure that such basic conditions are respected , nor is the promise to scale up consultations within the United Nations Human Rights Council .
Sadly the persecution of religious minorities and human rights defenders in India continues to be reported by the international press .
In my opinion it is therefore frankly unacceptable to sign economic agreements of this kind .
in writing . - ( SV ) This report claims that it is important for workers to be aware of their rights and have a good knowledge of labour law and collective agreements .
The rapporteur also observes that the Posting of Workers Directive must be complied with and stresses the value of the principles of subsidiarity and proportionality .
These are all desirable demands .
However , some of the wordings in the report are too far-reaching .
We cannot support wordings that advocate the introduction at EU level of a Community legal instrument to cover wages , social security contributions , taxes and compensation in relation to work-related accidents .
These issues are too important for us to be able to support this type of wording or requirement .
We have chosen to support the alternative resolution tabled by the Socialist Group in the European Parliament , the Group of the Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe and the Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance , as it restricts the wordings on the Community legal instrument .
In the final vote on the report as a whole we will abstain as , while parts of the text are positive , the wordings relating to the Community legal instrument are too far-reaching .
in writing . - I support this report which demands responsible and clear rules for Subcontracting in Europe .
The report will protect employees who work for subcontracting companies by calling on the Commission to establish a clear-cut Community legal instrument introducing joint and several liability at European level .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I voted in favour of Mr Lehtinen 's report on the social responsibility of subcontracting undertakings in production chains .
I agree with the rapporteur that subcontracting has reached very high levels in the European Union , which has given rise to various problems linked , for example , to the legal implications for employers and workers and difficulties in verifying compliance with fiscal and social security responsibilities .
I thus share the rapporteur 's view that it would be advisable to adopt a system of ' joint liability ' at European level , under which the main contractor would be encouraged to check that subcontractors comply with relevant legislation .
This would also help to tackle the grey economy by preventing unfair competition on the part of businesses paying their workers at a rate less than the minimum rate of pay .
in writing . - ( NL ) According to a study by the Dublin Foundation , outsourcing work to subcontractors is one of the most effective ways of undermining social legislation .
Subcontractors are found in various sectors , of which construction is the best known .
This report calls on the Commission to adopt definitive legislation on social responsibility in subcontracting throughout the whole production process .
All too often , clients pass on the responsibility to subcontractors , who then themselves outsource work .
As a result , the application of labour law is no longer monitored .
Those who work for a subcontractor and are near the end of the production chain do not always do this in the best working conditions , and violations of basic standards and lack of respect for fundamental employment rights result .
It is difficult for social law inspectorates to monitor this , since it is not always clear who bears responsibility at any one time .
This then tempts subcontractors to take a less careful approach to social-security contributions , to respecting statutory tariffs and to complying with statutory rest periods .
In some Member States it is already compulsory for clients to bear full social responsibility for all their subcontractors .
The fact that the cross-border nature of work is now increasing greatly renders a European directive necessary .
I therefore wholeheartedly endorse this report .
In January 2009 food prices in Italy rose more than 40 % above the average of the first 15 countries of the European Union , demonstrating severe distortions in the transfer of foodstuffs from field to plate .
According to ISTAT data , in January 2009 the trend rate of growth of food prices stood at 3.7 % in Italy , compared with 2.3 % in France , 1.9 % in Spain , 1 % in Germany and 2.6 % in the European Union .
The ISTAT analysis also showed that the main differences between Italy and its EU partners were in relation to bread , pasta and cereals , which contain raw materials such as wheat , the price of which is fixed worldwide and does not differ between the various countries .
The increase in the price differential between production and consumption confirms the existence of serious distortions in the transfer of foodstuffs from field to plate in Italy .
The effects have been felt more keenly by low-income families , for whom food is the biggest item of expenditure . Small and medium-sized food-processing companies have also suffered severe consequences .
The problem caused by the difference in the production price and the consumption price has reached the point where immediate action from the European institutions is required .
I voted in favour of the report submitted by Mrs Batzeli ( Greece ) as I believe that the EU must come to the aid of producers and consumers .
Due to abuses of their market dominance by large retail chains , the prices paid by European consumers are , on average , five times higher than farm gate prices .
Farmers generally receive around 8 % of the final retail price .
We urge the introduction of EU policies which facilitate direct contacts between producers and consumers .
The EU must support the use of new technologies and the Internet to provide consumers with more detailed information about products , while , at the same time , facilitating producers ' access to the market .
Measures are also needed to assign greater importance to the concept of ' local products ' and to provide more effective support to traditional food markets or other traditional types of commerce .
Traditional Romanian products must be supported on the European market .
in writing . - ( DA ) The Danish Social Democratic Members of the European Parliament - Poul Nyrup Rasmussen , Britta Thomsen , Christel Schaldemose , Dan Jørgensen and Ole Christensen - have voted in favour of the report on food prices in Europe .
It is the view of the delegation that the concentration of supermarkets and the lack of competition will mean that both consumers and farmers within the EU will lose out .
However , the delegation does not agree with the statement in paragraph 6 of the report that it is deplorable that intervention measures are being dismantled .
This is necessary in order to make European agriculture profitable .
in writing . - ( NL ) I should like to give an explanation of vote on the Batzeli report on behalf of the Dutch delegation from the Christian Democratic Appeal ( CDA ) .
In our opinion , this is certainly not the most elegant of reports .
Many points are worded in a long-winded way or duplicated .
We also have our doubts about certain requirements that tend too much towards socialist state intervention , and also about a complete ban on selling below cost .
This may sound like a nice idea , but is impracticable .
In agriculture , we consider this an important point .
With regard to dumping , action should of course be taken by the competition authority .
In spite of this , we have voted in favour of the Batzeli report , since it contains a number of important elements that the alternative resolution actually seeks to delete .
I refer , in particular , to the study into the margins in the various links in the food production chain and to the call for the European Commission to look into the power of supermarkets in the field of competition , as the European Parliament has already requested more than once .
We understand from the European Commission that the study into margins can be carried out partly on the basis of existing data known to the Commission , and thus we assume that this study will not entail any substantial increase in administrative costs .
I voted in favour of the report on food prices in Europe because I believe that political action is necessary to tackle the rise in prices of agricultural and food products and the discrepancy between the price received by the producer and the price paid by the consumer .
In Europe , the price paid by the end consumer is approximately five times higher than the price paid to producers , a situation which has impacted on low-income households , in which food expenditure accounts for the largest slice of the family budget .
in writing . - ( SV ) As usual , this ' opinion-soliciting ' report by the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development contains proposals that will entail increased costs for the EU budget .
We do not support the main ideas of the report , which , among other things , regrets the ongoing dismantling of Community intervention measures in the agricultural market . Neither are we in favour of the committee 's proposal for ' market management measures ' .
The European Parliament 's Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development also needs reminding that the price situation is different in different Member States .
The committee 's proposal to create a Europe-wide database for citizens containing reference prices for products and inputs and information on the costs of energy , pay , rents , duties and taxes from all across Europe is , in our opinion , detached from reality .
The prerequisites for comparisons between the Member States simply do not exist for numerous different reasons .
We also find the proposal for a special label for European agricultural products strange .
What is the motive behind this ?
An attempt to encourage protectionism ?
As usual , the June List observes that , in this situation , it is fortunate that the European Parliament does not have powers of codecision in respect of the EU 's agricultural policy .
Otherwise , the EU would fall into the trap of protectionism and of heavy subsidies to various groups within agriculture .
We have voted against this report on food prices in Europe .
in writing . - ( FR ) No one is challenging the aims of this report on the gap between producer prices and the prices paid by the consumer .
Greater market transparency is required in order to ensure that producers are sufficiently remunerated and that the prices charged to end consumers are justified .
Unfortunately , the text adopted in committee contains proposals that are incompatible with the social market economy .
These highly authoritarian proposals on price control , margins and markets merely call to mind too many formulas that have failed and that we thought had been definitively consigned to the past .
I regret that the report focuses solely on distributors instead of taking account of the production chain as a whole .
Indeed , it is often large processing companies that buy produce from farmers and abuse their dominant market position in order to sell the produce on to distributors at exorbitant prices .
Furthermore , creating European databases on all sorts of costs and margins , as the report proposes , would result in a considerable administrative cost for businesses , which would be passed on and absorbed into retail prices .
In order to prevent such bad habits , I have tabled an alternative resolution , which 40 Members have signed to indicate their support .
Regulation at EU level of the problem of unfair practices used by the large retail distribution chains against producers is very important for Romania .
Even here the issue of abuses practised by supermarket chains is a concern for both producers and consumers .
Apart from the accumulation of ' hidden charges ' , which are compulsory for any product and borne by producers , supermarkets ban producers from selling their products at lower prices in other stores .
As a result of all these regulations , products are up to 30 % more expensive .
The consumer is ultimately the one who pays the product 's overrated price .
The measures proposed by Mrs Batzeli in her report are aimed at reducing the pressures exerted by supermarkets and promoting a direct relationship between consumers and producers .
This is why I voted for its adoption .
The investigation proposed in the report on the distribution of profit margins will allow us to draw a series of conclusions about the right measures for ensuring price transparency in the producer-processor-retailer chain and penalising abusive practices .
The negotiation of prices between suppliers and retailers must allow the use of different prices on a case-by-case basis and therefore contribute to ensuring a healthy competitive environment .
The report makes repeated , well-known findings about the monopoly situation that has arisen in food processing and marketing .
However , it does not state that this situation is a conscious choice by the EU and the governments of the Member States within the framework of the Lisbon Strategy and the CAP .
The liberalisation of the markets , the incentives for mergers and takeovers and the quest for profit and competitiveness in the food industry have resulted in the sovereignty of the multinationals , in higher consumer prices , in lower farm gate prices and in higher profits for capital .
The CAP made a decisive contribution towards this development by abolishing minimum guaranteed prices and selling out farmers with small and medium-sized holdings to the WTO , so that the multinationals could obtain raw materials dirt cheap , and persecuting or shrinking the cooperatives , the hypocritical pronouncements of the parties which support the European one-way street notwithstanding .
One example is milk production in Greece , where the milk cartel is pushing down farm gate prices and holding consumer prices sky high , thereby reaping huge profits .
Nowadays it promotes the consumption of products with little reduced nutritional value , leaving thousands of livestock farmers , who are unable to market their produce in a country which produces 50 % of its requirements , out on a limb .
The fight for cheap and safe food and for the survival of poor farmers requires a strong alliance of workers , farmers and the self-employed and grassroots power and a grassroots economy .
The rise in food prices in Europe is clear for all to see .
It is a terrible problem requiring immediate action from the European Union .
I therefore voted in favour of the report by Mrs Batzeli , who , I believe , handled the matter comprehensively and has proposed very useful measures to address the issue .
It is imperative that we take steps to narrow the current gap between producer and consumer prices caused by the unhealthy price transmission mechanism that includes speculation on foodstuffs and a greater involvement of intermediaries .
I agree with the rapporteur that the growing concentration of marketing and distribution of foodstuffs has contributed significantly to the increase in consumer prices compared with producer prices .
There is an urgent need for measures such as those suggested by Mrs Batzeli for greater transparency of the pricing structure and profit margins through coordinated action by national competition authorities , for better regulation of the market and of price trends for food in Europe and for effectively encouraging consumers to choose locally produced foods , which by definition help to shorten the distribution chain and support traditional food markets that are currently in serious difficulty .
in writing . - I have decided together with my colleagues from the European Parliamentary Labour Party , to support the original Report , which offers the most satisfactory response to the hundreds of petitions submitted by European citizens , victims of the massive rush for urbanisation in Spain , overbuilding and coastal destruction .
The alternative resolutions tabled substantially modified the Report , and did not meet the consistent position we have held for 5 years now .
in writing . - The report is a cosmetic exercise designed to maintain false hopes , among hundreds of petitioners , during the approach to the EU assembly 's elections .
It purports to be able to take actions , which - as the Committee on Legal Affairs points out - the EU is not competent to take ; so that even Auken 's threat to oppose the next EU budget , if the report 's demands are not met , could not help those who have bought , and then been deprived of , properties in Spain .
The UKIP will not contribute to this imposture .
in writing . - I voted in favour of this report , which follows a huge number of petitions to Parliament by victims and concerned citizens from across Europe .
This report demonstrates that the massive urbanisation in several regions of Spain has been carried out in a way which abuses property rights , degrades the environment , undermines water provision and quality , and often leaves victims bereft of any redress or compensation when they may have lost their life savings .
I hope that this report will assist many of my constituents and citizens from across Europe who have been affected by this , in their battle for justice .
in writing . - Due to a conflict of interest , I abstained from all votes .
in writing . - ( SV ) We understand that there may be major problems within the construction sector in Spain and that it may be the case that unsuspecting citizens purchase properties in good faith which it later transpires the construction company did not have the legal right to build .
However , these are problems that can and should be solved within the Member State 's legal framework .
When all domestic remedies have been exhausted in accordance with Article 35 of the European Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms , individual citizens can turn to the European Court of Human Rights in Strasbourg .
There is no reason to introduce any legislation at EU level to deal with these issues or for the European Parliament as an institution to get involved in this matter .
Nor do we wish to have any involvement with the various alternative draft resolutions tabled by Spanish Members , which add domestic policy complications to the matter .
in writing . - I am submitting an explanation of vote on the Auken report in support of three separate constituents who have contacted me pleading for help .
In each of these three cases , the constituent has spent his or her life savings on the purchase of a house and land in Valencia .
In each case , proper legal procedures were followed at the time of the purchase .
But , in each case , the constituent has subsequently had to suffer illegal land-grabbing demands by the Valencian authorities .
These are just three of many thousands of cases of injustice suffered by European citizens owning property in Spain .
I ask the Commission to act swiftly and decisively in accordance with the recommendations of the Auken report .
I have voted in favour of the Auken Report , since it clearly criticises the reckless town planning by the Spanish state , and highlights the misuse of Community funds in planning and environment matters .
I should also like to stress the ineffectuality of the Spanish Members from the People 's Party ( PP ) and the Spanish Socialist Workers ' Party ( PSOE ) .
They were incapable of reaching an agreement to table an alternative resolution that would achieve the majority they needed ; hence they both ended up defeated .
They have made it quite clear once again that the only issue they can agree on is their opposition to Basque nationalism .
The Socialists and the PP tried to pressurise their fellow Members to vote in favour of their respective resolutions , which greatly mitigated the criticisms made by the rapporteur .
I want to make it clear that the Spanish Government participates in a practice that is systematically linked to mistreatment of its citizens , destruction of the environment and large-scale corruption .
I feel that the powers in question should be immediately transferred to Euskadi .
in writing . - Thousands of European citizens continue to be victims of a system of massive urbanisation , expressed in a very large number of petitions concerning the abuse of the legitimate rights of European citizens to their property and environment .
The problem has been caused by public procurement with insufficient control of the urbanisation procedures by local and regional authorities .
The resolution adopted should begin to bring concrete solutions to people living in the affected areas in Spain .
Having been involved from the start in the formulation of the Auken report , which has garnered the support of both the Spanish and the European people , I have defended its content wholeheartedly .
I fully support this report because it clearly reveals the involvement of all the Spanish administrations , from central government to the autonomous regional governments , to the local authorities , in developing an economic model based on urban speculation , which has been devastating for the environment , the economy and social development in Spain .
This report , which has withstood pressure from the People 's Party ( PP ) and the Socialist Workers ' Party ( PSOE ) , highlights the leniency of both political and judicial resolutions on this issue , which has led to impunity within the authorities .
It also includes the declaration of a moratorium on those development plans that do not comply with the criteria of environmental sustainability and social responsibility , so that irregularities can be investigated and a policy of faits accomplis can be avoided .
Furthermore , the report requires the Spanish Government to set up a working party in which all the administrations will participate .
It calls for a public debate about urban planning in Spain , which will allow legislative measures to be adopted against speculation and unsustainable development , and will put an end to à la carte legislation practised in autonomous regions such as Aragón and Valencia .
I voted in favour of the Auken report on the impact of extensive urbanisation in Spain on individual rights of European citizens , on the environment and on the application of EU law , on the basis of petitions which I have received .
There is a great deal of evidence which shows that excessive urbanisation is being carried out in coastal areas , and responsibility for this lies with central , autonomous and local authorities .
They have set in motion a model for unsustainable development that has had extremely serious environmental , social and economic consequences .
As a result of this activity , irretrievable damage has been caused to the biodiversity and environmental integrity of many regions of Spain .
In response to such charges procedures are slow and sentences handed down do not provide satisfaction to the victims .
This has caused people to have reservations about the Spanish justice system .
It should also be emphasised that thousands of European citizens , who bought property in Spain in a variety of circumstances , have become victims of abuses connected with urbanisation .
These abuses were committed by local authorities , but as a result the properties face demolition .
In connection with these facts the Spanish Government should be called upon to carry out a thorough review of legislation affecting the rights of individual property owners as a result of massive urbanisation , in order to bring an end to the abuse of rights and obligations enshrined in the EC Treaty .
I would like to congratulate the rapporteur on her work and say that I welcome her report on the impact of extensive urbanisation in Spain on individual rights of European citizens , on the environment and on the application of EU law ; this impact has been particularly negative , as testified by the numerous petitions received from residents in the area .
I think that in this case the Committee on Petitions has taken due account of the requests from citizens who are concerned about the destruction of the natural landscape , the failure to respect rules on contracts and environmental protection , and the huge-scale building activity .
The evidence brought by this committee following fact-finding missions in the area have clearly shown the encroachment caused by the construction industry and the need to defend the rights of Spanish citizens as enshrined in the treaties .
I therefore support the report in question ; it is perfectly in keeping with the principle of subsidiarity , and I hope that the local authorities in Spain will take the necessary measures without the need for the European Commission to resort to infringement proceedings .
in writing . - We voted in favour of the report in sympathy with the complainants .
However , we are of the opinion that the alleged breaches of Spanish , EU and international law should be dealt with and solved by the relevant Spanish authorities , the European Court of Justice and the European Court of Human Rights .
in writing . - I am pleased Parliament voted in favour of this report .
Many Scottish people have been affected by the Spanish land grab , losing their homes which many have saved a lifetime to afford .
The Spanish Government must do all it can to bring justice to those people affected .
Many people were misled and lied to over what they were buying and there must be a legal remedy to the situation .
in writing . - We voted in favour of the report on urbanisation in Spain because it reflects the result of several years of detailed work by the Committee on Petitions to respond to hundreds of related petitions by several thousand petitioners , including fact-finding visits and discussions with all interested parties and it was adopted by a large cross-party majority in committee .
We have a duty as elected representatives to ensure that European citizens whom we have encouraged to make use of their free movement rights should not then be subjected to arbitrary or unjustified restrictions in the host state .
We recognise that the primary responsibility under the Treaties for the monitoring of the application of Community law lies with the Commission .
We also recognise that the Treaties explicitly exclude any effect on domestic rules governing the system of property ownership .
However , we also believe , firstly , that Parliament 's Petitions Committee , as the ' eyes and ears ' of the institutions , should highlight any systematic problems affecting the free movement of thousands of our citizens which are brought to light by the petitions process .
Secondly , we consider that violations of Community law appear to be at issue , in particular environmental law and public procurement rules .
in writing . - As a fervent opponent of the EU and its continual meddling in our lives , I have consistently voted against the vast majority of reports that I have been asked to consider .
As is inevitable , a report will come along that simply demands a different approach and I believe that the Auken report is one .
I have been approached by many expats , all of whom did everything they could to establish a proper , legal and sustainable life in Spain .
That they became victims of a clash of bureaucracies is now a matter of history and hopefully this report will compel an equitable solution .
My action here does not imply a softening of my attitude to the EU and its impenetrable , inflexible and unaccountable structure .
However , if subordinate bureaucracies will not solve the problems they themselves create , then a solution must be found .
I hope now that the myriad problems created by the various Spanish authorities will be addressed and that such will be promptly resolved in the best interests of my constituents .
I have a nagging worry that such intervention may not be the solution .
In the land of the EU , the only continuing law is that of the unintended consequence .
I voted in favour .
I see in Obama 's election an important opportunity for a new policy of global commitment , a turning point in the history of the United States and also for the whole world .
The way forward should be a new policy of global commitment , in which the EU will play its key role .
We now have the opportunity to renew the global commitment through renewed institutions in view of the upcoming European elections .
The victory of the Democrat candidate is further proof of the extraordinary capacity for renewal that has been evident so many times at difficult points in US history .
The new US leadership could lead to an improved EU / US common policy , the two sides working together in an effective partnership on many global issues that the leaders of both continents must face , such as climate change , global challenges , regional issues , defence , economic matters and trade .
We must tackle these problems together , with determination and creativity .
Obama embodies what is positive and impressive about the United States and today 's complex and globalised world , in which change is constant .
The transatlantic link remains essential .
I have faith in the role that the US will continue to play in this regard under the leadership of President-Elect Obama .
in writing . - ( NL ) This voluminous report rightly advocates a deepening of relations between Europe and the United States .
The Middle East , Pakistan , Afghanistan , Russia , defence , security and economic and commercial matters are discussed in detail .
It is unacceptable , however , that the rapporteur expressly anticipates the entry into force of the Treaty of Lisbon , when it has become clear that the majority of citizens want nothing to do with the European Constitution or a carbon copy of it .
It is good that the rapporteur devotes attention to the Palestinian issue , but why is there no mention of Israel 's right to security ?
On account of this bias , I voted against this report .
The Mon report raises the subject of transatlantic relations in the aftermath of the presidential elections in the USA .
I endorsed the report , because I think that today it is essential for there to be close cooperation between the United States and the European Union in practically all areas : politics , defence , the economy , energy , the environment , culture , science etc .
We should be aware that the combined gross domestic products of the United States and the European Union make up more than 50 % of world GDP .
The New Transatlantic Agenda , which has been in force since 1995 , should be replaced by a framework understanding on the Transatlantic Partnership , which would be systematically updated .
The USA and the EU are of necessity engaged in activities to uphold world security and order .
Of course , this requires cooperation with other countries , especially China , India and Russia .
I also consider the remarks on the need to reform the UN to be correct , including the need to reform the working of the Security Council .
Transatlantic cooperation must not ignore the role of NATO .
Today , we should recognise rapid and effective action to slow down the growing economic crisis to be the most important .
I will also add that in these relations we should also include a place for Canada , Mexico and South America .
We should hope that the words spoken by the current President of the USA , Barack Obama , that ' America has no better partner than Europe ' will be confirmed by everyday reality .
This is essential if we are to be equal to the challenges faced by our civilisation .
The European Parliament 's ' huge expectations ' from the election of Barack Obama as President of the United States of America in fact only concern the imperialists who , with good cause , expect their interests to be served more effectively .
The people should not entertain any illusions that there will be a change of policy for their benefit .
Moreover , the statements and pronouncements by the new US President himself leave no margin for doubt .
The report calls for closer and deeper cooperation between the EU and the US and ΝΑΤΟ , following the election in question .
It therefore proposes the creation of a body to coordinate the foreign and security policy of the two imperialist centres ( ΕU and USA ) at an even higher level .
At a time when competition and antagonism are escalating between them as a result of the capitalist financial crisis , European and American imperialists are , at the same time , endeavouring to coordinate their cooperation in order to deal with grassroots opposition .
That is the aim behind the call for joint and effective action to tackle ' global challenges ' , ' defence and security questions ' and ' regional issues ' .
The willingness expressed in the report to accept Guantanamo inmates in the EU , should the US so request , is a typical example .
The people must set up their own common front against the united attack on them by the EU , the USA and ΝΑΤΟ and overturn the imperialist order .
I voted against Mr Millán Mon 's report on the state of transatlantic relations in the aftermath of the US elections , because I do not think it is right that the European Union , with the entry into force of the Treaty of Lisbon and the corresponding foreign policy instruments , will take on a stronger and more coherent role on the international geopolitical stage .
Furthermore , I do not entirely agree on the roles of the transatlantic partnership and NATO in collective security .
in writing . - I attach enormous importance to the transatlantic relationship and have consistently argued for revitalising and strengthening NATO .
Contrary to the main thrust of this report , however , I do not believe that this should mean replacing the strong links between the United States and individual member states ( Britain in particular ) with an ' EU-US partnership ' .
The references to the Treaty of Lisbon , which our people do not want , and the proposal that the putative Commission Vice-President / High Representative should co-chair a new ' Transatlantic Political Council ' , are examples of this .
In addition , I have specific objections to aspects of the report dealing with EU defence .
The report welcomes ' an enhanced European defence capability ' and explicitly endorses the European Security and Defence Policy , to which Conservative opposition has been constant .
For these reasons I abstained on the report .
I would prefer to abstain from the vote on the motion for a resolution on an EC-Turkmenistan trade agreement .
While I recognise the importance of economic and trade relations in the opening up of Turkmen society , I doubt whether an interim agreement is the best solution for both parties .
in writing . - ( NL ) I voted against this resolution because , in my opinion , it would mean Parliament undermining its own credibility .
This House is always making rhetorical declarations on human rights and emphasising that human rights are the most important objective of foreign policy - yet now it is going to sign an agreement with a country that violates these very human rights on a massive scale .
The underlying belief is always that the mere fact of signing such an agreement improves human rights in the country concerned .
We hear the same story from the advocates of Turkish accession : yes , human rights are violated and torture is widespread , but once Turkey joins the EU that will all be a thing of the past .
The facts prove the opposite , however .
I have decided to abstain from the vote on Mr Caspary 's report on the interim trade agreement with Turkmenistan .
I can only endorse certain points of the proposal and not the document as a whole .
This has led me not to vote against it , but rather to abstain .
I voted in favour .
Nowadays the Internet has become the basis for all our personal and institutional relations .
Our personal information is now owned by many companies who frequently make use of our private data without due permission .
For all these reasons it is clear that we need to protect the fundamental right to privacy on the Internet .
The Internet can also provide considerable support for other fundamental rights , such as freedom of speech , of political action and of association .
On the other hand , however , it opens up a wide range of criminal activity .
An example of this perverted use of the web is the rising scourge of child pornography that is now flooding the Internet and which we have a responsibility to curtail .
It is therefore necessary to take concrete steps to protect and promote the fundamental freedoms of individuals when surfing the web .
Our action must be founded on privacy and security , paying constant attention to the fundamental right to education and access to information systems .
The Internet constitutes a huge technological advance , which allows users to connect with each other , personal , professional and educational relationships to be established , knowledge to be disseminated , and culture to be promoted and enhanced .
Internet crime has proliferated , however , and the Internet has become a favoured tool of criminal networks , given that it is easily accessible , cheap and very powerful .
In the last year , cases of Internet abuse of children have risen by 16 % , without there having been any effective punishment in most cases or even the ability to find these criminals .
As regards terrorism , there are already around 5 000 terrorist propaganda sites , which form a means of radicalisation and recruitment , as well as serving as a source of information on terrorist methods and resources .
I recognise the urgent need to find solutions and develop appropriate legislative instruments to fight crime , without this leading to excessive and unreasonable control through censorship and the secret monitoring of Internet data traffic .
in writing . - ( NL ) This is a good resolution that strikes a careful balance between rights and obligations and represents a courageous appeal against censorship .
Recent years have indeed seen too many attempts , in the name of political correctness , to subject even the Internet to censorship , so that controversial ideas are excluded from not only the printed press but also the World Wide Web .
Indeed , the Web has long been a thorn in the side of the inquisitors controlling the media , who wish to outlaw any criticism of the multicultural society , for example , via ' racism legislation ' .
Freedom on the Internet is the best guarantee of freedom of expression .
I voted in favour of the Lambrinidis report on strengthening security and fundamental freedoms on the Internet , because I deem it essential that the European Union takes steps to reconcile the fundamental rights of Internet users with the fight against cybercrime , in order to protect citizens , particularly children .
As a result , I feel it is essential to develop legislation on data protection , security and freedom of expression .
in writing . - ( SV ) The freedom of expression and the right to a private life are absolute rights that must under no circumstances be undermined .
Naturally enough , we believe that these rights also apply to the Internet , thereby guaranteeing the individual 's right to free expression .
We also think that the possibility of removing personal information from databases and websites should be considered a given and we would urge companies to guarantee that individuals can have their personal data deleted from databases .
However , we believe that the lack of such a guarantee is first and foremost an international problem which is therefore best solved by means of international regulations and conventions .
The June List is very much in favour of the guarantee of security and the fundamental freedoms on the Internet , but we are opposed to some of the wordings in the report .
For example , the report expresses the desire to proceed with the adoption of the Directive on criminal measures aimed at the enforcement of intellectual property rights .
We are strongly opposed to this , as we do not want the harmonisation of European criminal law .
The rapporteur also seeks to compare the right to the Internet with the right to access to schooling .
We are of the opinion that this is an arrogant statement , as the right and opportunity to attend school are far from foregone conclusions in many EU Member States .
However , the good intentions of the report outweigh the negatives and we have therefore chosen to vote in favour of it .
I fully support the Lambrinidis report on security and fundamental freedoms on the Internet .
I think it is very important and necessary , mainly because our presence on the global web is almost universal .
In a word , the Internet has become part of our daily life .
We cannot imagine a better source of information , whether we are writing a book , or whether we want to make a sophisticated dish and are looking for an interesting recipe .
But we are not always aware that our presence on the Internet leaves traces which can be used against us , for example by people engaged in marketing , by intelligence services , and even by identity thieves .
On the other hand , the Internet can also be a convenient communication tool for criminals and terrorists .
That is why it is so difficult to prepare reasonable legislation , which in a balanced and effective way will allow people to use all the benefits of the Internet safely , while at the same time curtailing the very real and serious threats connected with its abuse .
Therefore I support the rapporteur 's proposals , which aim to strike the right balance between the privacy and security of individuals on the web , while fully respecting their fundamental rights and freedoms .
I also think that alongside concern for quality of service , the public authorities are responsible for ensuring Internet access for the poorest people and for those who live even in the most isolated regions of the country .
Internet use and development are without doubt a source of important progress , especially where freedom of expression and democracy are concerned .
Striking a balance between such freedom , the protection of privacy and the need for Internet security represents a real challenge for us all .
This is particularly the case where political action is concerned .
Indeed , some people on the opposition side or who may hold controversial political views do not have access to the various media and see in the Internet an opportunity to convey their message throughout the world .
Such freedom should not be censored .
China , Cuba and Burma , as true totalitarian states , have no hesitation in gagging such freedom of expression by systematically censoring and filtering information with contempt for all the principles of democracy and freedom .
Internet filtering for the sake of combating pornography , child pornography and terrorism is crucial , but such vigilance must be strictly defined and controlled .
The Lambrinidis report is the first report to deal with the problem of the Internet from the user 's perspective as its main topic .
I voted in favour of it because I believe that it is a balanced , relevant report which deals with the main topics of interest in this area .
As rapporteur for the PPE-DE Group on this report , I think that the recognition of the user 's rights over the posted content , particularly the right to delete this content permanently , and the request that the future regulatory mechanism define the digital identity and propose specific measures for protecting it are important contributions .
The report highlights the importance of cooperation between the entities involved in developing the Internet , with a view to devising instruments for self-regulation or coregulation ( for example , codes of good practice ) supplementing existing legal regulations .
Given the rapid pace of the Internet 's development , these regulatory methods are far more effective than traditional legislation as they are approved and applied by the majority of entities concerned , without any coercion from the state .
The Internet is the largest public access area in the world and the rate of its development may take us by surprise if we do not decide to deal with this topic in a balanced , realistic way so that future regulation of cyberspace focuses more specifically on the user .
I have voted in favour of Mr Lambrinidis 's report on strengthening security and fundamental freedoms on the Internet .
I wholeheartedly support the aims of the draft , which are to involve all interested parties , to act on different levels using existing national , regional and international instruments and , lastly , to exchange best practices , in order to provide a response in line with the requirements and problems of different kinds of Internet users and the numerous types of online activities .
in writing . - I support this report 's aims to strengthen security and fundamental freedoms on the Internet .
I voted in favour of the motion for a resolution on safe recycling of ships as I feel that it is vital for this issue to be tackled as an integral part of a ship 's lifecycle .
End-of-life ships should be regarded as hazardous waste , as a result of the hazardous substances that they contain , and should therefore fall within the scope of the Basel Convention .
I am happy to see that there is a Community will to improve ship dismantling practices .
The EU 's environmental protection goals can only be fully achieved if they are integrated into the various sectors of Community policy .
As a result , this motion for a resolution aims to speed up all the steps that the Union must take to ensure that the dismantling of end-of-life ships occurs under safe conditions for workers and with adequate protection of the marine environment .
The global phase-out of single-hull oil tankers and the backlog of old vessels now being withdrawn from the market , many of which contain hazardous substances , allow us to predict an uncontrolled expansion in sub-standard facilities in South Asia , which may even spread to African countries .
All these reasons lead us to support this motion for a resolution and also all the steps aimed at ensuring compliance with international rules on safety and the environment .
That concludes the explanations of vote .
Our sitting is now going to be suspended .
It will be resumed at 3 p.m. - shortly - with an oral question on the role of culture in the development of European regions .
Corrections to votes and voting intentions : see Minutes
( The sitting was suspended at 1.15 p.m. and resumed at 3 p.m. )

Approval of the minutes of the previous sitting : see Minutes
The role of culture in the development of European regions ( debate )
The next item is the debate on the oral question to the Commission by Doris Pack , on behalf of the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats , on the role of culture in the development of European regions ( B6-0226 / 2009 ) .
Madam President , Commissioner , we are meeting at an unusual time , but still , the oral question that we put today was born in the ' A Soul for Europe ' intergroup .
We believe that we will find this soul in our oldest units - the regions - where people communicate with one another with their particular accent , a specific dialect or even a regional language , where the local cuisine has its own specific taste , where truly local fruit and vegetables are sold at markets , where particular folk songs still reside , where particular tales and myths originate : in short , where people feel they belong , where they feel at home .
The march of globalisation threatens to standardise so much , and many unique features will disappear .
Only Europe 's wonderful regions can safeguard that specialness and they must be able to rely on the protection of the European Union .
The richness and variety of the regions of Europe - they were often enemies , they were occupied , they were divided up , they were destroyed by war and re-united - must be retained .
The regions are like our stem cells .
The European Union has maintained something like a culture of the small and is bound by human rights in this area , too .
Our brief debate today and the resolution should spur the Commission into finding ways to make the cultural richness of the regions even more visible and into finding ways for the EU to contribute to its preservation and continued development .
Europe 's cultural potential must be used strategically .
In 2009 , the year of creativity and innovation , the possibilities of integrating ideas and initiatives from the public and civil service sector at the local and regional level should be exploited in a meaningful way .
I would like to say to the Members of the Committee on Regional Development that we have absolutely no intention of curtailing existing regional policy - we merely wish to add to its cultural dimension .
We implore the Commission to do its part , too .
Member of the Commission . - Madam President , allow me first of all to thank you for the opportunity , on behalf of Commissioner Figeľ , to address the place of culture in our policies and its particular contribution to the development of European regions and cities .
The importance of culture is taken into consideration in different ways at Community level .
In the context of the EU 's cohesion policy , regional and local strategies have successfully integrated culture to support creativity and to promote innovation .
Cohesion policy supports , for instance , the protection of our cultural heritage , the development of cultural infrastructure and services , the development of regional attractiveness and its link with sustainable tourism , but also the regeneration of local economies and the development of cross-border strategies .
In 2007 , the Commission launched the European Agenda for Culture , which is now in its first stages of implementation .
This new strategic approach to culture sets common objectives and aims to propel the economic , social and political value of culture by strengthening its transversal role .
In this framework , the Commission and the Member States are cooperating under a new open method of cooperation to strengthen joint efforts in areas with a direct impact on local and regional development strategies .
This will , for instance , help maximise the potential of creative and cultural industries , in particular SMEs ; promote access to culture , and encourage the mobility of cultural professionals .
Feeding into the ongoing reflection , the Commission will soon launch an independent study on the contribution of culture to local and regional economic development as part of the European regional policy .
The results of this study will help underline the value of investing in the cultural and creative sectors and will illustrate the links between such investment , specific regional development objectives and the Lisbon Agenda for growth and jobs .
The study will also contribute to the preparation of a green paper on the potential of cultural and creative industries , which is currently under preparation and is due for adoption by the Commission in early 2010 .
The Commission regularly organises conferences with representatives from local and regional authorities .
Let me simply highlight the open days , which every year bring together in Brussels a large number of stakeholders to debate a wide range of issues relating to regional and cohesion policy .
Aspects relating to culture have been regularly considered in the context of these workshops .
Moreover , within the context of other European policies , such as the EU 's integrated maritime policy , the Commission also endeavours to involve civil society actors in highlighting Europe 's rich maritime heritage .
Thus , next May , during the European Maritime Day celebrations in Rome , stakeholders will examine the links between maritime heritage and sustainable regional tourism , amongst others .
Finally , I also wish to mention the European Cultural Forum , which will be organised for the first time by the Commission , in the context of the European Agenda for Culture in Brussels , on 29 and 30 September , and will bring together representatives of the cultural sector and national authorities , including local and regional authorities .
Madam President , Commissioner , I should like to start by welcoming the initiative on such an interesting issue as the role of culture in the development of the regions of the European Union .
Cultural heritage is an important element in the identity and in the history of the development of the peoples of Europe .
Protecting and maintaining it is therefore especially important to the education of the young generation and , at the same time , to respect for the European identity .
Regardless of its European , national or local dimension , cultural heritage is a fundamental value for European citizens .
We all know that the focus is on the large towns where the most famous museums and monuments are to be found .
However , it is a fact that the European countryside , which accounts for 90 % of European territory , is suffering from abandonment and economic stagnation .
European programmes with a cultural content therefore help considerably in developing economic activity in the regions .
It is not only the supply of work and employment , it is the creation of poles of attraction for cultural and historic tourism that will contribute to the sustainable development of these areas .
We therefore consider that culture contributes directly towards the development of the cultural education of Europeans and indirectly towards economic prosperity , especially in the regions which are most in need of focus and development .
on behalf of the PSE Group . - Madam President , I am very pleased indeed to have this opportunity to discuss this debate .
It is only unfortunate that we are doing it on a Thursday afternoon when it is not quite as well attended as perhaps it should be .
I do think this is an important debate in the context of the current economic climate .
We have already heard discussion about culture and jobs and how culture industries and people working in culture can contribute to the economy and can really help .
At the precarious times we are facing now - which we have heard already in this Parliament - it is important that we discuss these matters as fully as we can .
I am here also because I do actually represent one of those big cities that the previous speaker mentioned .
London , as you all know , is one of the cultural centres of the EU with - as we all have - enormous history and very much to offer .
It is also the centre of , certainly the British , cultural industries .
So I think I have a role here to speak for the people that I represent and to fight for those jobs which , when things get bad , are very often the first jobs to go .
So I very much welcome what the Commission has said about the role of cultural industries , about how we want to preserve and to build on those and how there is an economic role for culture .
I feel that , very often , that economic role is ignored , and we do not talk about it ; we do not even think about it , and we relegate culture to second-class status .
That is not acceptable , particularly when culture can be so very important in our national and regional development .
I hope that one of the things to come out of this debate today - that we take back to our Member States , and the Commission and the Council take back - is that we are very concerned about how this regional development happens , how we deal with this and the role that culture can play in that .
Also , as Mrs Pack has already said , there is the whole question of cultural diversity .
I think one of the great strengths of the EU , and of the European Parliament , is that we all come together - now with 27 Member States - and are actually very different , in many ways : different backgrounds and cultures , and obviously different languages .
That is just a start .
Although the world is getting smaller and although people come together more , there are still these significant differences .
We should be celebrating them , because those differences are at the very core of the things that we talk about .
We all want to preserve our identities and how we feel about ourselves , and we need to do that .
In this context , I think we also need to take on board that we are getting people coming into our continent .
We are getting people from other parts of the world - many of whom are now in second and third generations in some of our Member States - who come from different backgrounds again .
I think we also need to take on board that they come with their own culture , tradition and languages .
Although we integrate them and they learn our languages , they are still there with their own separate identities .
That is an issue which has not been mentioned in this debate , which I think is an important one and one that we , I hope , can integrate , particularly when we talk about issues such as multilingualism , which we have had good debates on .
It is an extremely important issue , and I think one we should perhaps give more prominence to than we have done , but in the context of a Europe which is changing .
We therefore need to preserve our existing cultures and our existing diversity and actually absorb the new diversity which has come , and which is continuing to come , into our continent .
For all of these reasons , I welcome the support that we are giving to culture and to cultural industries , support to small and medium-enterprises , which I think - in the current economic climate - are possibly going to be the backbone of what we will be looking at .
If large corporations and large enterprises are losing people , making people redundant and laying people off , it may well be up to the smaller outfits - the SMEs - to pick up this slack and to actually go out there and create employment for those who can work in this sector .
So I hope we will all recognise just how important the role of culture is in our continent and our society and that those of us who have actually turned up for this debate will take the message back to our Member States , to the regions and to the people we represent .
I know we have got a good message to say , so let us go out there and spread the word .
Madam President , regions are an extremely important place for the development of culture .
It is there that most long-lasting exchange programmes and joint projects between areas of different traditions , customs and achievements arise .
Regions stimulate the development of culture , and culture - important , attractive projects and events - becomes a magnet which attracts economic investment .
This is the classic knock-on effect , which is best illustrated by the effects of the splendid European Capital of Culture programme .
Economic revival always follows the year of cultural events .
This is understood by the numerous European cities trying to take part in the project .
Culture is a great opportunity , especially for areas which are underdeveloped but rich in natural resources or tourist and recreation attractions due to their geographical location .
Therefore it is particularly important to be aware of the significant role of regional authorities and to stimulate their activity by special European Union programmes .
I expect the Commission to submit a green paper shortly , presenting a broad concept of measures in the area of culture , including the key matter of the level of regions .
Ladies and gentlemen , allow me finally to draw attention to the initiative to establish the year 2013 as European Year of Learning the Languages of our Neighbours .
Dynamic development of regional cooperation in Europe is often hampered by problems related to a lack of knowledge of the language and culture of neighbouring countries and regions , and a lack of ability to communicate fully .
Learning the language of an immediate neighbour can be a great leap forward for mutual understanding and communication , and therefore for strengthening cultural and economic cooperation and consolidating the entire European Community .
Madam President , I think that in this debate it is worth recalling the characteristic words of Jacques Delors , the former President of the European Commission .
When asked , after he had finished his term of office as President of the Commission , if there was anything he regretted or if there had not been enough of something , he admitted that the European Union and the Commission had devoted too little time to matters of culture .
And I think that his characteristic self-criticism could be a signpost for us .
I agree with the speaker who spoke about the strange priorities of our Parliament .
We say that culture is important , and that it is not only priorities like institutions , administration and regulations which are important .
Then we speak about these things on Monday , Tuesday , Wednesday and Thursday morning .
Only the debate on Thursday afternoon is about matters which could be called fundamental - about culture , because culture is in fact the foundation of European unity .
Not only the culture of regions , but also national culture , because the heritage of Europe is in fact the heritage of European nations , and this is perhaps especially true of our cultural heritage .
I am glad that this subject has been raised .
I am glad because I suppose it will become increasingly important in the work of Parliament and also of the EU executive , especially the Commission and the Council .
on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group . - ( CS ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I agree with the wording of the questions as formulated by my colleague Doris Pack .
In my view multilateral support for the European regions is very important .
There used to be borders in Europe separating states and nations from each other for centuries , creating a kind of psychological no-man 's land .
Fortunately we have now succeeded in eliminating borders through the Schengen agreement , but regions remain divided , cities are cut in half and psychological problems in particular persist , as one piece of territory belongs here or there and another somewhere else .
In an increasingly integrated Europe these ancient scars on the map and in people 's minds are healing safely but slowly .
The fastest way to make them whole , much more effectively and practically than all of the top-down measures , is to support civic initiatives and the activities of cultural organisations and regional institutions .
The regional institutions and ordinary people living in this or that territory know best what needs to be done to revive their region .
There are many projects whose implementation would represent both a step forwards and an impulse for further action .
I come from the region of Northern Moravia , from Silesia , an area where Czech , Polish and Slovak territory all meet .
And it is precisely there , in the historic Těšín region which today comprises the Czech town of Český Těšín and Polish Cieszyn , that a project has been created called " A Garden on Both Banks of the River ” since there is a river flowing between the two towns which once formed a single urban unit .
The project is putting in place links between the two river banks that are not only of an urban nature , but are also architectural and above all cultural .
Both divided sections of the formerly homogenous whole must be linked through the cultural activities of the inhabitants .
The river between the two towns and their surroundings must become a place of cultural exchange and cultural overlap .
However , an important aspect of such projects is the new employment opportunities created not only during the implementation of the work but also afterwards .
The service sector will certainly expand , increasing the attractiveness of the area and supporting the potential for tourism and other sorts of related enterprise .
The authors of the " Garden on Both Banks of the River ” project were inspired by the example of Strasbourg in France and Kehl in Germany , which were also such close neighbours that they formed a natural urban structure .
Also here the Rhine flows between both cities .
What is happening in France and Germany can also happen in the Czech Republic and Poland or anywhere else in Europe .
There are many more examples of this in Central Europe .
When we talk of the share of culture in developing Europe 's regions it is precisely these projects that come to mind .
The EU , the Commission and the European Parliament should support cultural projects of this type even more than they have done to date .
The authors of civil initiatives often complain that these activities are unduly held up by complicated bureaucracy or overly-complicated structures in the relevant ministries and offices .
Madam President , I come with two questions for the Commissioner .
One : what is culture ?
And two : what on earth has it got to do with the European Union ?
In my region lies the historic county of Northamptonshire .
Part of its cultural identity , its history , its fabric , comes from its historic ties with the shoemaking industry .
Shoemaking in the county was first recognised in the year 1202 , when Peter the Cordwainer was almost famous within the county .
In 1452 the court regulated prices and weights for various traders , including the cordwainers , and Northampton itself has served as a home to the shoe industry for all that time .
In 1841 , according to the census list , there were 1 821 shoemakers within the county .
The county 's football team , Northampton Football Club , is still referred to as ' the Cobblers ' , and in Northamptonshire now we have 34 shoe factories still open , all over 100 years old .
I am wearing a pair of Barker shoes today from a village called Earls Barton in the wonderful Westminster constituency of Daventry .
We have a museum , we have cultural events around the shoemaking industry - and it all came before the European Union .
So , whilst I completely understand the role of culture in countries ' regions , I wonder if or how the European Union can help us in these things .
And what are Europe 's regions ?
I think we should leave it to culture in Europe 's regions to develop as it always has done - locally , organically , and not centrally government-led .
( IT ) Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , thank you for accommodating me .
I would like to expand our vision slightly and look to the future , not just the past .
We are in a situation where we are seeing that growth cannot always be continual , rather it is restricted by the limited nature of natural resources and the limited capacity of the earth to absorb and metabolise our waste .
We can no longer base our view solely on material growth - our concept of development - instead we must see development with stronger reference to quality of life : we must , in essence , dematerialise our society .
From this perspective , regions are equally important for their cultural wealth - meaning the richness of their quality of life - which is extremely important at a time like the present when our lifestyle must change completely .
In this context of dematerialisation , a region 's wealth in terms of its quality of life is thus extremely important , I would even say absolutely indispensable .
I would therefore like to direct both the Commission and Parliament towards an understanding of the change in lifestyle that we must effect , a dematerialisation of our societies and therefore a cultural work , which will become irreplaceable as we have to substitute immaterial wealth for material assets .
This regional experience is thus something that we must try to understand and preserve before it is swept away by a whole series of oversights .
For this reason I would ask that we proceed with this debate , because it is so essential and because we must simply change our way of life .
( PL ) Madam President , the beauty of culture comes from its regional and local diversity , which changes with the development of society .
Regional cultures , which are deeply founded on tradition , form a strong basis for national cultures and their many variations .
With their colourfulness of form and expression they have great appeal , and they provide artistic stimulation , carry experience and emotion , and strengthen the bonds of local society .
Regional cultures are being pushed aside by the professional artists who draw inspiration from them .
It is often thought that regional culture has to be an amateur movement , whereas a professional movement should be given strong financial support .
This is probably the source of the tendency , also seen in the EU , to finance big and expensive projects , including international projects which involve professional artists from different countries .
Regional and local cultures are gradually dying , and numerous forms of their expression , and their disciplines and creative skills are disappearing .
Today we can talk of the traditional and folk culture in historically undeveloped regions , but we cannot say very much about their existence in developing regions .
There is , therefore , an urgent need to develop a programme of research to document the protection and development of regional culture in all its spiritual and artistic expressions .
These expressions are stated in more detail in my amendment to the resolution under discussion .
I hope that it will receive the support of Members .
( HU ) Culture creates value in both an intellectual and a material sense .
Cultural and creative industries employ millions all over Europe , with films , book publishing , musical compositions and publications - what is often called the music industry - being among the most dynamically growing sectors .
It is no accident that the most successful and popular initiatives of the EU are closely linked to culture .
Within the exchange programme for European art collections , the public in Budapest can currently view an unparalleled Gustave Moreau and an Alfons Mucha exhibition in an important museum .
Another such initiative is the cultural capitals of Europe programme which highlights and promotes not only cities but entire regions .
Less than a year from now , in 2010 , this proud title will be held by a little-known small city in the southern part of Hungary , Pécs , where the hundreds of thousands visitors drawn to the area will give a boost to the growth of the entire region .
I am convinced that it is through culture that the EU can grow closer to its citizens and bring citizens closer to one another .
When we speak of regional identity in the European Union , it goes without saying that we invoke culture .
I hope that in the period following the Lisbon strategy there will be even more initiatives and resources available for culture and education than now .
For the modern , knowledge-based society 's economic engine is the inventive and original spirit , that is to say : innovation and creativity .
( DE ) Madam President , thirty years ago I was here in Strasbourg when the directly elected European Parliament met for the first time .
The Oldest Member was Louise Weiss , after whom this wonderful building , itself a splendid piece of European culture , was named .
Her speech was the intellectual foundation document of the European Parliament .
She talked at that time of the type of Europeans we need , united on the basis of a common European culture .
This European culture is not something new , as many people think , but it is the rediscovery of something that is much older than the nation states , Mr Heaton-Harris .
Borders , at least on the continent , are mostly rather artificial .
Culture is deeply rooted in regions that are often divided by artificial borders , and regional culture is of enormous importance as a link between nations .
One of the greatest cultural figures was the Bohemian Forest poet Adalbert Stifter , who worked in Bavaria , Upper Austria and Bohemia and united Czech and German people .
This tradition must be kept alive - the culture that is destroyed by nationalism and displacement , the culture of minorities , the regional culture , the culture of European regions that span borders and , in particular , the diversity that we will only be able to preserve together .
Franz Josef Strauß , the great Bavarian European , once said that we will only be able to remain Bavarians , Basques , Germans or Britons if we become Europeans in time - Europe not being a centralising factor , but a common roof against the rain of globalisation and standardisation .
( RO ) The European Union project , conceived rather as a mechanism for economic integration , owes a huge debt to the ' cement ' represented by European culture .
At the same time , encouraging diversity is among the objectives of the European cultural agenda launched during this legislature , along with promoting culture as a means of economic growth and incorporating it in relations with third countries .
Culture must be viewed from a slightly different perspective if we think about the fact that this sector generates more wealth than the European chemical industry , for instance , providing a living for millions of employees .
This sector can contribute to the development of disadvantaged regions through grants for cultural cooperation projects in the fields of art and culture .
For example , Romania has demonstrated that it can implement large-scale projects in partnership with European regions through the programme ' Sibiu , the 2007 European Capital of Culture ' , which had a major economic impact on the area .
At the same time , we must encourage programmes promoting cross-border mobility among those working in the cultural sector and the staging of cultural and artistic events on a transnational basis .
I mention these matters as a member of the Committee on Culture and Education and of the Committee on Regional Development , as well as being a former chairman of a European border region .
( PL ) Madam President , people must eat , move about and take shelter from the cold or rain .
These are elements of production and commerce which serve to meet fundamental needs .
However , the kind of fork we eat with , or what our bicycle or the roof of our house looks like , has nothing to do with the economy , but is an expression of culture .
People have a spiritual need to create , quite simply for the sake of creating .
They take pride in their work when those who see or touch it express their appreciation and feel better because of it .
An important point is the fact that cultural diversity is often associated with regions .
We should never unify those regions and their culture - indeed , we should support that diversity .
Culture is an expression of the soul of the regions .
The EU would be a most uninteresting place without the cultural riches which it possesses today .
Maintaining culture is expensive , and our role is to support culture .
Without it there will not be an economy or happy people in the European Union .
( PL ) Madam President , the cultural wealth of Europe comes from the great diversity of its regions .
That diversity needs to be protected .
Koniaków lace is completely different from Bruges lace .
The mixture created by a superficial reproduction of ideas taken from culture leads to impoverishment .
We must preserve that diversity of all forms and expressions of culture , including multilingualism and material culture , because our diversity is our identity , it is a source of creative development and of enriching cross-fertilisation .
It also gives a purpose to cultural tourism .
The culture of the regions needs support and protection .
I would like to ask the European Commission to develop a programme for this .
( PL ) Madam President , the motto of the European Union is ' United in Diversity ' .
That diversity makes the entire EU exceptionally attractive , and also means that we are very different from countries such as the United States .
Cultural diversity is in fact based , among other things , on the huge diversity of our regional cultures , a diversity which makes those regions and entire countries extremely attractive to tourists .
They are attractive to us , Europeans , and they are also extremely attractive to others , who can come to Europe to see , experience and appreciate that unusual diversity .
Regional culture should therefore be supported if only for this reason .
But we should also remember that regional culture is a bridge which enables people who live in the regions to participate in what is known as high culture .
Without this it is difficult to talk of the harmonisation and popularisation of certain models of culture and their perception .
( PL ) Madam President , achieving the unity of Europe while preserving its diversity , identity and cultural heritage is the great value of our Community .
Individual nations , regions and different local communities cultivate and develop their culture and tradition , and bring that heritage into a united Europe .
They share their culture with other regions , and in exchange learn about the accomplishments and achievements of others .
And so they give something to others , and they take something from others .
In order to maintain the cultural heritage in regions and smaller areas it is also important that funds are available from the EU budget .
Those who were afraid that after integration they would lose their culture and identity are realising that the opposite is true - that the EU supports regional , folk and local culture .
Madam President , I rise to support my colleague , Zbigniew Zaleski .
Somebody once said : ' When I hear the word " culture ” , I reach for my revolver ' .
I think that the European Parliament today underestimates , as indeed do our national parliaments and national governments , the importance of education and culture .
We are always bottom of the pile .
They say that ' the hand that rocks the cradle rules the world ' .
I think - and this is just my personal point of view - Greece was the cradle of European civilisation .
One or two Englishmen - Lord Byron and others - did a certain amount of things .
Perhaps Commissioner Borg from Malta , the country of the George Cross , could answer this question : why can we not spend a little more money on supporting the future of our culture of our civilisation ?
We spend I do not know how many million billion euro on this , that and the other ; please - music , poetry , history , harmony .
Give us a chance .
Member of the Commission . - Madam President , I would like to thank the honourable Members for the number of points that they have raised .
I will certainly forward your points and the concerns that you have expressed to Commissioner Figeľ .
I would , however , like to express some general points and reactions .
Mrs Pack spoke about the harmonising of rules at European level and how this impacts on regional diversity .
I would like to point out that having harmonisation at European level is necessary in order to ensure a level playing field across the European Union so that its citizens can fully benefit from the single internal market .
This would not , however , mean that such harmonisation leads to less cultural diversity .
In fact this was also the outcome of the European Year on Intercultural Dialogue .
Furthermore , the Commission , through its regional policy , promotes cultural diversity and invests in culture , both directly and indirectly , indeed by involving regional authorities and stakeholders .
In a number of policy areas the Commission seeks to promote diversity and take account of regional specificities across the European Union .
Concerning the point raised on the issue of culture and the economic crisis and the overall contribution to growth and jobs , let me just recall that the Commission is undertaking a study this year to analyse how the cultural dimension has been integrated into the regional development strategies for 2007-2013 .
The results of the study will highlight the value of investing in the cultural sector , including cultural and creative industries , and will underline the links between such investment , the specific regional development objectives and the Lisbon Agenda .
On the Green Paper I would like to inform you , as I said at the outset , that this policy document is due in the first quarter of 2010 and its aim is to launch an open consultation process .
It has three main policy objectives .
Firstly , to advance a more strategic approach .
Secondly , to unlock the potential of Euro