Resumption of the session
I declare resumed the session of the European Parliament adjourned on 19 June 1998 .
Mr President , I am sure you will be aware of today 's very historic events .
Following the Good Friday Agreement and just five weeks after the referendum the new Northern Ireland Assembly is meeting at the same time as we are .
It is five minutes into its new programme .
This is a historic day for Northern Ireland and given your interest and support for the peace process , would you , on behalf of all Members of Parliament , send a strong message of support for the implementation of the Good Friday Agreement , wishing all the elected members well in their work of building peace for the communities of Northern Ireland .
Mrs McCarthy , as you have said , this Parliament has always been supportive and this morning I sent a telegram to Mrs Marjorie Mowlam . It said : ' On the occasion of this first meeting today , please convey the best wishes of the European Parliament and my own personal best wishes to the new Northern Ireland Assembly .
The European Parliament expresses continued solidarity with the people of Northern Ireland and its new assembly in the on-going process of peace and reconciliation ' .
Mr President , we all know of your full and warm-hearted support .
Thank you for your good wishes and for sending the telegram this morning .
Let us hope that in the next few days we will not see any breakdown of the current positive actions in Northern Ireland .
I raised a point at the last session on Parliament 's budgetary problems following the judgment of the Court of Justice with the NGO networks working on social cohesion .
There is serious and widespread alarm about this .
I hope we may be able to get a statement from the Commission .
Mrs Banotti , if I may say so , you have anticipated the matter by about five minutes .
We are just about to begin a debate on the matter with Mr Liikanen .
Mr President , I refer to Rule 151 of the Rules of the Procedure , which states that the meetings of the committees are open to the public .
One of my visitors , who is a wheelchair user , experienced great difficulty getting into the D III building .
May I ask you to ensure that disabled people have access to this building ?
Thank you , Mrs Günther .
We will look at it immediately .
Mr President , I would like to pay tribute to the memory of Lunes Matub , vilely assassinated in Algeria last Friday .
Lunes Matub was a singer and spokesman for Kabylia and Berber culture as well as a symbol of the Algeria which is struggling and suffering .
I have every sympathy with the emotion and anger of the Algerian people in the face of this dreadful act and their revulsion at the fundamentalism which has strengthened the hand of the assassins .
Algeria is now suffering and fighting and I hope that the Algerian people and the Algerian government will be able to rapidly find solutions so that his situation can move forward .
I would like to end with the remark , as his mother declared with great dignity at his funeral , that while Matub may no longer be with us in person , his songs and poems will remain deep in our hearts for ever and his struggle for peace will continue .
Mr President , during the last mini-part-session here in Brussels we had about twenty councillors from the Basque country with us , and we had the opportunity of expressing our solidarity with them in their constant dedication to the fight for freedom and democracy .
And during the next part-session , in Strasbourg , we shall also be inviting a party of Basque councillors .
But there is one Basque councillor , Mr President , who will not be able to come back this time . I refer to Manuel Zamarreño , a councillor from Rentería .
He was an unemployed workman , his wife earned a living cleaning staircases around their neighbourhood , and he had gone out to buy some bread to have for breakfast with his four children .
He was introduced to politics by another councillor , José Luis Caso , whose death we noted with sorrow in this Parliament only a few months ago .
Mr President , the only way we democrats have of responding to murder , to bullets in the back of the neck , is with words .
This we do , strong in the knowledge that we are simply crying out for a people , the Basque people , to be given a chance to live in peace , freedom and democracy .
Mr President , I would like to add a very brief word to express my solidarity with Mr Galeote .
But I want to emphasize that this case is of particular importance , because Mr Zamarreño was the councillor who specifically represented the People 's Party on the Rentería council .
His predecessor had been murdered - between them there had been a councillor who resigned her seat because she was threatened - and it is clear that they are determined to prevent the People 's Party from having a representative , duly elected by the people , on that particular council .
This is an attack on democracy and we must use all possible means to prevent it from happening , because the truth is that it is an act of fascism to prevent a representative of the people from sitting on a council .
Mr President , as Mr Galeote has said , we shall not tire of raising our voices .
We democrats will always have the weapon of speech .
And , therefore , as long as fascist brutality goes on trying to silence those who have been democratically elected , we will tirelessly go on denouncing it again and again .
But at the same time , Mr President , is it right that we should be wondering whether to offer opportunities for dialogue to those who have no words other than murder and bullets ?
Mr President , Europe , which is in favour of dialogue , empathy and comprehension , cannot understand why we should want to offer dialogue to anyone who offers nothing but death .
Mr President , on behalf of my party , the Basque Nationalist party , I too want to condemn the brutal murder of Councillor Zamarreño , a representative of the Basque people , who has been murdered by the ETA terrorist organization .
I would like to express my condolences and solidarity with his family and also my total solidarity with the People 's Party , which Mr Zamarreño represented .
I would assure them of my total solidarity with that other political family of his , out of my conviction that arms and violence cannot silence the People 's Party 's legitimate defence of its ideas in the Basque country .
I only hope that we Basques , the vast majority of whom want peace , might be able to find the way to rid ourselves of the violence that still goes on in our country and among our people .
Mr President , I too wish to express the strongest condemnation of the murder of the Rentería councillor , as a representative democratically elected by his fellow citizens .
And in that respect , we believe that democracy and peace can only be achieved by listening to the voice of the people and never by taking the lives of their representatives .
Mr President , I do not propose to speak on this sad event - which naturally grieves me as well - but I regret that I have to report to my fellow Members in this House , particularly the ladies , the death , in this case from natural causes , of Carmen Llorca Vilaplan , who was a Member of this House for many years and worked hard here , especially in the fields of culture and women 's rights .
I am sure she will be remembered with affection by many Members .
Mr President , I should like to take this opportunity to thank you for your message this morning to the new assembly in Northern Ireland which I hope is now getting under way .
For the first time in over 25 years the people of Northern Ireland will soon be able to decide on their own destiny .
I would also like to thank you personally for having come to Northern Ireland and thank this Parliament for its support in many ways down the years .
It is a historic day .
I have no doubt there will be difficult times on the road ahead but I hope and pray that in future when I rise in this Parliament , to speak on behalf of the people of Northern Ireland , it will be about good things and not the dark days we have come through over the last 25 years .
Approval of the Minutes
The Minutes of Friday , 19 June have been distributed .
Are there any comments ?
Mr President , I refer to page 16 of the Minutes .
Under Item 8 , the COM on oils and fats , there is a reference to Rule 99 .
This is a report taken without debate so it should be Rule 97 which is a matter of urgency requested by the Council .
As far as I am aware , the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development agreed to urgency on this and there was a full debate on the Friday morning .
I now refer to the middle of page 19 in the English version , where it says that Mr Colino Salamanca , the chairman of the Committee on Agriculture , requested that this report be referred back to committee .
There is a matter of principle here .
It is not possible for a chairman of a committee to refer an urgency back to committee when that committee has not been involved in the debate that has taken place .
There were no amendments from the committee and I am not quite sure on what grounds the chairman was asking for referral back when he was representing the committee .
This matter needs to be looked at either by the Bureau or by the Committee on the Rules of Procedure , the Verification of Credentials and Immunities .
Mr Colino had every right as an individual to seek referral back to committee if he so wished but to do so he would have needed the support of his own political group or 29 Members .
That was not requested by the President at the time .
I am not criticizing the President who has our complete support every Friday morning that he is in the Chair .
But it is a matter of principle that the Bureau needs to look at .
Thank you .
I think not only the Bureau but , if necessary , also the Committee on the Rules of Procedure should remedy this omission .
Mr President , I have a comment on the Minutes of Friday , 19 June 1998 .
On page 18 , in the vote on my report , there are two errors .
One relates to paragraph 10 : although I made an oral request for a linguistic correction to the Spanish version , this has not been done , and I wanted to say that in the various paragraphs where the word ' oil ' appears this should read ' olive oil ' .
And a new paragraph 13 has been wrongly added , when I indicated in my oral amendment that this was an addition to paragraph 12 .
I should , therefore , be grateful if what appears as paragraph 13 could instead be added to paragraph 12 .
Mr President , I am very pleased to have the opportunity to speak .
I put my name down to do so some time ago , but perhaps you need more staff in the Bureau so that you are aware of all the Members wishing to speak .
I should like to raise one point .
At the last sitting in Strasbourg at midday on Friday , we agreed at short notice to adjourn a number of agenda items until the next sitting as there were not enough Members in attendance .
This is now the next sitting .
The items in question do not appear on the agenda .
When do you intend to deal with these items in the House ?
They will be dealt with in Strasbourg .
This will be put to the Conference of Presidents , which will be meeting today and is the appropriate body to approve the draft agenda .
This , of course , could not have been done earlier .
In any event , my assistants are sufficient for the time being .
Mr Colino , I assume you are asking to speak regarding some personal remarks .
Mr President , it is just that my name has been mentioned by Mr Provan .
Rule 60 states that once amendments have been voted on , the Commission 's opinion on those amendments may be sought , and it expressly states that before proceeding to vote on the draft legislative resolution the chairman of the committee or the rapporteur may , if necessary , request that it be referred back to committee .
Since there was no rapporteur , I made that request as chairman of the committee .
I agree that this is undoubtedly a problem of interpretation of the Rules of Procedure , but in any event I acted in accordance with the Rules of Procedure themselves .
Mr President , we have been discussing points of order for 25 minutes now .
I have no wish to deny any of my colleagues the right to introduce points of order but I feel that we would be better to start with the Commission 's communication at 3.00 p.m. as stated in the agenda .
First let us hear the Commission 's communication and then , when that ends at about 4.00 p.m. , give Members the chance to debate points of order .
Both we and the media are here for the real debate .
The Commissioners are entitled to expect us to discuss this important political issue before we regulate our own internal affairs .
I would therefore like to propose , Mr President , that in future we start with the Commission 's communication at 3.00 p.m. sharp and postpone any points of order until 4.00 p.m. when we start with the normal agenda .
Mr de Vries , you know as well as I do that points of order must be raised at the appropriate time , and none of us has any option but to be extremely disciplined .
( The Minutes were approved )
Welcome
I would like to inform you that a group of Dutch members of parliament invited by one of our Members are now in the official gallery , and at this point I would like to convey our greetings to our colleagues from the Dutch parliament .
Court 's ruling in Case C / 106
The next item is the Commission 's communication on the follow-up to the Court 's ruling in Case C / 106 ( legal bases in the budget ) .
Mr President , a recent ruling of the Court of Justice has raised serious questions about the execution of the Community budget , both in 1998 and beyond .
The Commission is aware of the concerns which these difficulties have created , and I welcome the opportunity to inform you of the state of play on this matter .
I would , however , like to state from the outset that any answer provided today can only be preliminary : the examination by the Commission of the budget lines concerned is going on at this moment .
As agreed at the Budgetary Trialogue of 23 June , the Commission will draw its conclusions on 14 July , in time for the discussions between the European Parliament and the Budget Council of 17 July .
The judgment of the Court of Justice of 12 May 1998 is the result of a legal action brought by the United Kingdom , later supported by Germany , Denmark and the Council .
The action was brought against a decision of the European Commission in 1995 , to finance projects to combat poverty and social exclusion , although the proposal for a legal base for the ' Poverty 4 ' programme had been blocked in Council .
In its defence , the Commission was supported by the European Parliament which had inscribed credits for such projects to the 1995 budget .
But the Court concluded that the Commission was not competent to fund the projects concerned .
Furthermore , before the specific case at hand , the Court set out a number of principles of which the Commission must take account as regards the implementation of the budget .
In brief , the Court insists that funds for significant Community action can only be executed if there is both an entry in the budget and a prior adoption of secondary legislation , that is a so-called ' legal base ' , authorizing the action itself .
The Court accepts , however , that a legal base is not required for non-significant action .
The Court does not define ' non-significant ' .
But it insists that a small amount or a short duration are not , per se , sufficient criteria .
Instead the Court points towards the right of the Commission to exercise its power of initiative by initiating , on its own responsibility , the studies or projects required to prepare its proposals .
From that it can be derived that pilot projects , preparatory measures and studies to prepare or update legislation can be executed without a legal base .
In addition , autonomous actions of the institutions have not been disputed .
In this situation , once the ruling of the Court had become available , the Commission had no choice but to suspend temporarily the execution of all budget lines of the 1998 budget without a legal base and to examine as quickly as possible whether they can still be executed in the light of the ruling of the Court .
The situation of this examination as of today is the following : 90 budget lines have been temporarily suspended .

The total budgetary volume in question was some ECU 870m ; for 19 of these budget lines , the Commission has proposed legal bases , some of them already four years ago .

The volume concerned is some ECU 500m ; more than 30 of the temporarily suspended budget lines have already been re-opened , as the Commission is satisfied that they meet the criteria of the Court .
Thus execution has resumed of some ECU 240m ; for the rest the examination continues and the Commission should take its decision on 14 July 1998 .
In parallel to its internal investigations , the Commission has contacted Parliament and Council to discuss the situation .
The Budgetary Trialogue of 23 June has permitted to agree an action plan with three elements .
Firstly , Council and Parliament will accelerate the adoption of legal bases for which the Commission has already made proposals .
This is very important because it concerns some major budget lines , in particular the ' Community measures for NGOs ' ( for which a legal base has been proposed in 1995 ) and the ' Human Rights and Democracy initiative ' ( proposal one year ago ) .
Fortunately , the legislation for the European voluntary service has now been concluded ( after two years ) and the execution of the programme can resume shortly .
The Commission will have an opportunity tonight and tomorrow to draw the attention of the Austrian presidency to the urgent need to adopt these legal bases .
But it is up to the legislative authority to make a special effort in this respect .
Secondly , in the Trialogue the Commission committed itself to conclude its examination in time to provide results for the meeting between the Budget Council and the European Parliament of 17 July 1998 .
This will be done .
Thirdly , the institutions will make their best efforts to come to a ' code of conduct ' for the question of legal bases already on 17 July .
The Commission has been trying for years to secure conclusion of such a code of conduct .
It has made a number of proposals which , unfortunately , have not been agreed between the Council and Parliament .
The most recent proposal has been made in the framework of the Commission proposals of 18 March 1998 for the next interinstitutional agreement .
Discussions at a technical level are going on among the institutions .
We will do everything we can to be able to conclude the discussions at the next Trialogue in two weeks ' time .
Commissioner , you have just said that the Commission had no choice but to suspend over 40 budget lines .
But you are fully aware of the consequent effect of the judgement , and especially the fact that this was a very particular situation since the problem was not the lack of any legal basis , but the abolition of a legal basis : the Poverty 3 programme .
Do you not agree , however , that - like Lucky Luke , the cartoon cowboy - you are firing quicker than your shadow and by sending this catastrophic signal to a group of people directly concerned with programmes which affect the most deprived of our citizens , you have deepened the crisis of confidence between the most deprived section of European society and ourselves ?
We must remember that the decision of the Court concerned issues which affect the weakest part of our society , namely the budget lines against poverty and social exclusion .
We all think these actions have been extremely important but when the Court announced its decision on the Commission 's competence to implement these budget lines , we had no other choice but to seek legal certainty for the implementation of the budget from now on .
Suspension was the only choice we had .
Of course since then we have been working day and night to find solutions as quickly as we can .
But the Commission is not above the law .
We must respect the decision of the Court of Justice even though it gives us many difficulties .
I am sure that in two weeks ' time the situation will have become clearer .
I cannot guarantee that everything will have been resolved but the vast majority of the issues will be .
Mr President , in spite of what has been said regarding the settlement of the current issue , that is , the suspension of budget lines following the ruling by the Court of Justice , I nevertheless wish to draw the attention of the Commission and the Members of this House to the issue of the institutional solution to the problem .
This issue has been shuffling around Parliament since 1982 and each year all kinds of problems surface which curtail Parliament 's possibilities to exercise its powers .
In parallel , therefore , to the solution of the short-term problem , that is to say , the specific issue of the current budget , in the debate that will take place on 17 July a solution must be found to the long-term problem . In other words , we need to define an institutional framework which will allow the institutional problem to be solved on a predetermined basis and in a legally acceptable way , so that the problem of legal bases will not arise each time and cause the problems that it does .
I am of the opinion that , in the event that a solution is found to the short-term problem , we must also have the institutional solution in parallel .
If not , I very much fear that the consequences for the current budget and for subsequent budgets will be considerable and the responsibility for this will lie with everybody .
I agree with this statement .
It is very important to try to solve this problem which has been pending since the 1980s .
In the best scenario , by 17 July we could have a clear situation for the 1998 budget and a solution for the long-term which could then be a part of the interinstitutional agreement which must be concluded before the end of this Parliament .
If we can agree on all the basic elements that would be the basis for the action from now on .
There are two questions here which are very important .
The first is : what is non-significant action ?
The common opinion is that it essentially helps the work of the Commission in the execution .
The second issue which must be discussed is what is to be done in the case where a legal base has been proposed but not accepted .
There is clearly a difference between these two dates and technically that could lead to a situation where we must cut off the action .
We must find a solution which will make a bridge from the normal preparatory action to the date when the legal base has been accepted so that the legislative procedure will not stop an activity .
Mr President , much damage has indeed been done , and it will take years to patch matters up .
The confidence of the public and that of the national organizations has gone , and , though we may find a quick solution , the damage is going to take time to repair .
I maintain that the reputation of the European Union , Parliament , and all EU institutions has been tarnished .
Mr Liikanen , you stated that a quick solution is now being sought .
It is most important and necessary that a quick solution be found and that this code of conduct be implemented .
But what if we have no solution on July 17 ?
Will Parliament , in that case , have to use the only means ultimately available to it , which is that we refuse to discuss the budget if no solution is found ?
Can you assure us that the Council will in this case now approve this joint agreement and give it a legal basis ?
Can you give us a guarantee of that ?
We must remember that the Commission cannot behave as if the Court ruling had not taken place .
The Court of Justice is an independent institution in the European Union and we are obliged to follow its ruling .
Whatever we think of the contents of a particular budget line , we are not above the law .
The political adjustment cannot go in a different direction to the clear contents of the Court decision .
The clear message is that according to the Court , significant Community action requires both appropriations in the budget line and a prior legal base .
We must follow that decision now .
There are areas where we have more margin of judgment such as pilot projects , preparatory actions and autonomous actions .
But we must review everything .
We must remember the poverty programme was blocked in the Council .
We wanted to continue some actions which were very close to many European citizens which we had implemented , supported by the European Parliament , but then the Court of Justice announced this decision .
So we cannot continue as if the decision had not happened .
Of course , we are working as hard as we can towards clarifying the situation by 17 July .
I have told you already that we have been able to clear budget lines which amount to approximately ECU 240m .
For the rest , I hope we will have completed our work in the next two weeks .
We must treat this very seriously because the Commission has the responsibility for execution thereafter .
We do not want to restart the same problems which led to the Court case .
I am not totally convinced that Commissioners Flynn and Bonino would agree with your very restrictive interpretation of this Court ruling .
As you have quite rightly said , the areas and the budget lines affected are those which are closest to the citizens and which , coincidentally , have been put in by the Members themselves .
If you are trying to keep the link between Parliament , Commission , Council and the people , you must try hard to get a quick solution to this .
NGOs are closing down at this very moment because they cannot enter into any new commitments .
No new contracts can be signed and so on .
When the Treaty of Amsterdam is ratified by all the Member States and comes into being , how do you view the unanimity clause as regards the non-discrimination and social exclusion provisions .
We could fund certain of the poverty lines and the social exclusion lines under the Treaty , but we still need unanimity .
Perhaps you could enlighten us with the legal expertise at your disposal .
We might still be in a legal quagmire unless we have a proper interinstitutional agreement .
I am afraid that your target is wrong .
The Council did not accept the legal base but when the Commission decided to execute that legal base , Members of Parliament attack the Commission .
Our decisions have been annulled and we must follow the law .
There are many areas in the budget which are very close to what I would like to do but that under the Treaty and financial regulations we need a prior legal base and appropriations in the budget .
The Court has now clarified that position .
We cannot continue as if Court of Justice decisions had no bearing on how the Commission acts .
We must be extremely clear about this .
We have some margin of manoeuvre when you talk about pilot projects , preparatory actions and autonomous actions .
We are trying to clarify every case .
I do not want to be in a situation in the future where a new decision of the Commission will be annulled by the Court of Justice and perhaps then the organization will have to pay the money back .
This time that did not happen .
The Court has said we do not have to pay the money back .
However , if the same thing happens intentionally in the future , then the damage to European public opinion will be disastrous .
I agree it is important to be close to the European citizens ; it is also important to respect the founding treaties on which the whole Union is based .
As far as the Treaty of Amsterdam is concerned , it is possible to think along the lines of whether we could do something preparatory for the new Treaty .
This contains new articles on employment and the social field .
We are having intense discussions on that and perhaps that could be a base for preparatory actions .
Thirdly , this legal interpretation has been prepared in the Commission by our legal service and by our budget department and agreed fully in the Commission .
There has been no political difference of opinion in the Commission on that decision .
Of course we accept that the Commission must respect the law .
But the Commissioner has also said there is a margin for interpretation .
I would like to ask the Commission to show some political courage .
The Commission cannot sit silently between the Council and Parliament and say whichever is stronger will win .
Specifically , I should like to ask the Commissioner , in the event of a choice between Article 235 which requires unanimity , and other legal bases , will the Commission always try to use the legal base which gives most powers to co-decision with Parliament ?
That is a very important question but it does not help in this matter .
The present problem is whether there is or is not a legal base .
As you know , our position has always been to support co-decision within the whole decision-making system as much as possible .
I do not disagree with Mr Brinkhorst on the matter in general .
Commissioner Liikanen , the Commission has been in operation since 1 January 1995 and since that time you have been responsible for the budget .
This Parliament has not given a discharge for the 1996 budget and has reserved the right to do so in September .
The officials went on strike because your proposals , Commissioner , came , shall we say , unexpectedly and were kind of makeshift solutions .
Now we have this matter that the Commission apparently did not discover until 12 June ?
Since it has the power of initiative , how do you see the Commission 's responsibility in this matter ?
It is a matter that certainly puts the European Parliament in very serious difficulty but also greatly damages the European Union 's image , considering the problem of the legal basis and the fact that the Commission knew for years that the institutions had to be given one .
Certainly , the Council , in particular , is seriously behind in its work , but the Commission is perhaps somewhat at fault too .
I would like to know what you think about this , Commissioner .
You are right when you say that .
This Commission has been in office since January 1995 and we must remember that these budget lines were executed in 1995 .
It was this Commission 's decisions which have been annulled .
That is why we must take it seriously .
If it had been otherwise , we would say that it was not our responsibility .
But , it is our responsibility - mine and the whole College .
To say that we interpret this to mean that everything can continue as before would be contrary to the Treaty and the whole spirit of the European Union .
We have given the role of resolving conflicts to the Court of Justice and now we must follow its decisions .
In some areas , there is a margin of manoeuvre , and we will try to use this as much as we can .
As far as our initiatives are concerned , your colleagues in the Committee on Budgets know that we have made proposals all the time to solve the issue of the legal base .
I have raised this matter every year in every Trialogue since the beginning of this Commission .
Mr Christodoulou , the rapporteur for the European Parliament , has been very active on this matter .
The Council has been extremely hesitant .
Now I am a little worried that we are missing the target in the debate .
We have taken the initiative to seek an agreement between the institutions .
We have made proposals for the legal bases .
The Council has not accepted .
We have not found a solution on an interinstitutional agreement but a lack of initiatives is not the problem .
There are plenty of initiatives .
But now we need a solution .
I am sure that your colleagues in the Committee on Budgets and those who take part in the Trialogue will do everything they can together with us to find a line which could be acceptable for all three institutions .
Mr President , Commissioner , thank you for clarifying a number of the points which I had intended to raise .
You are quite right to stress that the Court 's ruling must be adhered to , but this is precisely the point of my question , which relates in particular to Paragraphs 39 to 42 of the ruling .
In this respect , the Commission 's action differs fundamentally from what the ruling says .
The ruling has exempted a whole range of existing contracts and payments from suspension .
The Commission is proceeding on a very different basis .
It is examining everything and is now giving us a total of everything it has examined , but this does not satisfy the concern felt by the general public .
I would like to ask you to respond now to this public concern by providing a second answer in line with the wording of the ruling , which refers to specific categories .
Secondly , you have repeatedly told us that you are working towards an interinstitutional agreement .
However , our priority is to find legal bases - and since you have also argued in these terms , I assume it must be your priority too - and an interinstitutional agreement is not a legal basis in terms of the ruling 's requirements .
The Commission policy since 1994 has been to interpret an action which involves less than ECU 5m and of a duration less than two years as not significant .
We have applied this interpretation since 1994 .
The problem is that the Court did not accept it .
It said that small amounts or short duration are not good enough arguments .
So , our position has been questioned .
Secondly , on the question of legal bases , as I said in my statement , we have 19 legal bases now pending in the legislative authority .
ECU 500m are dependent on those legal bases .
We need to get them through .
In many areas there is no disagreement on the political contents .
There is very often disagreement on the different procedural issues or comitologies or the article on which to base the legal base .
We need a strong political will and strong coordination in the Council to get them all through .
The interinstitutional agreement is important for those so-called grey areas .
We must try to have a common opinion on what is ' non-significant ' .
The unilateral position of the Commission has not been accepted by the Court .
But if all three can agree on some interpretation , then we will have a new situation .
The Commissioner is under a lot of pressure today and Parliament has expressed a significant amount of concern .
Could the Commissioner tell us how the full College of Commissioners will respond to his very obvious good will in this situation ?
Also , we must note that , unfortunately , Courts of Justice are not elected and their members do not have to feel the citizens ' hot breath on the backs of their necks .
Many NGOs , in particular in the area of safety and protection of children , have so far not qualified for any funding under previously existing rules .
I hope that those organizations who do not have the opportunity to avail of Structural Funds will be given priority when the decisions are made in the Commission .
I would also like to ask the Commissioner what he thinks about the Committee on Budgets ' opinion .
It has not been mentioned this afternoon but I believe it is not as sympathetic to us as we might want .
Mr Christodoulou , the rapporteur for the Committee on Budgets , asked me about the legal base and he has expressed the position of the European Parliament .
On the basis of the Trialogue , my conviction is that we are not very far from a solution but we need a strong effort by the Parliament on the basis of the decision which has been taken and also from the Council .
If we have the basis for an agreement , the Commission will do all the technical preparations necessary .
As far as the NGOs are concerned , in the future the key matter for them is that we have a basic legal basis for their activities .
That is what we have been proposing since 1995 .
If the Council accepts that legal basis it is cleared for external actions .
Internal actions will need the same .
On the political priorities of Parliament , I do not want to interfere in discussions between the Committee on Budgets and the other committees .
Finally , I have received personally every NGO which has asked for contact .
I have talked to them directly and explained the situation .
We must try to find solutions which support the political priorities of Parliament and the Commission but which are legally solid .
We cannot have it any other way .
The Commissioner will now have heard the anxiety across the political spectrum in this House about what has happened with these legal bases and budget lines .
This Parliament is deeply committed to those lines for several reasons .
Firstly , they take this institution and the Union closer to the people .
But also we - like the Commissioner - have been on the end of the lobby from NGOs , organizations and people who have been supported by those budget lines and now find they are not available .
The Commissioner has made it clear that the real problem lies with the Council , not with this Parliament and not with the Commission .
Could he perhaps then join with us in saying that what we need now is a concerted Parliament and Commission line which says to the NGOs and the people of the Union that they can continue to write to us but they should direct their anxiety and lobby the Council and the national governments .
We in this House can perhaps provide addresses , telephone numbers and faxes of relevant ministers so they can feel the same heat as us .
Commissioner , we would like your support .
I fully agree .
It is important that our actions in the Commission and in Parliament are targeted on the areas where the problems are .
Many problems are solved on the day the Council accepts the legal base .
We must try to convince them .
We tried with the previous presidency and we begin tonight with the Austrian presidency .
I am sure that this very unpleasant crisis has transmitted the concern of the citizens to the Council .
We must try to find a solution which will attract popular support .
I am pleased that the Commission has taken cognizance of the concern which exists regarding this situation .
That concern is quite obviously shared by the European Parliament and civil society is very sensitive about the matter .
I think we must show that we share that concern by introducing transitional measures , once the ruling is known , until there are legal grounds for approving the various regulations that will authorize the actions provided for .
Mrs Green is right that we should bring pressure to bear on the Council .
But the European Commission must also do its duty and give specific answers to the questions placed before it .
For example , how does the European Commission interpret the scope of the words ' non-significant measures ' in the ruling ?
Secondly , what will the European Commission be doing about the programmes approved in the 1998 budget ?
And thirdly , ...
( The President cut off the speaker since he had exceeded his allotted time )
We try to analyse all the budget lines now in the spirit of the Court ruling so that we have a right to execute pilot projects and preparatory actions .
All those actions which fulfil these criteria can be executed without a legal base .
We work on this basis .
When the Court does not accept our interpretation about a certain amount of money , we cannot insert a new sum because it says clearly that a small sum is not a sufficient condition to execute a budget line as being not significant .
So that basis does not exist .
But pilot projects can be small and can be larger .
Preparatory action can be small but can be bigger .
The key thing is that we have to try to make a qualitative analysis of the old actions , not quantitatively as was done in the past .
Thank you , Mr Liikanen .
This matter is closed .
Mr Telkämper wishes to speak .
Mr President , I think that you should give an answer to this question in your capacity as President .
The point is that we cannot ask - or indeed complain about - the Commission because there has been a shift of power : the Commission and Parliament are now in the same boat with regard to the Council .
It is now time for Parliament to make a statement on this issue .
I think that you yourself have recognized that Parliament has become weaker , and it is up to us , as Parliament , to take a political initiative to ensure that this shift of power which has occurred - and I think there has been a shift of power vis-a-vis the Council - is removed by Parliament .
I would ask you to ensure that this item is included on the agenda at the next part-session in Strasbourg and that we , as Parliament , take an initiative to restore Parliament 's power in this respect .
It is a question of the Treaty ; perhaps , on principle , a codecision procedure should be introduced ...
( The President cut off the speaker )
Mr Telkämper , that , as you know , is not within the President 's powers .
It is the prerogative of the Conference of Presidents , with which you may raise this issue through your political group , as any other Member may raise an issue through his political group .
The President , however , is not responsible for drawing up the agenda .
That is for the Conference of Presidents to decide , and ultimately the whole House when it approves the agenda .
Mr President , I respect your authority as President to conduct the debates , but perhaps , in a debate of this kind , if the rapporteur asks to speak it ought to be one of the 20 or 30 Members who could put a question .
Mr Colom , this is a debate which is ordered in such a way that all Members can have an opportunity to speak , whether they are rapporteurs , chairmen of groups or anything else .
And , within the limits of the President 's powers , and there are many such limits , we try to strike a balance between nationalities , political groups , etcetera .
In your case , unfortunately , you have asked to speak but so have other members of your group , and rightly or wrongly , I had to choose one of them .
Euro-Mediterranean Agreement with Jordan
The next item is the report ( A4-0165 / 98 ) by Mrs Aelvoet , on behalf of the Committee on Foreign Affairs , Security and Defence Policy , on the proposal for a Council and Commission Decision on the signature and on the conclusion of a Euro-Mediterranean Agreement with Jordan ( COM ( 97 ) 0554 - C4-0171 / 98-97 / 029 ( AVC ) ) .
Mr President , let us turn our attention to the Euro-Mediterranean Agreement between Jordan and the European Union .
This Agreement forms part of the overall process known as the Barcelona process , a process whose purpose was - and I hope will continue to be - to achieve closer links between the European Union and the countries of the southern Mediterranean , and of course between the European Union and the Palestinian Authority .
The main objectives were : to help achieve peace and stability in the region ; increase economic cooperation , for which a perspective was drawn up on the establishment of a free trade agreement between Jordan and the European Union after a period of twelve years ; increase regional cooperation ; provide more opportunities for social and cultural cooperation through organized links ; and finally , to allow Jordan access to MEDA funding .
Since the establishment of the Barcelona process , four similar association agreements have been concluded with Israel , Tunisia , Morocco and the Palestinian Authority .
Unfortunately , it looks as though the Middle East peace process has ground to a halt . There is increasing evidence that this is so .
This naturally places a very heavy burden on the original purpose of the Barcelona process whose very aim was to give peace more of a chance .
In June , further efforts were made at Palermo to give new impetus to the peace process by convening a meeting of Foreign Ministers of the European Union and partner countries . Ultimately though , it is events that determine future progress and not just meetings .
A meeting may help but it cannot act as a counterweight if everything else continues to point towards a harsher reality . The situation in Israel is giving more than cause for concern .
The Agreement with Jordan has been a long time coming . This is largely because Spain expressed opposition after the original agreement had been initialled .
It felt that one particular clause was too prejudicial to the Spanish tomato market given the possible import of Jordanian tomatoes . This finally resulted in the clause being altered and an increase in the quota of tomato concentrate .
Jordan had then to forego an overall review of the quota . This is an embarrassing example of how a project aimed at giving shape to a European Union foreign policy can ultimately stumble over a few cases of tomatoes .
There is not really anything to boast about .
Turning to Jordan itself , there can be no doubt that its economy is weak . Like the Palestinian economy , the Jordanian economy is suffering a great deal due to the deadlock in the peace process .
There are many in the European Parliament who plead for sympathy for the situation in Israel . They should take a look at the situation elsewhere and see how every economic initiative is grinding to a halt because of the difficulty there is crossing borders .
This is because there are only two bridges that can be used in either direction and because Israeli border checks continue from early in the morning until late at night . The country that summoned the political courage to sign a peace agreement with Israel in 1994 is now paying a very heavy economic price for doing so and not reaping the rewards it had hoped for the political courage it actually showed .
With regard to democracy , it is clear that Jordan has a long way to go before it meets the main criteria for a well-functioning democracy .
In some respects , the situation is actually deteriorating .
But if you compare the situation in Jordan with the average situation in all of the other countries in the region , then Jordan is doing relatively well .
As I suggested in my report , I think that the European Parliament is doing well to define what problems there actually are and plead for the adoption of the cooperation agreement ; at the same time we should monitor the situation with regard to democracy and human rights and use this agreement to demand more progress , because things have got to improve .
Mr President , firstly , I should like to thank the rapporteur for her work , and also for her comments here today .
I can only agree with her that whereas Jordan is not a developing country in the traditional sense , it has not really been the focus of the European Union 's attention for some time .
Certainly - and I agree with the rapporteur on this point too - Jordan has a less than perfect record on human rights and democracy , but I am sure we would all be pleased if Jordan 's achievements , which Jordan itself is keen to improve , could be repeated in other parts of the world , especially in the ' classic ' developing countries .
Democracy and human rights are always issues which we are increasingly stressing in our cooperation with other countries .
Mrs Aelvoet herself has also undertaken the work necessary in connection with the Amsterdam Treaty and the Lomé Convention to enable us to make democracy and human rights a criterion for cooperation in general .
The Committee on Development and Cooperation is therefore pleased that this , too , has been laid down in Article 2 of the Agreement .
Another point in the Agreement which we welcome very much is the intention to facilitate cooperation between the Parliaments , which is certainly important within the framework of the parliamentary forum of the Euro-Mediterranean process too .
We are currently preparing the first meeting of this forum , and for this reason too Jordan is thus in an advantageous position to breathe life into this Agreement .
Mr President , although the number of Euro-Mediterranean Agreements is continuing to increase , I have to say that the measures that were proposed at Barcelona far outweigh those that have actually been put into practice , particularly in the eastern Mediterranean .
This is largely due to the deadlock in the peace process .
Good headway in the peace process had to form the basis for greater economic cooperation between the countries in the region . The European Union promised that it would play an important supporting role .
A new cooperation agreement with Jordan would , of course , have to play a prominent part in this .
Now that things have gone awry , we must welcome the new agreement with Jordan with open arms .
As well as having genuine economic significance , it will play an important symbolic role .
Jordan is a country with a long-term vision .
It knows that its fate will depend on relations between Israel and Palestine .
It wishes to play a positive role in the peace process and will , therefore , be an important participant in any future negotiations .
By signing this agreement , the EU will indirectly play a similar positive role .
We share Jordan 's desire for close links with Israel and the Palestinian Authority and do actually have such links .
The very fact that the European Union is the most important provider of support to the Palestinian territories underlines our commitment to the future of the entire region .
The agreement is wide-ranging and ambitious .
In twelve years ' time , the European Union and Jordan will have established a free trade area .
The agricultural sector will also have to play a prominent role .
There is no sense denying that agreements of this kind will cause problems for the European Union as regards horticultural products .
In the years to come , we will be willing to strengthen our relations with Mediterranean countries in the area of agriculture , but not if our own EU producers will have to cushion our partners against market developments in the fruit , vegetable and flower sectors .
Plans for these sectors in the Mediterranean region are very ambitious , too ambitious , in fact .
We hope that it will be possible to increase cooperation in the agricultural sector but in a reasonable and sensible manner .
Mr President , I would like to welcome this Association Agreement with Jordan , which has been a long time in coming , as the rapporteur , Mrs Aelvoet , was saying .
I would like to say that our group , the Socialist group , will be expressing its satisfaction with the Agreement by voting in favour of the rapporteur 's proposal that we give our assent to the Association Agreement .
And I would like to take this opportunity to say that we are concerned that the necessary ratification by Member States of the European Union will take another four years from now , and the implementation of this Euro-Mediterranean Agreement will , thus , be delayed even further .
Jordan is a country that has opted for peace and a country in a difficult region and a difficult situation .
Jordan has to prove to its public that the peace it has opted for will benefit them .
Jordan is a country that has maintained a constructive attitude in the dialogue process signed in Barcelona and has continued along the same road since .
And the financial and economic cooperation that can come out of this Agreement is important to Jordan 's political development .
With regard to agriculture , the sector that has caused the delay in reaching an agreement with Jordan , we have to accept its inclusion in this free trade area and find quicker formulas for achieving cooperation in that respect .
This Agreement also includes a political dialogue and a parliamentary dialogue which we have called for many times .
In October , in this same House , there will be a multilateral dialogue between the parliaments of the region and the European Parliament .
And I believe it is going to be important to ensure that this Agreement , like the rest , has been signed by then .
The Agreement also contains provisions for monitoring the observance of human rights and support for democratization .
The situation in that field is not perfect .
We are concerned not so much about the human rights situation - which , as previous speakers here have already said , is comparable to that in other areas of the world - as about a certain tendency for the situation regarding political rights - the right to hold meetings , the right of association , the freedom for elected members to carry out their duties , etcetera - to deteriorate , and we want that situation to improve .
But we want to sign this Agreement precisely in order to be able to do that : to be able to play a proper part in the monitoring of human rights , as has been mentioned , to help in the democratization process .
I therefore reiterate our intention to vote in favour of the rapporteur 's proposal . I only hope the Jordanians will not have to wait for a further generation before this Association Agreement is ratified by all the Member States of the European Union , and that sentiment applies equally to the other agreements that come out of Barcelona .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the conclusion of the Agreement with Jordan is a positive step , since this Agreement is an example of how the European Union can conclude treaties with other countries - in this case with the Mediterranean region , in particular - which are below the threshold for accession .
I think that this can , and must , be a model for the future .
We cannot only intensify cooperation when there is a prospect of accession to the European Union at the end of the process ; instead , we must find other ways of proceeding .
This Agreement is an example of how close relations can be achieved on the basis of an accord .
Agreements of the same type have already been concluded with Tunisia , Israel and Morocco , and this new Agreement thus fits in with the European Union 's policy on the Mediterranean .
A Cooperation Agreement with Jordan has existed since 1977 .
Four supplementary financial protocols have already been signed within the framework of this Cooperation Agreement .
After a transitional period , the aim is to establish an area of free trade which should be achieved on a step-by-step basis .
I believe that this is an important move towards a Euro-Mediterranean free trade area , which is what we are aiming for .
The Christian Democrats in this House , the Group of the European People 's Party , has always supported and worked actively towards this goal ; I should like to emphasize this point very clearly once more .
However , there are criticisms which we can make in relation to Jordan , and which we should not gloss over today .
The rapporteur made brief reference to this at the beginning ; however , her report does not make these issues as clear as I would have wished .
I think that two points should be made in this connection , and I shall name them : the restrictive press laws in Jordan , and , above all , the ban on all forms of political assembly .
I think that the discussion process with Jordan can be a way of initiating talks about these issues too .
They could thus be dealt with through political dialogue in such a way as to ensure that democratic conditions are achieved as we would wish and in line with the conditions set by the European Union , at least in the final phase , when it concludes agreements of this kind .
I am pleased that this Agreement has been reached and that solutions were found within the framework of the trade talks too , for I believe that Jordan , in particular , must be given our support . Jordan has always been a reliable partner in the Middle East and also contributes to the stabilization of this region .
I am looking forward to the dialogue between the European Parliament and the Jordanians .
Mr President , I regard closer links with Jordan as a natural means of strengthening the agreements that have already been concluded with Israel and the Palestinian Authority .
We are clearly leaving out Syria and Lebanon although that is not such a problem .
But what about Egypt ?
I have been rapporteur for Egypt for three years now and regret to say that negotiations are still deadlocked over a number of issues : agricultural products and human rights .
Mrs Aelvoet has already mentioned agricultural products . An agreement should not hang on a case of tomatoes .
I say we should give Egypt a fair export quota .
The situation with regard to human rights is rather more complicated although I will not go into that here .
The Commission has negotiated very hard with Egypt and has now reached the end of its mandate .
I would therefore like to call upon the Commissioners to come and report on the situation as soon as possible .
On this the first day of the Austrian Presidency , I would call upon Vienna to ask all of the Member States to speed up the agreement with Egypt because we do not want the first country in the Middle East that had the courage to start the peace process with Israel to be one of the last to be able to sign the agreements .
I hope that in the coming months the Council will not just give its attention to enlargement but will make one of its many tasks to call upon the Member States to bring the agreement with Egypt to a successful conclusion .
Very positive results have already been achieved with those countries with which we have already signed agreements .
I am referring in particular to Morocco .
I regularly come across Moroccan parliamentarians with whom we can talk business .
I would like to see the same thing happen with Egypt and , of course , Jordan .
I would also like to congratulate Mrs Aelvoet because she has worked hard to keep those cases of tomatoes out .
Mr President , the Liberal group welcomes the conclusion of this agreement with Jordan .
The European Union is doing well to pursue this Mediterranean policy under the Barcelona process .
We should not be put off by complications arising from deadlock in the peace process .
Jordan is important to the peace process .
Jordan was prepared to sign a peace treaty with Israel despite Israel 's occupation of part of Jordanian territory in 1967 .
This is a sign of great willingness .
King Hussein has quite rightly earned a great deal of respect .
Since the time of the Israeli occupation , Jordan has continued to act as protector of the occupied territory .
Jordan also has very large groups of Palestinian refugees within its borders .
Despite all these complications , Jordan is one of the few democracies in the region .
We must encourage further democracy because improvements are possible and necessary .
Mr Konrad has already mentioned those involving freedom of the press and the formation of political parties .
If Jordan had been part of Africa , I think things would have been different and there would have been no agreement .
I therefore think that it is right for the agreement between the Union and Jordan to contain a clause on democracy and human rights .
I hope that we can adhere strictly to the clause .
In the current explosive situation in the Middle East , we must use this agreement to promote the prospects of a lasting peace .
This agreement will hopefully help give the Jordanian people more chance of achieving economic progress . Hopefully , it will also help the country continue to promote peace and reconciliation .
The Liberal group therefore accepts this agreement and joins me in sending compliments to my friend and colleague Magda Aelvoet .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , we approve the basis of this report and the improvement in relations between the European Union and Jordan .
But I would first of all like to pay tribute to King Hussein , tribute which he so justly deserves for the many long years during which , under the most difficult circumstances , he has shown wisdom and worked for peace , torn as he was - as was his country - by powerful forces .
In common with the Lebanon , Jordan has suffered problems due to the creation of the State of Israel , through the presence of many Palestinian refugees in Jordan who have sometimes behaved as a conquered state , forgetting their own difficulties and foisting their problems upon their host country .
This report is too critical because what we mean to say here is that human rights are far from perfect in Jordan ; but what conditions prevail in the region ?
There is far less denunciation of things which happen in the neighbouring country .
The daily press reports that huge crowds gather in Jerusalem itself .
Mr Netanyahu goes there and up goes the cry , " Death to the Arabs ' .
Curiously , those who appreciate the extremist positions in Israel are those who would sometimes like to teach us a lesson , whilst we only want to ensure that the basic sovereign rights of our people are respected .
This is home to the Arabs ; this is home to the Palestinians , and Jerusalem 's policy of conquest and expulsion of the Palestinians and Arabs is a real catastrophe .
Here , people talk about freedom of the press , but if we take a close look at ourselves , we see that it does not exist .
There are laws which a great journalist from our French daily newspaper , " Le Figaro ' , a former Stalinist and something of an expert , who has acknowledged the errors of her youth when she was an editorial writer with the Jewish Tribune , called the intolerable Jewish thought police .
We have laws which prohibit freedom of thought , freedom to write , so how dare we pursue in Jordan , living in a state of war , something we are unable to enforce at home , where we have an intolerable thought police .
But , as always , there is truth on the banks of the Jordan , mistakes on the banks of the Seine .
As regards the free trade policy , we would like to impose some limitations on this concept , which we do not always agree with .
But , in general , we would like to welcome the improvement to be made in our relations with Jordan , by voting for this report .
Mr President , I too consider Mrs Aelvoet 's report excellent and the agreement with Jordan positive , also because a solution has been found for some problems with agricultural production that were blocking the agreement .
But you see , in all these agreements a problem occurs : either negotiations are delayed or some obstacle prevents subsequent ratification of the agreement reached .
If it is not one Member State posing problems , it is another : this is the case for Egypt whose agreement still has to be completed or for Morocco whose agreement was concluded two years ago but has not been ratified .
This is not acceptable !
We , the European Parliament , were right in taking a position a month ago and reminding the Commission and the Council of their responsibilities so that they , in turn , remind the Member States of their responsibilities .
Otherwise , it is too contradictory : we cannot want to relaunch the Mediterranean strategy and then block agreements with individual Mediterranean countries .
This is too contradictory .
We must , therefore , again recall this aspect .
Jordan is an important country in Middle East affairs ; it certainly has a few economic and social problems and also problems with full democracy , but - as Mrs Terrón recalled - in comparison with other countries , fundamental liberties and rights are guaranteed and there is a certain cohabitation between religions .
We must make sure that this situation does not regress but instead gradually progresses .
This aspect is , in my opinion , very important .
We must rekindle - now is the time to say it - political dialogue between parliaments : it will be very important if we succeed at the end of October in organizing the first interparliamentary forum between the European Parliament and national parliaments and in taking full advantage of this opportunity .
We must , therefore , rekindle interparliamentary dialogue in general , and Euro-Mediterranean dialogue in particular .
The meeting of Foreign Ministers on 3 and 4 June was useful in this sense , and I believe that it can help the third Euro-Mediterranean Conference .
The most important question relates to the peace process .
As you know , the Palestinians have said that they accept the American plan whereas the Israeli government so far has not said that it does .
This creates a very difficult situation . Some of today 's newspapers carry an interview with President Arafat who expresses his deep concern about a very worrisome situation : he denounces Israel 's siege of and stranglehold over the Palestinian Territories , a situation that cannot be accepted over a sustained period of time and that can only generate despair and especially hinder development and prevent the solution of poverty , a situation that is a kind of embargo , so to speak .
The interview ends with a very serious and pressing appeal to the European Union , the only one that can help call off the siege .
This is a very strong reminder of our responsibilities .
We must tell everyone that you cannot play with peace , but especially that this region cannot be kept in a situation of marginalization , poverty and non-development .
I understand that this is in the interest of some who today are stronger and more powerful , but this is not in the interest of all the peoples and not in the interest of the European Union ; we must therefore remind everyone of their sense of responsibility in concluding this peace process .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , this agreement follows the signature of two similar association agreements with Tunisia , Morocco , Israel and the Palestinian Authority in the context of the new EuroMediterranean partnership .
This Agreement creates the necessary conditions for establishing the nucleus of a future integrated economic area , as soon as the political situation permits , in the Middle East and North Africa .
By creating this network of agreements based on similar provisions , the Community is attempting to create an economically prosperous EuroMediterranean area and encourage the development of South-South economic relations , which are essential to peace and economic stability in the region .
We hope the new Agreement will lead to a thoroughgoing renewal of our bilateral relations with Jordan .
The Commission is aware that the gradual establishment of free trade with the Community is an enormous challenge to the Jordanian economy and Jordanian society .
In that respect , although the Community can only act as a catalyst for the efforts of Jordanian society , it will not fail to provide technical and financial assistance , through the existing channels , to support the changes Jordan will have to make .
The Commission is especially pleased that Jordan fully accepts the provisions relating to respect for human rights and fundamental democratic principles , as well as the need to prevent illegal immigration .
Finally , the Commission wishes to congratulate the European Parliament , and particularly Mrs Aelvoet , on the excellent work of the committees that studied the Agreement .
We hope that the process of ratification by the Jordanian parliament and those of our Member States will soon be completed so that the Agreement can begin to produce its beneficial effects as quickly as possible .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 11.00 a.m.
Urban environment
Mr President , an analysis of the urban environment in Europe was undertaken in the excellent Commission Green Book of 1990 , together with the parameters of a general approach at the European level , and we commented on that in my report in 1991 .
Further development from the Commission comes in the form of the urban communication which we are looking at later on in this debate .
The purpose of my new report is to take stock of what has happened since then and to suggest ways in which we can move forward by strengthening the development of European Union environment policy for urban areas .
A lot of mileage has been made out of the subject of a peoples ' Europe and yet our actions are not perceived by the majority of our citizens to touch their lives .
It is my contention that the many factors which make up the urban environment are precisely those where we should be able to connect with people more closely .
Policy development , however , must be from the bottom up , involving NGOs , women , men , old and young people and social partners .
If we are indeed to develop the role of cities as generators of prosperity and economic growth and combat the under use of human resources , then an integral component of our work must be a tangible improvement in urban environments .
I cannot stress strongly enough that social and economic development are partners of a better environment and quality of life in our cities .
What are our European objectives for our cities ?
I do not yet see a clear answer from the Commission .
The main ingredients of quality of life are surely health , a safe and pleasant place to live , work and a variety of cultural experiences .
We in Europe are proud of our cities , large and small , in which our culture , civilization and democracy have flourished and developed for many centuries .
Yet these same cities are the scene of a wide rift between the haves and the have-nots .
Poverty , racism , unemployment , ill-health , crime , traffic congestion , noise and air pollution scar the lives of far too many .
So where is our vision ?
Whilst celebrating the good with our cities of culture and so on , it is our duty to play our part in tackling the bad .
I say play our part , President , because this is not something which the EU can or should tackle on its own .
Clearly , a large part of the task must be for the local , regional and national authorities to deal with .
First , I would like to pay tribute to the work of the expert group on urban environment and to the sustainable cities campaign .
Each has made enormous contributions to the development of urban environment policy , awareness raising and real actions which have taken place over the last few years .
It is essential that they are guaranteed a continuous existence and do not have to worry about the future with every annual budget .
Also , that proper resources are made available for the development of a partnership approach to urban environment and support is continued for collaborative schemes on best practice .
Environmental degradation in our towns and cities is as widespread as the problem of social dislocation .
We know that the poorest and most socially disadvantaged people tend to live in the most polluted areas .
This in turn affects their health , particularly the weaker members of society such as the elderly and children .
Yet there is a knock-on effect on the whole urban population as poor quality of life , high crime rates and pollution drive out employers and make life , even in the more attractive parts of town , a misery .
Given the new public remit under the Amsterdam Treaty , criteria should be included in the new Structural Funds regulations on combatting levels of health-damaging pollution .
We have a serious task in front of us and there is still insufficient coordination inside the Commission to deal with urban environment .
Yes , there is an inter-service working group but I believe it needs to be upgraded to a proper cross-departmental unit with a clearly specified reporting mechanism .
We currently have no clearly articulated vision for a sustainable urban future across the range of policy areas .
We also lack any fund whose primary aim is to improve urban environment .
Clearly , some of the tasks for the near future need to be a proper sustainability audit and the development of comparable sustainability indicators .
This must go hand-in-hand with the widespread dissemination of better information on the state of Europe 's urban environment and an ongoing programme of pilot schemes .
One of the most important developments in recent years has been the proliferation of Local Agenda 21 schemes .
Putting sustainability at the forefront of our efforts in urban areas is the key to successful action in the future and we need continued support for the Agenda 21 organizations .
Sustainability is not only about the need to arrest environmental degradation and ecological imbalance and prevent the impoverishment of future generations .
It is also about the need for quality of life and equity between current generations ; an urban model which excludes a substantial environmental component is incapable of achieving this .
I welcome the news that an urban environment action programme will be launched in Vienna in November .
Please can we assure that flexibility is built into these action plans so that they can be applied to all areas in cities and not confined to restricted areas .
If we can move forward along these lines , I believe we can begin to develop our cities so that they can be places of creativity and fulfilment for future generations .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I believe that this resolution is a starting point for our Parliament because the European Commission 's communication has the merit of initiating a debate and , for the first time , approaching urban problems from a global , comprehensive viewpoint .
I believe that this is important because , to date , we have dealt with cities , but only in the context of sectoral policies .
Furthermore , the Commission 's document begins with the observation that 80 % of Europe 's citizens live in cities : cities are where the greatest economic and social changes have occurred these past few years , cities have to face the processes of economic globalization that often upset their economies .
Therefore , cities are where the greatest number of contradictions exist : in general , cities are where there is the most wealth - the level of the Community 's gross domestic product is actually the highest in cities , but it is also where poverty is the most severe and where there is another , perhaps even more serious phenomenon , that of exclusion .
All this therefore leads the Union to take a careful and concerned look at the development of this situation and these policies .
However , European policy has not yet drawn all the conclusions from this analysis .
If you will allow me to give a naturally positive judgement of the Commission 's communication , it is that this communication identifies and develops the problems in depth but is not very coherent in identifying which instruments should be used to intervene more effectively .
I will say immediately that this is not a simple matter , because it is obvious that the instruments are disseminated in various policies and , therefore , the policy that is more visible in terms of impact , including impact on citizenship , is cohesion policy .
We must , however , be careful not to burden cohesion policy with the responsibility of assuming what should be the objective of other policies : I am talking about environmental policy and research policy but also agricultural policy , because cities are the place where the relationship between producers and consumers materializes , a relationship which is often rather critical and based on imbalances in the ability to control and participate .
Nonetheless , I believe that we are at an interesting point in our work , the point where we must link up various instruments with various courses of action ; I personally think that we were right in organizing this debate in conjunction with the debate on regional planning in which Mr Novo will speak , because cities are in a region and we cannot , therefore , imagine a policy on cities that is not linked to regional policy .
Lastly , we will need to take immediate account of the single most important matter , reform of the Structural Funds and Agenda 2000 , and with this report we are calling on the Commission to be more coherent in its policies on cities . It is fine to have introduced an urban dimension into Objective 2 , but it is quite inappropriate to propose cancellation of the URBAN programme which does not in any way contradict this objective .
It is also important that in Objective 1 , the Interreg programme and Objective 3 , which deals specifically with training and employment , greater attention be given to the impact of these policies on cities . And it is especially important that a conscious effort should be made to involve locally-elected representatives , for it is a major policy , an important policy with many challenges which , as a Union , we now want to take on , beginning with the challenge of employment .
Mr President , this own-initiative report on planning and the European Spatial Development Perspective is part of the work being carried out by the governments of the countries belonging to the Committee on Spatial Development .
On 9 and 10 June 1997 in Noorwijk , during the Dutch presidency , this work produced a first official draft of the European Spatial Development Perspective .
This first draft stated that we have not yet considered , at European or national level , the three principal aspects of regional planning : the spatial aspect , based mainly on the location of people , activities and equipment ; the economic , social and cultural aspect , based on employment and the search for work ; and the aspect based mainly on the protection of the environment .
The report we are debating today concentrates on the content of the first four sections of this first draft perspective , the spirit of which is specifically summarized in the first part , defining the purpose of regional planning .
That purpose is based on the principle , which we have constantly and frequently defended in this Parliament , that truly balanced competitiveness throughout the whole territory of the European Union can only be achieved on the basis of social and economic cohesion and the nurturing of sustainable development .
The second part of the document is the analytical part , which gives some idea of the difficulty of obtaining harmonized comparative data from the different Member States by complete and reliable methods .
This demonstrates the need - as I have also specifically mentioned in the report - for the creation of a European Observatory for regional planning , as recommended at the 1994 Leipzig Council , and for a budget heading to make it financially viable .
The third part of the document is the political message itself , and this defines the European policy we ought to follow to achieve our regional planning objectives .
I believe , Mr President , that that policy is incomplete inasmuch as it does not take sufficient account of cross-border and transnational areas .
The fourth part of the document refers to the practical application of the perspective , making allowance for the difficulty of an obvious institutional weakness at European level , which makes us incapable of carrying it through .
I have tried to draw special attention to this aspect in my report .
I therefore emphasize that the possibilities of intergovernmental action in that respect are now exhausted , and so it is absolutely essential that the policy on regional planning be officially introduced at Community level .
And on this point I want to remind the House of the continuous calls by the European Parliament to give definitive official status to the Council of Regional Planning Ministers and to make the Committee on Spatial Development a permanent body , seeking , too , ways and means of enabling regional and local authorities to play an active part in the process .
There are , nevertheless , various existing Community instruments that can be used to implement the perspective , such as the Community policies affecting the spatial balance and the structural policies defined in Article 130a of the Treaty , the reform of which will have to take account of the political principles and options defined in the perspective .
And finally , I must draw your attention to the question of cross-border and transnational areas , as previously mentioned , especially in view of the future enlargement of the European Union , which is now imminent .
In that respect , there was an interesting meeting of the Council of Regional Policy Ministers in Glasgow on 8 June , which , among other matters , considered the effects of enlargement on the present 15 Member States , which will undoubtedly affect the subsequent definition and content of regional planning in the European Union .
While on the subject , Mr President , I consider that we ought to add a further chapter to the perspective document to cover enlargement . This is the thinking behind the three amendments I have tabled , apart from wishing to include the Glasgow Council 's conclusions in my report .
With regard to the other 14 amendments tabled , I would like to explain to you , Mr President , the reasons why I am against their inclusion in the document . It is because their philosophy is profoundly contradictory to that of the report .
This report was approved by the Committee on Regional Policy because it emphasizes the need for a Community policy which gives the European Union itself the leading role in regional planning development , which , as I have already mentioned , will encourage social and economic cohesion and competitiveness within the Union itself ; this is , of course , subject to the principle of subsidiarity , with the object of dealing more efficiently with the particular practical needs of the regions and thus including all interested sectors .
I would like to conclude , Mr President , by saying that it is now time for us to leave behind the fears of all Member States that regional planning policies may directly affect the reform of the Structural Funds , although we ought at least to suggest - from now on - that regional planning policies be used to coordinate the implementation of certain Community policies - agricultural , environmental , research and development , etcetera - all , as we have also mentioned , subject to the principal objective of genuine economic and social cohesion .
Finally , I would like to thank all my colleagues in the Committee on Regional Policy and the whole of the technical team , especially the technical secretariat of the Committee on Regional Policy .
Mr President , the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs agrees with the need for the coordination of Community policies concerning cities and an integrated overall view of them that will lead us to develop an effective urban policy .
We are all agreed that the URBAN , INTEGRA and Interreg initiatives have been successful and that their objectives should be maintained in the future .
European cities have improved greatly , thanks to these initiatives , but the effort must continue .
Our cities still have problems of unemployment , social integration , immigration and safety which call for joint action by citizens and authorities to find solutions .
Planning must take into account the ageing European population , young people and the difficulty they have in getting their first home , children , whose safety is in doubt in many cities , the disabled , housewives , and the unemployed .
Although all different , they all have one need in common : they want to live with dignity , and there must be a place for them in the city .
Nurseries , day centres for adults and the disabled , domiciliary care and neighbourhood services must be a priority , both as sources of employment in the service sector and because they are urgently needed to enable women to reconcile jobs with family commitments .
Cities can be innovation laboratories for social and employment policy , turning problems into opportunities .
We call on the Commission to give priority to local employment initiatives and territorial pacts .
Urban sustainability will require greater awareness in the use of public transport , saving water and energy , and the management of waste and noise , which very seriously affect industrial and tourist-orientated cities .
Local authorities must reduce property fever and land speculation , which do not bring progress , but rather instability and anarchy , and must provide for all these things without ignoring social conventions , by seeking development models that do not involve destruction and impoverishment .
We urgently need to protect our European natural and historical heritage and develop parks and green spaces in cities . We must learn to make the city a more human place and become more human with it .
And , to conclude , I would like to remind you that a strict application of the principle of subsidiarity must not prevent the European Union from concerning itself with the weakest members of society by taking actions which , although they may be small and cost little , help to create a European social conscience .
President , may I first congratulate my colleague Mrs Napoletano on her excellent report and the very constructive comments which I also fully support .
We in the Environment and Public Health Committee welcome the Commission 's urban communication but we also want to register some concerns which we have articulated in greater detail in our opinion .
Obviously , the Environment Committee 's report , which we are also debating , feeds directly into this particular area .
The environment and public health side of urban issues seems to be submerged in the debate about economic urban regeneration and spatial development .
We accept , of course , that problems of high unemployment and social exclusion are particularly serious in cities .
Nevertheless , several OECD studies have indicated that improving quality of life in the urban environment not only improves life for its citizens but helps attract and create jobs and investment .
Therefore , by improving the urban environment we can , at the same time , increase economic regeneration .
The urban communication lacks an overall vision in this respect and it is essential that environmental sustainability is taken on board as an important part of the urban equation .
The eleven suggestions under the heading of environmental aspects in the report are crucial in developing urban environmental action .
I do not really have time to discuss them here , although I would like to go through each and every one of them , but I stress their importance .
I hope the Commission will pay very serious attention to them since they have had the endorsement also of the Regional Affairs Committee .
We need a real cross-departmental urban affairs unit in the Commission to ensure that these matters are more coherently pursued than at the moment and that there is much more integrated development of policy than currently exists .
One final point , there is now a very strong move in the revision of the Structural Funds to relegate urban actions to areas simply covered by Objective 1 or 2 .
This is simply not good enough .
Eighty per cent of the European Union 's population is in towns and cities , most of which are outside these areas and the need to tackle social dislocation and urban environment problems refuses to fit neatly into these administrative and budgetary borders .
The disappearance , in particular , of the urban community initiative into Objective 2 means that the flexibility needed to be able to develop environmental sustainability in our cities , where it is so desperately needed , is missing .
Since we have no fund which has as its main aim improving urban environment , I strongly urge the Commission to construct its action plans in such a way that flexibility can be maintained .
Mr President , I would firstly like to add my congratulations to the draftsman of this report .
I think it is a report which helps us to understand the problem and makes important proposals .
We welcome both the Commission 's communication and its conviction that we need to create a European Union policy that both includes and concentrates on our cities .
I come from Barcelona , a city which is very proud of its status and its local government , and I know how much local government authorities look to Europe and how much the presence of Europe needs to be felt through our cities so that citizens can see and hear how important and how close to them it is .
The first proof that we have adopted such a policy , as the report says , will be the reform of the Structural Funds , and in that respect it seems to me that some interesting suggestions for reform have been put forward , especially the reform of Objective 2 .
But I would also like to express my concern that , at the same time , there is talk of abolishing such a beneficial initiative as URBAN .
I think the retention of URBAN , together with the right sort of financing , is not incompatible with the reform of the Structural Funds , but is consistent with the guidelines we want to lay down for the reform of the Funds .
The Committee on Civil Liberties , Mr President , is also looking very carefully at what is going on in the cities .
We think the subject of urban safety is highly important , and we also think it highly important that we in the Union should also work to create cities where people not only can , but also believe they can , go out at night .
Only then can citizens feel free , and only then can we live in an environment in which violence , whether that of delinquents or that carried out by the private protection systems we see proliferating everywhere , will not go on and on increasing .
We must work against phenomena such as racism and xenophobia - and there is provision for this - and we must introduce a series of structural and social measures which involve the citizens and which strengthen the social fabric and civil society in order to do so .
But we also need to help the cities to do what they can for themselves , what they have the competence to do , and to strengthen their competence and capacity in certain areas .
And I believe , for example , that it is very important to establish systems of summary justice and community reparation for petty crimes , and support other , little-publicized , types of action , such as the drug and heroin addiction prevention and control plans which are being implemented in many cities , without much fuss , and which are extremely effective .
I think this series of measures would be important and I hope this report and the Commission 's initiative will help to place this subject , too , at the top of our agendas .
Mr President , Commissioner , colleagues , I believe today 's debate on both the EU 's urban agenda and the report on regional planning and European spatial development perspective raises two very important and yet related dimensions of European regional policy .
It is particularly relevant for Parliament to give its opinion on the future development of these policy areas given that under the British presidency the informal meeting of Ministers in Glasgow chose to devote one whole day to discuss both urban policy and the European spatial planning perspective .
I congratulate Parliament 's rapporteurs on their work and indeed the quality of both these reports and all of those people who have provided very good opinions to the reports .
The draft spatial planning document has now made progress , thanks to the push given by both the British ministers and indeed the group of experts .
But this is not just some academic planning exercise ; it needs to be supported by real decisions .
We need to agree on how to plan for the future and making sure the results of such an exercise are accessible .
The real audience are our citizens and the countries of the European Union need to bring governments closer to the citizens .
The key we believe is sharing best practice .
We want real solutions for real issues .
For example , the complexity of transport flows offers some areas new opportunities yet other areas get congestion and pollution .
We also see the pressures on our urban and rural areas and yet we want to see the benefits of new technology spread right across many of our regional areas .
We need to foster cooperation between the Member States and get common approaches to share problems and opportunities and get a better balanced development with an integrated approach across the sectors .
We , in Parliament , want to be involved in translating the Eurospeak into real action and we look forward to the final draft of the European spatial perspective which we hope will be agreed at a future Council meeting .
One further aspect where the British presidency conclusions agreed that further work was needed was better consideration of the changing role and functions of urban areas .
I welcome the initiatives that were taken at the informal meeting .
Indeed , the Presidency document on urban exchange produced a very good exchange of experience on looking at a comprehensive approach to regeneration , to tackle problems faced by disadvantaged people concentrated in particular areas , to look at town centre management and to address urban quality issues .
Very close to our hearts in the Parliament , was the emphasis on the need for community involvement and good government in order to improve the working of local democracy .
I would agree with Mrs Pollack that simply to include the urban dimension in Objective 1 and 2 programmes is not sufficient .
We believe that the urban community initiative has , in fact , given very good public recognition to the urban ideas .
We want to see that promoted .
Therefore , it will be no surprise to Members of the House and to the Commission that in our meetings we are asking for a continuation of the urban community initiative .
At the informal Glasgow Council , children from across the European Union fifteen Member States were asked to design and present to ministers their ideal city of the future .
Children , by providing a high-tech vision of a safe , sustainable city , were laying down the challenges of fulfilling our responsibilities .
I believe that begins now .
We need to create dynamic cities that respect people and the environment and involve community groups in the planning and process and in regeneration processes as such .
I was pleased to table amendments to Mrs Napoletano 's report to look for a much more sustained approach with better funding for our urban areas and I hope the Commission will take these views on board when they produce their Agenda 2000 proposals , following negotiations with ministers in Council .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , Europe needs a planning policy .
Just as Member States have their territorial policies , which include regional and local policies , we now need a European planning policy which incorporates the different national policies .
This is a common objective : we need to combine economy and territory .
Planning is bound to influence future regional policy , because there will be no economic and social cohesion without territorial cohesion .
We cannot go on designing and implementing isolated common policies , because we are doing something bigger than that , we are building a continent , and we need to do so in a spirit of cohesion and solidarity between the 15 existing Member States and those that are knocking at our door , in order to build the great Europe .
So coordination , cohesion and territorial-based planning are essential .
Planning is synonymous with balance , or , if you prefer , with restoring balance .
The great Spanish philosopher Ortega y Gasset once wrote that ' Europe is not a thing , it is a balance ' .
There are many bees , but one flight .
And from that swarm of interests , planning should emerge as a policy to restore the balance of European spatial areas and policies .
I therefore support the ESDP and my compatriot Mr Novo Belenguer 's excellent report , and I would only wish to restate here what I added to the report in committee : that the European Spatial Development Perspective should go beyond its obvious terrestrial dimension and include the maritime dimension it lacks at present .
We plead for the promotion of European ports , especially the small and medium-sized ones , which are a catalyst for local and regional development in backward and peripheral regions , and the development of all forms of maritime transport as an alternative to the congestion of land transport and the deterioration of the environment , with support from the Structural and Cohesion Funds .
And permit me one last comment .
Speaking for this Parliament , I call for support from the Commission and the Council for the Atlantic side of Europe , an area where 50 million Europeans live , where three of the present four cohesion states are situated , two of them fully within Objective 1 , and where there are 32 peripheral and ultra-peripheral maritime regions .
These regions , from the Highlands of Scotland to Andalusia in Spain , demand their inclusion in real terms in the European Spatial Development Perspective and support for a trans-European maritime network which will boost European Atlantic and transatlantic communications as a special backbone for their future development .
Mr President , I would firstly like to express my appreciation of the fact that my group , the Liberal group , has been given a position in the order of speakers which now actually represents fairly the number of Members it has .
We are discussing a regional matter here , as presented in two reports which I think are two sides of the same problem : the one on planning and the European Spatial Development Perspective and the other , Mrs Napoletano 's report , on urban policy for the European Union .
Why do we need planning ?
The rapporteur has told us the reasons : to achieve greater economic and social cohesion , sustainable development , and geographically balanced competitiveness .
Obviously there is something missing from our planning system : the Treaty makes no provision for Community planning powers .
But it is difficult to draw up regional policy unless there are instruments for territorial cooperation at European level , which transcend those artificial lines that constitute boundaries , and the Interreg initiative has already played an important part in cross-border cooperation , but there is still a great deal to do in that field .
I am , therefore , strongly in favour of the creation of a European Spatial Planning Observatory .
Secondly , there is the problem of the cities .
European policy must have a direct effect on cities as a whole , not only their sectoral aspects , in order to deal with the serious problems they have , as the rapporteur has mentioned , especially those of unemployment , social integration and immigration , which is also normally concentrated in these areas , and to develop citizen participation and improve the quality of life .
Agenda 2000 provides for the abolition of the URBAN initiative .
This may make it difficult to implement the city schemes contained in that great compendium of measures , the proposed new Objective 2 .
In that respect , I consider that we ought not to waste the experience of city development that URBAN has provided for us .
Finally , I would like to say that this urban policy is not incompatible with regional policy , but rather complementary to it .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the European Spatial Development Perspective ( ESDP ) is a document which , even though it depends simply on intergovernmental cooperation , aims to give a real political framework to Community , national and regional actions as regards regional planning .
At Community level , this framework will help to give coherence to the various Union policies , and in particular to structural policy and transport policy .
If I restrict myself to discussing the matter which is closest to my heart - namely that of insular regions - and I hope you will forgive me , I note that the framework provided by the ESDP is not consistent with the resources currently included in the Structural Funds .
Must we conclude that some regions , currently considered by the Union as being in great economic and social difficulty , do not warrant being included in Community spatial planning because the document scarcely mentions them ?
How is it possible that a document , which is so important , does not promote the new provisions of the Amsterdam Treaty , which quite specifically acknowledges the particular handicaps of insular regions and the urgent need to remedy this situation ?
The ESDP , and the proposals for regulations on the Structural Funds appear to want to bypass these provisions and bring no message of hope to the 14 million people living in insular regions who are still waiting to be integrated into a major European regional planning project .
I would not like to appear too pessimistic , and so after congratulating the rapporteur on an excellent piece of work , I would very much like to welcome the promise reiterated on 8 June by the European Ministers for Regional Planning , who met in Glasgow , to think more seriously about the territorial development of the Mediterranean basin .
In my opinion , this is one of the main challenges which faces the European Union at the dawn of the 21st century .
I hope that this commitment will not , once again be relegated to a mere declaration of intent and that , here again , we shall not forget to take proper account of the situation of the very many insular regions in the Mediterranean .
Mr President , I am going to refer in particular to Mrs Pollack 's report , because we are both members of the Committee on the Environment .
80 % of the inhabitants of the European Union live in cities ; yet less than 50 % of the European budget is allocated to dealing with their problems .
We know that a very major share of the European budget goes to agriculture .
The European Environment Agency calculates that between 70 % and 80 % of cities with over 500 000 inhabitants have problems of air pollution , noise pollution and deficiencies in the general quality of life .
It is true that the European Union has taken some sectorial measures relating to air quality - with the Auto-Oil programme , which was debated in the Committee on the Environment - , to water quality , and also to waste management .
There is a campaign for sustainable cities , supported by over 320 local authorities .
But , today , there is still no overall statement of the European Union 's position on the quality of life in the cities , even though the Green Paper on quality in the cities was debated and published 7 years ago .
I would conclude , Mr President , by saying that we need an overall framework programme for air quality and the urban environment , with sufficient and coordinated funds .
And we must allow for the fact that measures to deal with unemployment , poverty and poor health conditions must be inter-related , and finally that citizens need to be educated and their awareness raised to enable them to contribute to improving their quality of life .
Mr President , the Pollack , Napoletano and Novo Belenguer reports have quite rightly been clubbed together on this afternoon 's agenda .
They share one thing in common : neither urban policy nor regional planning policy have any foundation in the Amsterdam Treaty .
Both were left out of the Treaty .
Attempts have of course been made in the meantime to incorporate these matters into the European agenda .
We are only partly in favour of this .
Anything that can be done locally should be .
Fortunately , the Pollack report is short but forceful and not too demanding , unlike the Napoletano report .
When I read the reports , I did wonder why there was such a desire for a Community-wide policy .
One of the reasons given was that there were major problems in towns and cities throughout Europe and that over 80 % of the population lived in towns and cities .
Can this really justify the implementation of a European urban policy ?
I think not .
There has to be a real benefit and I have my doubts about this .
Anyone who has spent any time in local or regional politics will know that the problems involved are often very specific and require specific solutions .
Only in the area of regional planning do I see opportunities for Europe .
But even then , you would need to have a very good idea of what would and would not be possible on a European level .
The European Spatial Development Perspective is a very good way to get discussions going but no more than that .
It is an illusion to think that it would be possible to harmonize regional development policy in the various Member States .
Fortunately , everyone is agreed about this .
The approach adopted by the ESDP is therefore quite a cautious approach .
It merely raises a number of very general assumptions and perspectives .
Europe itself has a great deal of influence over regional development .
Just think of the internal market , transport systems and agricultural policy .
There is then already some control over regional planning on a European level .
There is , in my view , also a certain amount of potential for ecological development and the preservation of ecological corridors .
I think these are important elements in the ESDP document .
If we are to accept this sort of approach , I think we will need a formal Council of Regional Planning Ministers , although I suspect that this will also be the most we are likely to achieve .
Mr President , I would like to rise above all the repetitive talk we have heard these past few years on the urban environment .
It has become fashionable to say : ' the city for the city , the province for the province , the region for the region , ' in a false autonomy that , in substance , creates not progress but regression .
Indeed , without broad and comprehensive planning , we end up making incomplete choices that never solve the problems of citizens or of the businesses that offer jobs .
Do you realize that seven years have passed since the Green Paper on the urban environment was published ? Yet , despite many initiatives , virtually nothing has been achieved .
Do you realize that because it does not want to be unjustly accused of interfering in the day-to-day management of European cities , the European Community , which got off to a good start , has never fulfilled its main role which is to define a framework for urban policy ?
We are convinced that Europe 's urban environmental policy , launched by the European Parliament 's own-initiative report in 1988 and included in the 1990 Green Paper , is today the only instrument capable of promoting an integrated approach to the problem of European urban areas and defining a Community strategy focusing on at least three important and specific problems : first , measures to improve the quality of life and the environment in European urban areas ; second , the elaboration of a Community project for sustainable cities ; third , the definitive inclusion in the Structural Funds of financing for areas suffering from urban decay .
In the light of this , how can we not interfere to coordinate and harmonize ?
At the second European Conference on Sustainable Cities held in Lisbon in 1996 , it was shown that pollution in our cities was deteriorating at an exponential rate and that we are far from making our dream of a clean and healthy environment come true in Europe , because urban pollution does not seem to take account of existing national or Community legislation .
Moreover , the unevenness of Community interventions leaves us puzzled when we see that over half of the Community budget is aimed at rural areas while 80 % of the population actually lives in urban areas .
So , yes , we support the Pollack report and , yes , we give our unconditional support to a stronger Union policy on the urban environment .
Our job is to improve the lives of consumers , certainly not to chase after the autonomous yearnings of some dreamer , or worse , some profiteer .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I would firstly like to congratulate Mrs Napoletano on her splendid report and the great determination with which she has taken on the by no means easy task of gathering together all the opinions and ideas on the urban problem that have been expressed in this House in the course of its preparation .
It seems to me that this report highlights two fundamental issues .
The first is that almost 80 % of European citizens live in urban areas .
The second , which is becoming ever more obvious , is that the European Union needs to unify and coordinate its own policies for those areas .
Both issues should mark a starting point for a Community strategy to achieve the harmonious development of the European geographical area .
But there is a third element in this report on which I should like to dwell for a moment .
If we want all kinds of citizens to feel at home in the cities - adults , traders , artists , young people , entrepreneurs , immigrants , women - , the European Union , as well as the governments of the Member States , must combat the effects of exclusion and the division into haves and have-nots which is at the root of the serious conflicts we are seeing every day in European urban areas .
Women , ladies and gentlemen , form a social group whose needs and difficulties in the cities tend to be minimized .
The European Charter for Women in Cities , a discussion paper sponsored by the Equal Opportunities Unit of the European Commission in 1995 , contains some of the key ideas that can help us in our general thinking : the opportunity of gaining access to employment ; the number and quality of neighbourhood services , especially those relating to child care ; access to decisiontaking authorities in cities ; and the issue of safety in urban areas .
Ladies and gentlemen , European urban policy needs to recognize these specific women 's issues , as summarized in Mrs Napoletano 's report , because women urgently need to become involved .
We must encourage their participation in decisiontaking authorities and increase exchanges of information and innovative projects . Their point of view needs to be taken into consideration when determining socio-economic and cultural indicators for the cities , and our male colleagues should be made more aware , so that they will take more notice of women 's points of view .
Mr President , more and more Europeans live in cities .
As has often been pointed out , four out of five EU citizens are city-dwellers .
Cities are thus also enjoying increasing prosperity and their infrastructure is improving all the time .
In this connection , I am pleased that my city , Graz , was recently selected as the European City of Culture for the year 2003 .
However , cities are not only places of beauty and culture ; they face growing problems with poverty , unemployment and exclusion .
They have more crime and are less safe , and they suffer environmental damage on a very large scale .
Against this background , it is obvious why urban issues are crucially important within the framework of structural policy and why they must continue to be so , but - and this cannot be emphasized often enough - not everything should be regulated at European level .
We must not get carried away ; we must take account of the principle of subsidiarity not only in speeches but also in our very practical political work .
A second important aspect should be mentioned in this connection , however . European structural policy , and European urban policy too , cannot be defined from the top down ; it must be a bottom-up process and we must take partnership with the cities seriously .
Thirdly , the principle of divide et impera has often been applied in the past , with much , therefore , being imposed from the top .
We must adopt a different position : we must support networking by those involved , and we must support what has already been discussed here today , namely the sharing - and challenges - of best practice .
Diversity is out there in the European cities .
The excellent reports before us today - especially the reports from our committee by Mrs Napoletano and Mr Novo Belenguer - take account of all these issues to a substantial degree .
However , in some respects the enthusiasm goes a little too far , and I have thus attempted , with my amendments , to modify one or two points .
This is not directed against the issues themselves ; rather , my intention is to ensure that we should also , and above all , respect the reports submitted by the Commission and the aims which they contain , and also take this respect seriously .
I have nothing against URBAN , but we must take ourselves seriously and thus integrate URBAN and its objectives into general Community policy and structural policy , even if we would prefer to have our own programme .
I have nothing against the initiative for cities , but we must not forget the region around the cities either .
I have one final point : I have nothing against a further extension of the right to vote in local elections for all citizens living in our European Union , but first things first , we should be concentrating on EU citizens above all .
Mr President , as Mrs Napoletano 's report emphasizes - and I would like to congratulate her on her work - , it is essential that the European Union tackles the issue of urban policy , since a large majority of Europeans live in cities .
As long ago as 1995 I was very concerned by this problem and tabled a motion for a resolution on large conurbations which suffer many of the problems which beset today 's society .
These include : unemployment and its associated disastrous effects ; poverty and the homeless ; large-scale and small-scale crime ; the lack of social infrastructure ; emigration of the welloff to the more pleasant outlying districts with the consequent deterioration of the environment of town centres ; lack of funds for the development of public transport ; the deterioration of local infrastructure ; and very weak support for historical and architectural heritage .
Even with its limited resources , the URBAN projet has produced good results in the less advantaged parts of our towns .
Should we not be concerned that its initiatives , incorporated within the huge canvass of Objective 2 , might lose their effectiveness there .
We need a regional planning policy which respects the balance between habitat and green spaces , meeting and leisure spaces , if European towns are to remain attractive .
The proposal for an urban audit is , therefore , an excellent one and it will be useful for all our towns to think about this .
Finally , I fully subscribe to the importance which the report gives to the participation of citizens in local democracy , and , therefore , to the compulsory and unrestricted application of the Treaty as regards the voting rights of European nationals in municipal elections .
I hope , therefore , that the Belgian government , which has dragged its feet on this matter , will finally implement this provision as soon as possible .
Mr President , the report by our colleague , Mr Novo Belenguer , expresses its agreement with the main aims of the ESDP project and emphasizes the shortcomings of an overly urban and continental vision of Europe .
It demonstrates the inconsistencies with Community policies and the aims of the ESDP .
But is there not a more basic criticism to be made of this draft plan ?
Is it right that the ESDP should start with the needs of business rather than those of people and propose that the territory should be structured so as to benefit business by achieving a high level of productivity .
With this approach , the plan hardly makes any reference , if at all , to the human dimension , that is , employment , culture and education .
It ignores the role played by public services and local policies in terms of land use .
It does not say anything about local resources , with the exception of water , which lead to human settlements and agricultural , industrial and energy activities .
Last of all , it ignores the strategy of large groups and financial bodies which have a significant influence on the planning of the land .
The current plan for Community spatial planning responds , in my opinion , to one fact and to one project .
The fact is the land crisis , at the centre of which lies the competition for land .
The price of this crisis is the transfer of the considerable wealth from the population to economic and financial activities .
It is the forging of imbalances in land use and the concomitant urban overdevelopment , rural abandonment , saturation of the main axes of communication and social and environmental destruction .
The project is the result , stressed in the ESDP , of the implications of the introduction of the euro and the pursuit of economic liberalization .
What additional problems will be created with the arrival of the euro and the enlargement of the Union ? And how should we deal with this ?
The rapporteur proposes putting a fence around European policies to encourage the development of social and economic cohesion and lasting development .
He hopes to see , as I do , democratic development of the ESDP and he points out the priorities in the plan as regards the harmonious development of employment and activities in the various regions of the European Union .
But will this be enough ?
Should we not be thinking about quite a different process for developing the ESDP based on the needs of the citizens and the territory , an approach which would ensure that economic and financial activities met with and satisfied these needs .
I hope that the discussions organized within the Member States and at Union level will make it possible to listen to the needs of the people and of the land and that the final plan will be centred around jobs , as well as the social and environmental aspects .
Mr President , the report by our colleague Mr Novo prays that there will be a European regional planning policy .
This is an excellent initiative .
In fact , rural areas represent approximately 80 % of the Community territory , and a balanced regional planning policy depends on their vitality .
The ESDP document notes that European agriculture will continue to play a principal role in the development of the vitality of several rural regions .
Mr President , the Commission must also be well aware of this and take account of this in its proposals for reform of the common agricultural policy .
Our rural areas are currently undergoing profound change which can be seen in the diversification of activities and all too often , unfortunately , in abandonment .
In some regions , agro-tourism will not be enough .
It is , therefore , essential that we respond to the challenge of this change and avert the dangers so that , by contrast , we derive as much benefit as possible .
Thus , intensive development can encourage investment , provided that quality and the environment is not sacrificed to quantity . Quite the opposite .
Diversification can offer new opportunities for the promotion of our cultural and natural heritage , as well as the development of rural tourism affecting small- and medium-sized firms and craft industries .
Extensification and marginalization can create better conditions for the protection of the environment and reafforestation , always provided that we can prevent a haemorrhage of manpower and the abandonment of agricultural holdings by using land in a different way .
We must recognize that Community action has sometimes had very damaging consequences on an economic and social cohesion of which we are often voluntarily proud , but it should be restored .
Thus , the abandonment of some of our countryside has been aggravated by the implementation of the 1992 common agricultural policy and the reduction in agricultural prices .
The new reform of the common agricultural policy which , amongst other things , involves a marked reduction in prices , can only further unbalance regional planning through a major reduction in the number of farmers .
So we hope that , rather than claiming new powers , the European Union will simply consider the effects of its policies , and in particular those of the common agricultural policy , on the balance of the Community territory , in order to avoid negative consequences , and that it will insist that the health and the well-being of animals will be taken into consideration in future WTO negotiations ...
( The President cut off the speaker )
Mr President , considering that there is broad agreement with the report by Mrs Napoletano , the European Commission 's document is a basis which can be used to launch a serious and constructive debate to outline the terms of a Europe-wide urban policy .
It is clear that a new strategy is needed to strengthen or restore the important role that European cities must play as regards social and cultural integration , the supply of resources , sustainable development and as a pillar of democracy .
The purpose is not to develop Europe-wide urban policies in areas that can be better dealt with at local or regional level but rather to facilitate solutions and their application at European level , adopting a more targeted approach based on the instruments that exist in Member States and at Community level , with increased cooperation and coordination at all levels .
Most cities today are a hodgepodge of many realities : business districts and residential neighbourhoods , historical centres and outlying dormitory towns , office areas which are deserted at night , shopping centres , student neighbourhoods , etcetera .
Many neighbourhoods in the outlying areas are host to acts of vandalism and crime arising out of a lack of job opportunities or social and cultural life that keeps them isolated .
To regain control of urban areas there must be better regional planning that revives the true notion of neighbourhood and reintegrates huge peripheral areas into the urban fabric , and this must be accompanied by efficient public and private transport .
In our opinion , cultural activities must be promoted as a feature of development in cities , regions and throughout Europe , given the wealth of heritage available to us .
This will have two effects : one direct effect , that of encouraging the creation of jobs that are often permanent ; and one indirect effect , connected to what is produced and which could offset the loss of jobs in the primary and secondary sectors .
So , promoting the development of cultural activities as a factor of social and economic cohesion must be one of the new directions .
For all this , it is fundamental that we increase the amounts earmarked for the Structural Funds , give more importance to studies on the theme of new services , and give attention to all the possible forms of tax relief , beginning with a reduction in the Value Added Tax on work to restore , recover and preserve cultural assets .
Another area where cities can and must play a fundamental role is in the conservation of the environment , because the most serious environmental problems are concentrated in cities .
Therefore , when planning and developing future strategies , greater attention must be given to urban development and rehabilitation of the decaying outlying areas , since this will favour synergy between specific actions at both local and regional level .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I should first of all like to express my appreciation of the excellent work undertaken by Mrs Napoletano and Mr Novo Belenguer .
Both reports underline the most important issues arising in the closely linked debates on regional and urban development and put forward a number of valuable suggestions in terms of developing these very new European policy areas further .
I should like to make three points . Firstly , the various European Union policies - such as agricultural policy , structural policy , transport policy or even competition policy - directly affect the spatial structures of the European Union , but have hitherto done so , as regards regional planning , in an uncoordinated and incoherent manner .
Furthermore , in terms of Europe 's population structures , its transport , energy and communication structures , the spatial distribution of its economic activity and its environmental links , Europe forms an interconnected network .
We must , therefore , move away from our often very limited viewpoints and develop a European perspective on the impacts of spatial planning , both for the territory covered by the current European Union and also for an EU which is enlarged towards the East .
A European observatory can contribute substantially to this process .
However , clear progress towards collating basic statistical data on these issues is even more important .
Secondly , developing a European perspective and coordinating it at European level does not mean that we must shift competencies to Europe to a substantial degree .
What is vitally important in this respect is that we adhere to the principle of subsidiarity and respect for established local government traditions , and that we ensure the participation of local actors .
Thirdly , I would like to make a point about the cities . It would be a grave mistake to view the cities in isolation .
The very complex interaction between urban and rural areas must be taken into account .
It is true that 80 % of Europe 's citizens live in urban areas .
More than two-thirds of Europe 's wealth is generated in the cities .
Yet this is only possible against the background of the rural areas ' ability to balance out economic , social and ecological interests .
It would be a mistake to focus solely on the major urban areas .
It is the smaller and medium-sized towns and cities in the rural regions , in particular , which perform an important bridging function and shape the economic and social landscape of Europe .
We are still at the beginning of spatial planning at European level .
If we take on board the conclusions of the two reports submitted today , we will be taking a major step forward .
Mr President , up to now the accent in the regional policies we have been implementing has been on development in the less favoured regions of the Union , as a means of advancing economic and social cohesion .
Yet in recent years more and more people have been calling our attention to the fact that we ought to be placing more emphasis on the citizen as the beneficiary of our environmental and planning policies .
The Commission has already pointed out this trend in its Europe 2000 communications and , more recently , in its Europe 2000 + document on planning , and Parliament voted in favour of the report , of which I myself was the rapporteur , by an overwhelming majority .
It is very important that we should not forget the peripheral and ultra-peripheral regions , the subarctic areas and the sparselypopulated mountain regions , so as not to aggravate geographical imbalances .
But Europe , Mr President , is , first and foremost , an urbanized continent .
The most serious cases of poverty , marginalization , unemployment , social exclusion and crime are now found in the urban areas of the Union .
The bigger the cities , the more serious these problems are .
In the urban agglomerations of London 's docks , next door to the City itself , there are the most appalling cases of human misery .
The same applies to Naples , Amsterdam or Madrid .
None of the major cities of Europe is free of this problem today .
That is why I share the Commission 's view on Agenda 2000 , which does not propose a reduction in urban development funds , as some critics seem to believe regarding the URBAN programme , but does , in fact , seek to restructure those funds to create a greater and more efficient volume of investment to support development in the urban areas of the Union .
Mr President , I have three brief comments to make on these three excellent reports .
Firstly , I am pleased to see that Mr Novo Belenguer , in particular , has recognized how important proper coordination of regional planning policy is to sustainable development - particularly with regard to nature conservation policy - and has included this in one of the points of the resolution .
I myself have tabled an amendment , establishing a link between the habitat and birds directives and the instrument involved in coordinating regional planning .
This is because the Natura 2000 initiative says that every Member State must leave 20 % of its territory to nature in order to protect biodiversity in Europe .
There is , however , scarcely any coordination between the Member States .
Some countries have too few black grouse and others far too many .
Coordination of this kind is a very good way of implementing a nature conservation policy within the European Union .
My second comment relates , in particular , to that part of Mrs Napoletano 's report where she says that we should support Agenda 21 and consider introducing a new budget line .
I can agree with this because I am chairman of a local 21 group in The Hague and can see the importance of promoting a system whereby we can exchange experiences .
Finally , Mrs Napoletano and Mrs Pollack have pointed out that 80 % of the population live in towns and cities and that the European Commission wants to scrap the URBAN initiative .

We are sorry to learn that the URBAN initiative will also be disappearing from Agenda 2000 because it forms part of Objective 2 , although towns and cities in areas not covered by Objective 2 are excluded from the urban system .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the draft European Spatial Development Perspective is an approach to planning matters which I consider limited , inasmuch as it places little importance on the problems of the human dimension of the occupation of land , that is to say , on its cultural and educational aspects and the question of social exclusion .
Similarly , it does not enquire as to the role public services , regional policies and specific economic activities should play in rational planning , particularly through giving the attention that is desirable and necessary to the peripheral and ultra-peripheral regions and the islands .
The report by Mr Novo Belenguer , whom I take this opportunity of congratulating , is in its turn a welcome reminder of the need to pursue a policy of economic and social cohesion with a strategy of sustainable development and balanced competitiveness , although it might have dealt with the gaps and omissions in the European Spatial Development Perspective at greater length .
In the context of institutional politics , however , we find Mrs Napoletano 's report - and I congratulate her as well - more balanced , fairer and more realistic .
It also supports the creation of a European Spatial Planning Observatory , but accepts the present informal framework of a Council of Regional Planning Ministers and recognizes the potential for development of urban and territorial planning policies , based on increased cooperation , dialogue , partnership and subsidiarity .
Because we consider this vision more appropriate , we have suggested some amendments to try to give the Belenguer report the same political and institutional rationale and render the two texts more consistent with each other . This is because we do not think standardizing planning policies at Community level is the way to find solutions to problems which often are and will continue to be specific and varied , and for that reason will continue to depend essentially on the proper discharge by the national , regional and local government authorities of their responsibilities .
Mr President , the adoption of an integrated European policy and a strategy for the viable development of towns and cities today takes on a certain urgency as , in many towns and cities , the downgrading of the natural environment , the problems of political , cultural and social exclusion , and the problems of crime and traffic chaos have brought about a serious deterioration of the lives of millions of people .
Moreover , the crisis in our towns and cities places the competitiveness of the European Union , the mechanisms of integration , and the policy of economic and social cohesion in great jeopardy .
The Commission communication and the excellent report by Mrs Napoletano constitute a positive response to the new challenges and a global approach to the problems in the framework of a broader spatial planning policy .
We need to act now in order to secure a minimum quality of life in the towns and cities of the future .
In my opinion , priority must be given to the following .
First , we need to consider the creation of a new equilibrium between the large urban centres and the countryside .
Secondly , the strengthening of ties between small and medium-sized towns is essential .
Third , we need to create technological and industrial parks and cultural and recreational centres , with the active participation of local self-government and social organizations .
Fourth , we must give consideration to the needs of children , the elderly and people with special needs , during the planning of towns , buildings , roads and means of transport .
Fifth , we need the necessary reforms aimed at maintaining a high level of social protection , in view of the projected increase in the number of people over 60 years of age by 37 million over the next 25 years .
Sixth , we should look at the provision of resources for social infrastructures , day nurseries , and up-to-date homes for the elderly , in the light of the reform of the Structural Funds .
Seventh , we must provide public transport which is accessible to all and which will respect the environment and reduce the use of private cars .
Eighth , we need to consider measures aimed at combating racism , xenophobia and at crime prevention , in other words , measures to safeguard the rights of the citizens of Europe to a life that is free from fear and insecurity .
Last but not least , we must promote the active participation of women in all decision-taking authorities and in the planning of the societies and towns and cities of the future .
Mr President , after first congratulating Mrs Napoletano on the very good report she has prepared , I would like , in turn , to dwell on a few points which I consider to be important in the issue of " the urban environment and the European Union ' .
Bearing in mind the significant role played in the economic and social life of the European Union by towns and cities and large urban centres , in which a very large part of the population lives and where more than two thirds of the wealth of the European Union is concentrated , I think that the Commission must promote a European urban strategy that will acknowledge the vital role of towns and cities , as well as the special problems they face , one which is also aimed at coordinating the various Community policies which may affect urban regions either directly or indirectly .
Of course , a European urban strategy cannot be understood in isolation , but only as an integral part of a broader spatial planning policy , which is mentioned in the other report we are debating jointly today , that of Mr Novo Belenguer .
I would also like to support this report wholeheartedly , as it contains some very good points and observations relating to the already ambitious Commission communication on a draft for a European Spatial Development Perspective .
Be that as it may , what I would like to dwell on at this moment are some more specific issues .
Given that the Community initiative " URBAN ' , which for the most part has been extremely successful , is nearing its end without any possibility for its renewal , as with most Community initiatives , greater emphasis must be given to the innovative actions of Objective 10 of the European Regional Development Fund relating to the urban environment .
In this regard , the Commission could examine the idea of strengthening small and medium-sized island towns which face , in addition to the other difficulties , all the particular problems which arise because of their island status , not on the basis of the criterion of an upper limit of 100 000 inhabitants , as provided for in Objective 10 of the ERDF , but of the influence they wield as key towns and cities , that is , as poles of economic , social and cultural development within the broader geographical unity with which they are associated .
In addition , I consider it useful to point out the following .
Firstly , incentives must be given , in the context of relevant Community policies , for the restoration and upgrading of historical buildings for cultural , social or economic use .
Secondly , special emphasis must be given to urban tourism , which could constitute the basis for growth for many regional towns and cities .
Finally , we must encourage the accession of regional towns and cities to Europe-wide networks and , more generally , strengthen coordination and cooperation at all levels between towns and cities and the European Union .
Mr President , I would first of all like to congratulate Mrs Napoletano and Mrs Pollack on their excellent reports and to stress that I think we need something more , something much more , than simple communications from the European Commission , which may indeed be laudable , but which do not have much practical value .
The urban environment is something akin to a biosphere for the vast majority of European citizens .
The enormous problems of the quality of life they face , even at the level of public health , are being faced additionally by the European Union , with relevant programmes for air quality , for regional regeneration and for cultural interventions .
These programmes are often useful and even pioneering .
However , the Court of Auditors itself has pointed out that they do not have multiplicative outcomes or a global logic and usefulness , simply because they do not have a specific framework for global consideration and a global perspective .
The citizens of Athens , for example , are very well aware of this .
Of course , ensuring the cohesion and the perspective of such interventions in the city belongs to the national , and chiefly to the municipal , authorities which , in Athens , for example , have not done their job , beyond a short-lived push forward for political reasons .
Nevertheless , they can and they must do their job .
And I think they will be greatly helped by general Community legislation , a programme , a framework directive which will put in place a general framework of principles , guidelines and criteria , so that whatever relevant programmes are debated and adopted will take on significance and perspective .
It is about making a qualitative change , which I think will reduce arbitrariness and waste and will increase the overall gain of citizens from any Community intervention .
Mr President , having had the pleasure of chairing the European Parliament Hearing on the Urban Communication with our rapporteur , Mrs Napoletano , and having chaired an association of ten towns in my own region in the United Kingdom before being elected to this Parliament , I welcome the progress being made towards an urban agenda for the European Union .
Not simply do the vast majority of European citizens live in towns and cities but such urban areas include pockets of deep poverty and incidences of racism and social exclusion and of environmental degradation which demand action at European level .
Yet the action programme , to be proposed by the Commission , is not yet a fully-fledged urban competence for the European Union .
Initiatives to benefit towns and cities still have to be made by diverting powers from other headings .
The next revision of the European Treaty must remedy this deficit .
The proposals within structural fund reform which will enable European support for housing projects and for the regeneration of derelict sites for the first time , are welcome steps forward in meeting urban needs .
But as other speakers have made clear , the abolition of the urban community initiative would dismantle European support in 110 cities benefiting half a million people across Europe .
Retaining a separate urban community initiative would allow innovative and trans-national urban projects to be maintained as well as aid to the majority of people who live in particular in small and medium-sized towns .
No European-aided town in the Nordic countries or in Austria , currently exceeds the 100 000 population mark ; their needs must not be ignored .
Meanwhile , welcome as the newer urban strand in mainstream Objective 2 structural funding would be , the proposed 2 % population to be aided is a feeble figure .
The 5 % proposal requires far more serious consideration .
In my own constituency , in Basildon , European ADAPT funding is currently being used to appoint a town centre manager to combat the drain of shopping to out-of-town centres .
Today , in the Parliament , we have a visitor who is working to increase the recycling of waste in London from less than 10 % to 50 % by the year 2005 .
These are the exciting urban regeneration initiatives that we should be supporting .
Are we up to the challenge ?
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I should firstly like to thank the rapporteur and draftsmen of the opinions for having drawn up this report which opens our dialogue on the future of urban development .
It is essential that we recognize the need to pay more attention to the problems of cities at Community level .
Nevertheless , as you are fully aware , we have no mandate to create a common urban policy .
We do , however , need to try to formulate a coordinated and consistent response to tackle the growing number of problems affecting our cities .
European cities are having to deal with an ever-increasing number of problems , from unemployment , environmental deterioration and traffic congestion to poverty and social marginalization , housing problems , crime and drug addiction .
A more coherent programme will enable cities to deal with these problems more effectively and make the best possible use of their resources .
As a member of the Committee on Civil Liberties , I would like to emphasize , in particular , the need to direct our efforts towards the fight against marginalization , racism , xenophobia and drug addiction .
Many immigrants make their homes in the cities and , therefore , one of our objectives is to create appropriate polices for integrating them into the community , making it possible to comprehend the problems and interests of minorities within the urban population , encouraging immigrants to participate in community life and providing them with information on the resources and services available to them .
In that connection , it is also essential that we train social workers and partners and campaign against xenophobic and racist activities .
As far as crime is concerned , we all know that urban areas are the most seriously affected .
The growth of crime is a serious threat to the respect of citizens ' rights in the Union , and for that reason we must endeavour to go on creating a Europe of safety and justice , encouraging the competent authorities to maintain progress in the exchange of information that will benefit all the citizens of the Union .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , Mrs Napoletano 's report , the contents of which I entirely agree with , highlights and gives due importance to the need to define an urban strategy that is clearly differentiated , as regards both powers and institutions , from our regional strategy , in view of the important roles of two sub-State authorities - the autonomous community and the city council - in the construction of the European Union and the creation and implementation of its policies .
In that context , and from the point of view of the objectives to be achieved at the beginning of the year 2000 , we must ensure that local autonomy is protected and municipal authorities are given full responsibility in the partnership .
In my opinion , however , the limited attention given to the municipal authorities in Agenda 2000 gives us cause to fear that the amendment of the regulations , even if we acknowledge that they have some part to play , will in practice be of little effect .
It is quite obviously insufficient to relegate the urban problem to Objective 2 .
This clearly means that the structural policies of Objective 1 will have to meet the needs of large and medium-sized and country settlements .
At the same time , we call on the Commission - please do not forget to pass this on to Mrs Wulf-Mathies , Commissioner - to decide in favour of keeping the URBAN initiative - in view of the positive results of its implementation in over 100 European cities - , improving the resources allocated to it and making good use of the information that has resulted in its being applied , as Mr Howitt reminded us earlier , in over 100 European cities .
If we want to make European citizenship really meaningful , citizens must see it at work in the first institutional layer that represents it : the town hall .
To forget that , Commissioner , would be a serious mistake , which we hope the Commission will avoid .
Mr President , I would firstly like to congratulate the rapporteurs , Mrs Pollack , Mrs Napoletano and Alfonso Novo , for the reports they are presenting today .
And I believe they all reach the same conclusion : that the European Union should seek a coordinated urban strategy , since the Union is already having a decisive influence on our cities today .
Furthermore , they also make it clear that our urban problems need a global approach , as regards both the internal problems of the cities and the relationship of cities to geographical areas .
They then go on to identify the most urgent needs the cities are facing : unemployment , which is a serious problem for social integration ; citizens ' safety and their participation ; and the environment , and specifically the quality of life in our cities .
They also mention funding .
I share the concern over the abolition of URBAN , which has produced so many successful results within our Community urban policy .
The new Objective 2 covers a different set of issues .
It deals with the problems of industrial decline , rural development , urban areas , and fishing subsidies within a general instrument comprising a total sum which , let us not forget , is reduced by 13 % in constant ecus during the 1999-2006 period in relation to the amount that is allocated to all these Objectives at present .
I must , therefore , express my anxiety about the financial aspect , especially since medium-sized cities may find themselves at a disadvantage when the funds are shared out .
The European Union should , therefore , endeavour to concentrate its attention essentially on those aspects which have a Community dimension .
And I would end with this thought , Mr President : it is also essential that we should do something about cross-border urban areas , where there is a real problem Europe can do something about .
I would say that I live in a Basque Euro-city , straddling a national frontier , on the main road from San Sebastián to Bayonne .
And there is regrettably no Community legal framework at European level to extend the significant increase in cross-border cooperation to cover planning matters , so as to improve the quality of life of our citizens .
Mr President , the reports and the debate that has been going on for so long have provided a sampling of the many serious problems that the urban Community territory is suffering from .
It is clear that there are more problems , and the outlook is that they will get worse and they will multiply .
What is noteworthy and surprising in this ?
Nowhere does anybody name the main causes , those guilty of this situation , that is , the jungle of the law of multinational interests and unbridled competition , which has run amok , in the pursuit of profit in the context of the arrant free market .
We run the risk of being regarded as hypocrites and accomplices in the cover-up of illegal interests , or , of it is not the one or the other , we run the risk of being regarded as political and parliamentary masochists , continually bemoaning the problems , not naming the causes , and consequently not confronting the problems in order to find a solution .
Let this Parliament at last rise above these syndromes and let it show that it truly represents the tormented people in the urban centres of the European Union .
Mr President , cities are too often seen in terms of black and white , either as places for the rich and privileged , or as problem areas .
Cities have their own , individual problems but cities are , above all , centres for innovation and they are in the forefront of development .
Besides , most new jobs are now being created in urban areas .
Last year it was emphasized at summit conference level , no less , how Europe 's immense unemployment problem needs to be brought under control .
Investment in urban areas and seeing them as places of opportunity rather than as problems must be one of the principles of the European Union too .
Structural funding reform should attend to the targeting of EU regional funding at areas which are more certain of producing the result we want , that is , the improved welfare of citizens , and not squander resources in developing desolate or impoverished areas .
The spill-over effect will mean that prosperity will spread out of the cities to other regions .
By strengthening opportunity in the cities we improve prospects for rural regions .
At this time , regional policy thinking is still on the wrong track when it comes to funding .
Although 80 % of EU citizens live in urban areas , over half the Union budget still gets spent in rural areas .
It is easy to muse that the EU is one big rural project that ignores urban areas and urban folk alike .
There is no longer any great trend for people to move to cities , but there is a large proportion of people who are staying and who enjoy being in the city .
Although the details contained in urban policy are ultimately the province of decision-makers in individual countries and regions , as they should be , the European Union has its own important duty to solve in particular problems that are common to all .
Urbanization has brought with it new problems for society , such as exclusion , drugs and environmental problems .
We certainly want everyone in the future to enjoy clean drinking water , fresh air and a safe city environment .
One unfortunately good example of urban environmental problems is the collection of waste and recycling .
Brussels , for instance , would seem to have a lot more to learn along these lines .
Mr President , first I would like to congratulate Mrs Napoletano on a very successful report .
I am especially glad the report gives great emphasis to the importance of the opportunities for residents themselves to have a say in urban policy .
There can only be full-blooded development of cities when it leads to city dwellers having an influence on decisions that affect them .
That is why different forms of residents ' and local democracy should be investigated and developed , and there should be greater possibilities for keeping residents informed and for them to get involved , for example , by making use of new technology .
We support with particular warmth the report 's proposed insistence on getting women involved in urban development .
Studies have shown that when women are involved in urban planning the results are very different from the plans of men only .
Women consider the smooth flow of the working day more important than the monumental outward appearance of buildings .
Women remember to see to it that children and prams , elderly people and the disabled can move around and live in comfort .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I would first like to pay tribute to the rapporteur , Mr Novo Belenguer .
I can support the main conclusions of the own-initiative report .
However , in Germany we have found that successful spatial development policy needs a bottom-up approach .
Regionally balanced social and economic development , in other words spatial cohesion , can only be achieved if local communities and regions are equally involved in spatial planning and decision-making from the outset .
A top-down approach to spatial development is wasteful of people 's energy , entails the risk of bad planning and our citizens are reluctant to accept it .
The rapporteur is , therefore , quite right in calling for the principle of subsidiarity to be strictly observed in implementing the ESDP .
I believe that we should reject any attempt in the ESDP to tie EU Structural Funds to spatially relevant programmes .
I am also afraid that they could be used as financing and regulatory instruments of regional planning policy .
I do not think that we have any reservations about generally grouping regions into target areas or about the control and coordinating function which the Commission accordingly has to exercise .
However , a European Spatial Development Perspective is not needed for this .
Instead , the implementation of EU structural assistance should remain the responsibility of Member States , and should not be made more difficult because of additional regional planning criteria , so that it becomes a greater burden for Member States involving increased administrative expenditure .
We should reject any attempts to make structural and sectoral development policy in the Member States subordinate to key regions and central locations under a European Spatial Development Perspective .
We must not lose sight of that in this debate .
Mr President , in the European Union , theory and practice differ in many matters .
This is particularly true of urban environmental policy .
Let us take Brussels , for example .
Here , all our excrement gets directed untreated into the River Samme , which takes it untreated into the River Schelde , which takes it untreated into the North Sea .
From there we get our excrement back in the form of mussels in those months which , in French , have the letter R in them .
Brussels ' first waste water treatment plant , which , therefore , is not a sewage plant , but a water treatment plant , will be completed next year .
According to the reply I got from the Commission to a written question , Brussels is breaking the terms of Directive 91 / 271 / EEC , and Article 17 , in particular .
It is going on under the Commission 's very own nose .
I propose that we embark on an urban policy by treating our own waste and making Brussels do the same .
Brussels is an environmental disaster when it comes to urban policy .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 11.00 a.m.
Ad hoc procedures for 1999 budget
The next item is the report ( A4-0256 / 98 ) by Mrs Dührkop Dührkop , on behalf of the Committee on Budgets , on the " ad hoc ' procedures for the 1999 budget , as provided for in the Interinstitutional Agreements of 29 October 1993 on budgetary discipline and improvement of the budgetary procedure , and of 16 July 1997 on provisions regarding financing of the Common Foreign and Security Policy , and in the procedure concerning financing international fisheries agreements , pursuant to the Joint Declaration of 12 December 1996 .
Mr President , at this part-session , Parliament will be deciding on the mandate for negotiations with the Council covering , in particular , compulsory agricultural expenditure for 1999 as part of what is known as the ad hoc procedure .
In previous years , we have gained a good deal of positive experience of this procedure , particularly last year with the 1998 budget .
All of the parties involved believe that the ad hoc or Tillich / Mulder procedure must continue .
This means that negotiations between Parliament and the Council should no longer focus on the preparation of a draft budget but on the autumn when the Commission sends the two arms of the Budgetary Authority a Letter of Amendment containing details of the most recent estimates of compulsory expenditure .
At this moment in time , we need to decide what changes might conceivably be made to the preliminary draft budget both in terms of income and expenditure .
In view of actual expenditure for the financial year 1998 , Parliament feels that it might perhaps be possible to make savings in 1999 .
It is acting on this assumption by allocating ECU 700 million to a general reserve to cover market uncertainties and related measures .
There are also tentative proposals for a straight cut in the agricultural budget .
Any reduction will be temporary assuming that the Commission comes up with proposals for a more selective reduction in a number of substantial budget lines .
It is a temporary solution given Parliament 's express opposition to a genuine straight cut in compulsory expenditure . This opposition stands .
The procedure must , of course , also work well if on balance we do not achieve savings but merely increase expenditure .
I would also like to say a few words about related measures arising from the 1992 agricultural reforms .
These measures are becoming more and more important and expenditure is increasing significantly .
What we are lacking is a proper analysis and evaluation of these measures .
Parliament believes that an evaluation of this kind must be carried out very quickly , particularly as these measures will form a substantial part of the new rural policy proposed by the Commission .
Parliament and the Council must be able to make a sensible decision on this .
It is high time that Parliament carried out a thorough examination of the effectiveness of these related measures .
Parliament will propose increasing the budget item to combat fraud in the agricultural sector .
This is in line with the Commission 's intention to embark on new programmes of action .
There must be no slackening in our efforts in this area .
The Commission can embark on new campaigns immediately if funding is guaranteed .
Finally , the Dührkop Dührkop report contains proposals that involve dividing up the agriculture section of the budget in a different way .
Separating traditional market planning expenditure from direct payments to producers , which have increased significantly , would , in particular , be very useful .
The same goes for structural expenses in the Guarantee section .
This item also demands specific attention given the Agenda 2000 initiative that has already been announced .
Each of these cases involves compulsory agricultural expenditure although this is not to say that they would be able to escape the political will of Parliament .
The way in which Parliament could exercise its authority in a proper manner must form part of an agreement between the various institutions , a new agreement .
The new classification proposed by the rapporteur would be a good start .
Mr President , Mrs Dührkop 's report demonstrates that in the Parliament progress can be made without changing the Treaty .
For many years , the Council has refused to subject the budget to proper democratic control .
We have been fighting for years for proper overall budgetary control , both for compulsory and non-compulsory expenditure .
We have been also been fighting for years for democratic control over fisheries and for the budget on common foreign and security policy to be under democratic control .
This proves that without Treaty change , provided Parliament is consistent , efficient and does not spend too much money , we can make progress .
This is what we now have : the ad hoc procedure .
It has taken the Commission some time to understand that over-estimating budgetary expenditure in the field of agriculture is counter-productive .
Finally , two years ago we made a start and I congratulate my colleague Mr Tillich who last year succeeded in gaining a firm commitment both from the Commission and the Council to accept the principle of the reserve .
Much has been said about the reserve .
It has always been said to be an abuse of power by the Parliament .
But the reserve is not an abuse by the Parliament : it is the proper use of public money by a publicly controlled legislature .
It is against that background that I believe we have the best starting point for the debate which will begin in the next few weeks .
One comment on the legal basis .
This afternoon , it was again demonstrated in the debate with Commissioner Liikanen that the legal basis is not ultimately about the law , it is about the political willingness to understand the needs of the population .
The fact that 90 budget lines are at present not being executed is shameful for the development of civil society .
We have just passed the Herman report which makes it very clear that we can make progress providing the Council is willing to work with us .
Let there be no misunderstanding : if we do not achieve in a trialogue a political breakthrough on the legal base , relations between the Parliament and the Council , but I would also add relations between the Parliament , Council and the Commission , will suffer : I hope this message will be received by all those who were not present here today .
I see that the Commissioner for Africa is here and I hope that he can pass the message along to the Agricultural Commissioner .
I believe that with what has been achieved so far we have a good starting-point and I am confident that we will come to a good conclusion .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the ad hoc procedure born of the provisions of the Interinstitutional Agreement of 29 October 1993 on agricultural expenditure has been extended to include fisheries agreements and the common foreign and security policy .
Undoubtedly , this has enabled progress to be made , both as regards improvement of the budgetary procedure and preparation of the European Union 's budget .
The concertation which preceded the second reading of the 1998 budget is the best example of this .
On the one hand , the European Parliament is allowed to look over the section of agricultural expenditure , whilst on the other hand , by accepting certain positions of Parliament as regards compulsory expenditure , the Council can obtain certain concessions as regards non-compulsory expenditure . In the past , because of the supposedly unreasonable scope of the European Parliament 's budgetary decisions , this has often represented a bone of contention , if not a source of conflict , between the two arms of the Budgetary Authority .
Another significant and positive step forward is the agreement concluded between the Council and the Commission , as a result of which the Commission must now submit a Letter of Amendment for agricultural expenditure to its preliminary draft budget , before the first reading of the budget , so that the budget forecasts can be better assessed , this being a difficult exercise as regards agriculture .
These improvements are wholly acceptable for two reasons : firstly , it becomes possible to put an end to a kind of war over budgetary decisions between Parliament and the Council , which has gone on for far too long in the past ; and secondly , they give Parliament a more coherent and unified role in exercising its authority .
The situation of the budgetary hemiplegia of our Parliament , which only gave us power over half of the budget , leaving the Council the second part of the budgetary authority , is now seen as out of date and unrealistic .
We are in favour of the ad hoc procedure as a code of good conduct between the two arms of the Budgetary Authority : budgetary etiquette ensures better results when drawing up the budget .
But we must be careful that this does not engender , by insidious means , a confusion of powers , because as far as Parliament can see , it amounts to no less than a proposal to amend the structure and classification of agricultural expenditure , in other words , the abolition of compulsory and non-compulsory expenditure .
Without questioning the rationale behind the ad hoc procedure , nonetheless , we cannot support the rapporteur , for the basic reason that since agricultural expenditure is so specific , it could not , in the main , be treated as general , non-compulsory expenditure .
By its very nature , non-compulsory expenditure is subject to the free will of the legislator , depending on the choices made .
It is desirable , for example , to reduce a budgetary allocation in favour of a programme of wind power , depending on the interest and credibility attributed to this energy source .
Most other agricultural expenditure has to be treated very differently , including expenditure concerning market support and that relating to direct aid or structural measures .
This expenditure has to be guaranteed and , because it is so specific , it must be excluded from excessive attempts at classification .
The ad hoc procedure must only be applied within the framework of the Interinstitutional Agreement and must not go beyond this .
Whilst not wishing to swim against the tide , it is a step which my group and myself could not take .
Mr President , I would make a general comment first of all to say that we consider the ad hoc procedure positive inasmuch as it provides a way for Parliament to contribute to the introduction of improvements in the distribution of compulsory expenditure , particularly agricultural expenditure .
It guarantees that they are more rigorous and more transparent .
But we also consider - and this is a point we would like to emphasize - that this procedure neither can nor should be devalued by making it into a mere mechanism for proposing reductions in expenditure .
This applies twice as much to the special reserve proposed in category 1 .
We can certainly agree to the creation of this reserve , particularly for the purpose of providing a cushion against market uncertainties .
But we do not think it should be created as a matter of course ; it should be consolidated and limited to very well-defined situations .
In this context , however , there is one idea which has already been raised in a previous report , and which we find controversial , namely , the idea of a dedicated fund .
We understand the intention to lighten the budgetary burden on Member States , but we must draw attention to the dangers of such a trend , either as a precedent which may tend to become generalized , or , more especially , as a way of completely negating the concept of own resources .
Unless some precautions are taken , we run the risk that this concept of own resources will be transformed into mere routine transfers by Member States .
And that is a situation with which I am sure none of us would agree .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , before I comment on Mrs Dührkop-Dührkop 's excellent report , I must make a short additional remark on this afternoon 's debate on legal bases , as this seems relevant to me and was not mentioned .
The crucial point is not whether a judgement has to be complied with .
That goes without saying .
The crucial point is how we can get the Council to agree to policies that Parliament wishes to initiate .
Unfortunately , we have not received any institutional reply to this question so far .
As long as the Council refuses to make any concessions on this point , we will have to use the means available to us as the Budgetary Authority and bring pressure to bear .
At the last meeting of the Committee on Budgets , all the groups were in agreement that if the Council dug its heels in , we should make full use of the margins available to us in categories 3 and 4 of the 1999 budget .
The Council has to realize that we know perfectly well how to get round its blocking tactics . After all , we are talking about at least ECU 1.3 billion .
The Council can be quite sure that we are in a position to spend this money well .
It will have to come clean on this in the trialogue .
Now let me turn to the Dührkop report , which - if we leave the specific estimates to one side for the time being - refers to three important institutional disputes that need to be resolved in the context of the next Interinstitutional Agreement .
In addition to the problem of the legal basis , which I have already mentioned , it also refers to the classification of expenditure and also sounds a warning note about using the creation of a reserve to achieve increased flexibility . To this extent the Dührkop report is an important stage on the difficult road to interinstitutional cooperation .
My group supports the efforts of the rapporteur and of the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development to pay more attention to evaluating programmes .
This also applies , of course , to sustainable regional agriculture programmes .
However , we wish to stress that everything possible must be done to guarantee that these particular programmes , which call for a high level of commitment by Member States , are made relevant to our citizens .
With regard to creating an insurance fund to compensate for damage suffered as a result of animal diseases , I would like to emphasize that for me the key motive is to reduce the burden on the budget .
Checks could accordingly be carried out so as to guarantee the self-insurance principle .
I cannot , therefore , agree to the creation of a budget line at present .
Finally , I have another point about expenditure under the common foreign and security policy .
We entered into the ad hoc procedures under the Amsterdam Treaty because it seemed important to us to preserve the non-compulsory nature of this expenditure .
Nevertheless , these procedures assume a minimum of responsibility on both sides , which I believe the Council has not fulfilled .
It is particularly regrettable that neither the Council nor the Commission has so far complied with Parliament 's wish to establish a European Civil Peace Corps .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , once again we are studying an important report on budgetary procedure here in Brussels , which is different from the texts which our headquarters manages , confirmed by the Court of Justice .
The report submitted to us is far from being neutral .
In fact , whilst , in theory , the ad hoc concertation procedure consists of formalized discussions between the two arms of the Budgetary Authority as regards the amount and distribution of compulsory and non-compulsory expenditure , in practice , this procedure allows the European Parliament to open a dialogue and to politically blackmail the Council , both as regards the amount of compulsory expenditure as well as the nature of some of this expenditure .
I would like to discuss the two categories which are subject to the opening of an ad hoc procedure in the report , namely , agricultural expenditure and CFSP expenditure .
As regards agricultural expenditure , the European Parliament justifies its regular recourse to the ad hoc procedure by pointing out the endemic overestimating of the past 10 years .
The Committee on Budgets believes that some lines in the agricultural budget are permanently provided with excessive appropriations .
It calls on the Commission to submit a Letter of Amendment so that the budget includes only credits which match real needs as closely as possible .
However , we should not be fooled by the real motives of the Committee on Budgets ; their real and only objective is to influence the character , content and amount of compulsory expenditure , which is usually controlled unilaterally by the Council .
I had tabled an amendment which proposed that Parliament should regard the ad hoc procedure as an instrument designed to improve the allocation of credits and not a political method for upsetting the current balance of power between the two arms of the Budgetary Authority .
This amendment was rejected .
As regards CFSP expenditure , the problem is slightly different .
To start with , the Maastricht Treaty treated this type of expenditure differently .
The Interinstitutional Agreement of 16 July changed things , without respecting the procedure , or waiting for ratification of the Amsterdam Treaty .
There is also a desire , in this respect , to change the texts and influence the Council 's proposals .
Contrary to what we are told , the ad hoc procedure is not a way of rationalizing expenditure , but a desire to redefine the classification of this expenditure .
Mr President , the budget for 1999 is the last of the present financial perspectives . It is , therefore , a budget which , although it follows the same lines as those of previous years , has already begun to look towards what will be the new financial perspectives , and this is no less true as regards its agricultural aspect .
We are well aware that the purpose of the ad hoc procedure is not to cast doubt on the competence of the budgetary authorities but is , on the contrary , to provide an opportunity for debate between the Council and Parliament on the classification of expenditure .
The Committee on Budgets approved Mrs Dührkop 's report on the ad hoc procedure at the same time as it was confirming the value of the Tillich / Mulder procedure we introduced last year .
We will apply it once again to the Commission 's Letter of Amendment , which will be submitted at the end of October , in order to achieve greater harmony between predicted and actual expenditure .
I would also like to emphasize the fact that we have voted for the creation of a special reserve for market uncertainties and accompanying measures , while waiting for a Letter of Amendment from the Commission . It is allocated ECU 700 million from a linear cut in all B1 lines of the EAGGF - Guarantee Section , without an increase in its total amount , thus preventing an overestimation of agricultural expenditure .
Whether the Council is prepared to accept it is another matter .
An additional innovation that has our support is the new expenditure nomenclature proposed by Mrs Dührkop , based on the purpose of the expenditure , in order to achieve a better evaluation of the common agricultural policy .
In addition - in the absence of any agreement with the Council on the legal basis in the trialogue , and to be coherent with the ruling by the Court of Justice - , the rapporteur suggests that funds relating to lines for which the legal basis has yet to be approved should be placed in a special reserve .
In this way , the appropriations will be transferred from the reserve to the line only when the legal basis for it has been adopted .
The Tillich / Mulder procedure , which has already been mentioned , includes international fisheries agreements ; therefore , the Commission 's Letter of Amendment enables us to reach a better assessment of the situation as regards current negotiations , and if the agreements are not concluded in time , we can decide to reduce the amounts held in the reserve still further .
I do not want to finish , Mr President , without mentioning that there are some Members who have some reservations about dedicated reserves , because of the danger of accumulating expenditure at the end of the year and having to pay it all at the same time .
As far as the financing of the CFSP is concerned , we can accept a reduction in the allocations for emergency measures if this means that loans provided for the prevention of conflicts will be increased .
Mr President , Mrs Dührkop has prepared a thorough report , for which I thank her profusely .
I should like to look more closely at points 13 and 14 .
These tackle the questions of environmental support for agriculture , early retirement and afforestation .
Firstly , I would like to point out that European Union policy and funding should not extend to forestry as such .
Only afforestation , which concerns reverting arable land to forest or rough pasture , might possibly fall within the European Union 's sphere of activity , as might activity that sets out to prevent erosion or desertification .
Point 14 , in particular , focuses on the agricultural policy to be applied .
It sees requirements for agriculture as being too vague and non-binding .
At the same time , it calls on the Commission to make special proposals to enhance sustainable agriculture by developing regulations for good agricultural practice as well as functional standards for the environment and production .
I believe point 14 places too much faith in administration and bureaucracy , indeed in rules that extend to regional policy .
We must remember that the European Union is a community of 370 million inhabitants .
It is impossible to imagine that the Commission would be capable of drafting good agricultural policy for every nook and cranny of Europe .
The same goes for meticulous standards also .
For example , this spring , the Commission changed the final day for sowing for my particular country several times .
Why should the Commission be trying to decide details such as this ?
Agriculture has ben practised for centuries in that Member State .
They know perfectly well when the land can be sown there and when it cannot .
The basic prerequisite of the common agricultural policy is a respect for the principle of subsidiarity .
The responsibility for agriculture lies with the Member States as well as the EU .
Up until now the environmental protection of agriculture and associated activities has been dealt with through agreements between the Member State and the European Union , and both sides have contributed to the costs .
Putting these into practice and monitoring the result are mainly the responsibility of the Member State .
This has worked well , as the Member State has had both the functional and economic responsibility .
I hope that these matters of subsidiarity will be resolved positively in conjunction with the CAP reform when the AGENDA 2000 programme is being decided .
Mr President , I would like to turn to an aspect of Mrs Dührkop Dührkop 's interesting report on combating animal diseases .
This has cost the European budget a great deal of money over the past few years , on account of BSE , and swine fever , in particular .
Presently , in the event of an outbreak of a contagious disease , 50 % of the costs are borne by the Member State and the remaining 50 % by the European budget .
The present situation is that in certain Member States - for example , in the Netherlands , to name a country which is close to my heart - the 50 % of the costs which are borne nationally are borne by the farmers of that country .
It is clear that this is not yet the case in other countries .
Does the Commission not think that this could be a case of distortion of competition ?
Would it be possible for the Commission to evaluate all existing schemes relating to combating animal diseases in the Member States of the European Union in the near future ? I already referred to this last May .
I believe that it is certainly worthwhile to consider Mrs Dührkop Dührkop 's proposal to investigate the feasibility of establishing an insurance fund at European level for this . There are , however , many details to be discussed before then .
Mr President , The Commission is pleased that the European Parliament seems to accept the overall amount proposed for EAGGF Guarantee and that there is a large measure of agreement on how it should be allocated between sectors .
The rigour of this budget is evident not only in its ' zero-growth ' , but also in the efforts which have been made to reduce the over-budgeting seen in the past on certain budget lines .
As for the proposed creation of a reserve inside the EAGGF Guarantee , I have to say that the Commission does not see how the creation of a reserve without making any change to the overall amount of the budget contributes to our common aim , namely a rigorous budget .
The Commission is opposed to a linear reduction of all lines in order to fill a reserve .
However , if this is what the budgetary authority wishes to do , the Commission can accept to treat about 250 million euros as ' provisional appropriations ' and place them in the reserve chapter B0-40 .
These appropriations can be drawn from five budget lines , which either tended to be consistently under-executed during the period 1994 to 1997 , or where expenditure is not certain , such as the fight against outbreaks of animal diseases .
To reduce the appropriations for the actions of control and prevention by 3 million and to inscribe them into the chapter B0-40 , seems illogical .
The Commission would not be able to carry out an evaluation of the accompanying measures , as Parliament has requested , and to which it is committed , if Parliament withdraws the appropriations .
Concerning the transfer of a supplementary 17 million euros to the B0-40 , obtained by a linear reduction of the budget lines , the Commission does not see the usefulness of this action .
In its preliminary draft budget the Commission is committed to presenting new actions to control and prevent fraud , if possible in the framework of the Letter of Amendment .
In the future , the agricultural Letter of Amendment in the autumn will be a crucial step in the EAGGF-Guarantee budgetary procedure As in the past , it will allow the latest developments in production and on markets to be taken into account .
In this regard , developments up to now do not lead us at this stage to expect savings on the amount proposed in the 1999 PDB .
The rectifying letter will also be the right occasion for an update of the PDB in the light of legislative decisions , including those on the price package , market reforms and , probably , the adaptation of the agri-monetary system following the introduction of the euro .
Concerning fisheries agreements , following the new estimations , the Commission can now endorse two changes to the preliminary draft budget if the budget authority can agree on them .
The first one is the transfer of 0 , 5 million euro from the line B7-8000 to the reserve relating to the agreement with the Gambia which will most probably not be signed in 1998 and thus will not be in force at the beginning of 1999 .
The second is a reduction of up to 7 million euro of the reserve intended for new agreements , due to the fact that it will most likely not be possible to conclude a new agreement with Russia in the near future , for which such an amount had been foreseen in the reserve .
However , at a later stage the Commission present updated estimates and propose the corresponding changes to the proposals for new agreements .
As agreed during the trialogue of March 1998 , the final distribution between the reserve and the budget line should be decided in the Letter of Amendment that the Commission will transmit at the end of October to the budget authority .
Finally , concerning the financing of the common foreign and security policy , with regard to the line for urgent actions ( B8-015 ) , appropriations proposed in the Preliminary Draft Budget for 1999 have been increased in the light of the relatively swift execution in the first months of 1998 .
However , the Commission could endorse a certain downward revision of the allocated amount , such as the 2 million euro proposed by the European Parliament and reinforce for example the line for prevention of conflicts and support for peace processes ( B8-013 ) .
Minor modifications in the nomenclature do not pose any problem for the Commission .
But if no agreement can be found for some budget lines , the Commission proposes to revert either to the nomenclature agreed upon in the 1998 budget discussion , or to the nomenclature agreed upon in the Interinstitutional Agreement .
Commissioner , I would like to make it absolutely clear that this resolution does not propose any reserve for support measures .
I have said quite clearly that I would have liked to ask for much more specific reserves instead of a general reserve .
But the general fund that has finally been decided on has been agreed with the Committee on Agriculture .
And if you read the report carefully , you will see that it says " provisionally linear ' .
During all the years of the ad hoc procedure this House has always stated that it is clearly against linear cuts .
For the time being , until we see from the Letter of Amendment where the real needs lie , we prefer to say " provisionally linear ' .
As far as fishing agreements are concerned , Commissioner , I would like to say that , as we both know , not only is there little chance of the agreement with Russia being included in the 1999 budget , but this applies to one or two other agreements as well .
We shall see how things stand around autumn , as we shall with agricultural expenditure , when we look at the amendments to the budget .
Thank you , Mrs Dührkop , for your explanations and clarifications , which I do of course note .
With regard to fisheries agreements , however , and inasmuch as I am involved from time to time , at least collaterally , in negotiating some of these agreements , it is extremely difficult to make a reliable prediction .
I will give you an example : the fisheries agreement with South Africa .
This is an agreement which looked impossible last year , on which negotiations began this year , and which , in spite of everything , we have some hope of being able to conclude by the end of the year .
We have some hope , but no more than that !
Because it depends much more on the South African authorities than the Community authorities .
For that reason , we have to view these matters with some degree of caution , accepting that there is some uncertainty .
This was the point I wanted to clarify , while assuring you that I do , therefore , understand the difficulty both my colleague and the Member and her colleagues find themselves in , because they would like a strict budget , while at the same time they are confronted with these uncertainties with which they have to grapple .
Thank you , Mr Pinheiro .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 11.00 a.m.
Vendor control systems
The next item is the report ( A4-0230 / 98 ) by Mr Riccardo Garosci , on behalf of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and Industrial Policy , on the Commission report on the vendor control systems applied by the Member States ( COM ( 96 ) 0245 - C4-0589 / 96 ) .
Mr President , this is my first speech in my new seat in this Parliament , finally in the centre .
Starting with the bad news , 30 June 1999 could perhaps be the last day on which people who travel between Member States will be able to purchase duty-free goods such as specialty items , crafts , luxury articles , alcohol , and tobacco in tax free shops .
This date will change an important feature that has been with European travellers for 50 years .
Its abolition is , however , the direct consequence of the creation of the single market on 1 January 1993 .
Given the sector 's socio-economic importance , the Council granted a special extension from 1 January 1993 until 30 June 1999 so that the sectors could gradually phase out the tax-free system .
The Council also authorized duty-free sales during the extension period in the two Channel tunnel terminals and increased the duty-free allowance for third countries to ECU 175 and for Community countries to ECU 90 .
Given the lack of border controls , the Council has set minimum standards of control on tax-free sales dealt with in this report .
The Commission should have presented the Council with a report by 1994 on the functioning of this transitional system and on the related systems of vendor controls .
This report was not produced until 1996 , and today , a little more than one year before the end of the extension , the Parliament is called on to give its opinion on this Commission report and , therefore , indirectly on the future of duty-free .
The first airport with tax-free points of sale was Shannon in Ireland in 1947 .
To give you an idea of how this tax-free airport has developed , from the first flight with thirty passengers in 1945 , we have reached a turnover of $ 10 million in 1977 .
The Shannon concept spread rapidly to all of Europe and since then all the major airports have adopted the duty-free system .
Following the example of the airlines , the ferries also developed tax-free sales on board , especially the small companies with year-round service , and today these sales still cover a large part of their management costs .
In the European Union , the sector now carries weight in the three fundamental channels - airports , ferries and on board aeroplanes - with a sales turnover of $ 7 billion in 1996 .
In 1991 , the Commission said that it was in favour of producing a study on the socio-economic consequences of eliminating duty-free .
Unfortunately , this report was never produced , and the information available today for understanding the current importance of the sector in question is still the information compiled by the sectors and the information contained in a European Parliament study .
The creation of the internal market on 1 January 1993 and the relative absence of Community borders made it necessary to introduce a system to monitor sales and guarantee compliance with the set duty-free allowances .
The manager of duty-free sales - and here we arrive at the central issue of the report - has to pursue two separate objectives : increasing sales whilst making sure that sales do not exceed the set limits .
The Commission states that compliance by managers of the guidelines laid down by the Council in 1992 has been far from satisfactory .
In most cases , shop managers have not applied systems that keep track of purchases and have not set up systems that calculate how much duty-free allowance passengers still have .
There has also been no coordination of controls for purchases made on aeroplanes .
The duty-free sales manager does not have all the relevant travel information for the passenger concerned at the time of the individual purchase .
This is due to the shortcomings of the control systems , but is also justifiable because the provision of effective controls coordinated between the various modes of transport and for the various stages of each journey would require huge investment .
For their part , the controls set up by tax free shop managers are only the same as those carried out by warehouse managers and only guarantee that the goods have not left the store or the tax-free area without having been registered .
The shortcomings observed are probably due to the fact that Member States have not , between themselves , had the time to organize , coordinate and invest in these systems .
The extension to 30 June 1999 could have been a way of helping the sector make the necessary , gradual adaptations , but since 1991 nothing has been done to convert the duty-free system in preparation for the end of duty-free on 30 June 1999 .
There is also another problem of fairness with traditional shops .
Even if sales were to decrease , the development of air traffic would offset any initial drop .
Furthermore , the abolition of duty-free does not mean the physical closure of the points of sale but only the end to duty-free allowances for travel within the Community .
Another important factor is the physical location of duty-free shops and shops in the city , which is difficult to compare .
So , whether we like it or not , the completion of a real internal market must include the end to duty-free sales within the Community .
The case of duty-free , however , raises socio-economic problems that Parliament cannot ignore .
The sector directly employs about 140 000 people , and the abolition of duty-free allowances will mean that a lot of these jobs will be in jeopardy ; in addition to the risk of job losses , there will be negative effects on the tourist industry , particularly in certain peripheral regions .
Furthermore , the elimination of duty-free sales will jeopardize the process of liberalization of the transport industry , especially for small and medium-sized operators .
The consequent rush by the airlines to save money could also endanger transport safety .
For that reason we are placing a lot of trust in the amendment that the Commission is sponsoring to use regional funds .
We understand that the decision to eliminate duty-free sales , unless there be some new unanimous political assessments , is final and we agree with the Commission 's assessment that the situation is rather unsatisfactory .
The idea of using the duty-free system also for the arrival of the euro is important .
Therefore , without changing the deadline of 30 June 1999 , it is our duty to provide the managers with instruments and methods for improving their control and for providing the network of duty-free shops with an opportunity to make a gradual conversion into normal points of sale .
We therefore consider that the second of the two amendments which I have tabled is fundamental . This amendment enables travellers whose final destination is outside the Community , but who have a stopover , to make duty-free purchases at the point of departure .
Mr President , those of us who fly regularly know that the control on compliance with the regulations in respect of duty-free sales is absent , or at least it is full of loopholes .
Individuals who have bought their quantity of duty-free alcohol or cigarettes in the airport have no difficulty in obtaining another lot on board the aeroplane .
Those purchasing goods above the permitted duty-fee sum find that they have not paid VAT after all , as the shopkeeper will have paid it .
These problems are as old as duty-free sales themselves .
The fact that they have not yet been resolved says a great deal .
The duty-free sales within the European Community may disappear in a year 's time from today , but they will remain in place for journeys out of the Union .
As a result , the problem of uncontrolled double duty-free sales remains with us and this is the subject of this report .
The Group of the Party of European Socialists agrees with the rapporteur that it is time effective controls were in place , and we agree with his recommendations , which are astoundingly easy to implement .
My group thinks it is right that the Garosci report only deals with the control of duty-free sales . Indeed , the European Commission 's report on the subject is rather out of date .
We did not agree with the way in which the original report tried to table the Ecofin Council resolution dated December 1991 , on the subject of ending duty-free sales within the Community , again .
We are , of course , also concerned about jobs in duty-free shops , but firstly , consumer purchases will be moved to other shops where jobs will be created and secondly , governments will be able to lower taxes by raising additional , different tax revenues , or increase their expenditure in order to create new jobs .
After all , attractive as duty-free sales may be to the consumer , they are anything but free .
They are a subsidy on flying from which the better-off traveller in particular benefits , and to which all citizens contribute .
It is , therefore , a socially regressive tax .
It is a subsidy to the most polluting form of transport which discriminates against environmentally-friendly forms of transport which cannot make use of this privilege .
It is a subsidy which discriminates against shops in towns and villages who must pay VAT and excise duties , in favour of shops at airports .
It is a subsidy on alcohol and tobacco , in particular , as these more than any other products are affected by the freedom from tax . Yet these are not the kind of products we would choose to subsidize before all others , given a free choice .
Research I have conducted showed that consumers benefit from only one-third of the non-paid tax , while the shopkeeper retains two-thirds .
This enormous percentage of profit on sales in duty-free shops explains the enormous campaigns and gigantic pressure put on us as Members of the European Parliament .
But we will not succumb to this pressure , based on the arguments I have submitted .
We will , therefore , support the Garosci report in its present form .
Mr President , I cannot , of course , agree with the previous speaker , who like a typical socialist can only see the downside when it comes to tax-free sales .
No , I am one of those people who is passionately committed to keeping duty-free shops at airports and on ships for people travelling inside the European Union , who should keep the right to buy typical products , artefacts and other goods free of tax .
However , all this is due to end on 30 June 1999 .
I know that there are some people who adhere strictly to principles , and that it can be said that duty-free is incompatible with the internal market .
This principle is a hobbyhorse of the Commission and , in particular , of Commissioner Monti .
The Commissioner has refused to extend the 30 June deadline again , for example until 1 January 2002 , as our rapporteur , Mr Garosci , had proposed in a spirit of compromise .
That is , of course , when we will have euro coins and notes in our pockets .
I am not just an advocate of duty-free because I want to make it easy for executives with money to spend to buy luxury goods on business trips .
But right now I simply cannot ignore the fact that there are 18 million unemployed in the European Union and that tens of thousands of jobs are being put at risk by abolishing duty-free at airports and on ships , not to mention the effect on the cost of flying .
Is it not rather contradictory to organize grandiose employment summits , set up action plans to preserve and create jobs , and then simultaneously , by rigidly adhering to principles , jeopardize more jobs than programmes of this kind could ever preserve or create ?
I also know that politics is the art of the possible .
So I can only express my regret that the good intentions of our rapporteur , Mr Garosci , whom I warmly thank and who wanted to save duty-free , have become the victim of a procedure which has swept all his excellent proposals aside by limiting his report strictly to vendor control systems .
I am the joint author of two amendments , the aim of which is to ensure that we do not at least just lock the stable door after the horse has bolted , in other words , after we have destroyed jobs by abolishing duty-free . Instead , we intend that a system of sectoral and regional aid should be provided for the regions and sectors that will be hardest hit by the abolition of duty-free .
We want to ensure that Community funding is made available for this .
I also hope that Parliament will agree to our amendment , which stipulates that travellers departing from ports and airports in the European Union will be able to make duty-free purchases if their final destination is outside the Union , but they have to change inside the Community .
This is particularly important for Luxembourg , as we can usually only fly to third countries via Frankfurt , Brussels , Paris and Amsterdam , and I hope ...
( The President cut off the speaker )
Mr President , Mr Garosci 's report is , of course , an extremely interesting report .
This is particularly true , as we do not say what we really wanted to say , as the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and Industrial Policy has decided to stick with the European Commission report .
But the question which arises is whether implementing the measures in the Garosci report will be effective , considering the fact that by the time bureaucracy has processed these recommendations , duty-frees will be abolished .
That is what I think anyway .
Nevertheless , Parliament has made a wise decision in my view .
Parliament has not been tempted into the trap of giving its opinion on a problem whose future direction is in the hands of the European Commission .
The question remains concerning the stage at which the duty-free zones must be abolished .
In theory , we are agreed , of course , that these duty-free zones must be abolished , but on the other hand , the European Union and the Council in the vanguard , with the European Commission in the rear , have not been able to resolve a number of tax issues .
Society might have expected that these tax issues would have been resolved by now .
Another issue relates , for example , to how this system of abolished duty-free allowances is to function in regions such as the European Economic Area .
European citizens travelling from Amsterdam to Switzerland or from Paris to Norway may encounter , for example , different rules than when they travel direct to Sweden .
I fear that we are facing a problem which we are not resolving correctly , as we anticipate events while still leaving issues unresolved .
I would , therefore , urge the European Commission to reconsider carefully all aspects of this issue and , in particular , to review the inevitable effects , rather than just the recommendations in this report .
Mr President , I recognize that the primary thrust of the Garosci report relates to the general need to tighten up the rules governing the purchase of duty-free products at airports within the territories of the European Union .
However , it is difficult at this time to debate such an issue without referring to the broader need to maintain duty-free operations within Europe post-1999 .
I understand that the outgoing President of the Ecofin Council described this debate as the most emotive one on the political agenda and I believe most people would agree with that .
The abolition of duty-free will be a highly regressive step in the light of the fact that it commands such widespread support among the citizens of Europe .
It is a consumer-friendly measure and one which commands widespread public support .
In fact , at a time when many people contend that they feel alienated with the workings of the European Union , they find it virtually incomprehensible that the EU is abolishing what is a very popular mode of social shopping for many people working and travelling to different Member States within the Union .
The European Commission is not giving an inch on the need to look closely again at the effects of the abolition of duty-free and the effect that this will have in many Member States of the Union , particularly peripheral regions .
We should not forget that the Commission gave an assurance that this study will be carried out and they have failed to have fulfilled this commitment .
The Commission is not endearing itself to the general public by taking such a wholly unsympathetic and forthright position .
On 3 April , this House overwhelmingly voted for a resolution calling on the European Commission to carry out a social and economic study .
The fact that the European Commission is refusing to do this , once again reinforces the fact that it is unwilling to listen to the wishes of the only democratically elected body within the European Union .
The Council of Ecofin Ministers met on 19 May and contrary to press speculation there was no decision or reaffirmation by the Council that duty-free would be abolished .
The issue will be back on the Ecofin agenda when working documents on the issue are prepared .
I welcome the fact that the Mr Garosci in his report believes and recognizes that an alternative solution must be found to the abolition of duty-free shopping .
He makes the clear and correct observation that the decision would immediately jeopardize a sector which employs 140 000 people in Europe .
If duty-free operations discontinue , the effects for my country , Ireland , will be very serious .
There would be job losses across all sectors ; price rises in both air and sea travel ; higher access costs for travel ; threats to the viability of year-round ferry services to and from Ireland .
It is a very serious situation and I would hope that the Commission will at last take into consideration the views of the Members of this House and the wishes of the vast majority of the people of this Union .
Mr President , first of all I would like to express my appreciation for the fact that the Garosci report keeps to the subject it deals with : the point-of-sale control systems .
The Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and Industrial Policy convened a hearing on this subject which unfortunately proved to be overcrowded by lobbyists who pleaded in favour of duty-free sales .
The European Commission report is clear .
The controls are slack in many ways .
The main cause is that people are riding roughshod over one of the basic principles of the administrative policing .
The vendors , in whose interest it is to maximize their turnover , are at the same time required to ensure that their customers do not exceed their purchase limits .
The inevitable result is that the improvements proposed by the rapporteur remain stopgaps , which is not to say that they should not be welcomed .
The duty-free sales on internal European journeys conflict with the single European market .
The distortion of competition is all the greater , due to the defective controls .
The price level is still considerable , despite the duty-free regime .
The consumer hardly benefits , not least because jobs are sucked away artificially from the normal distribution chain stores and smaller shopkeepers .
Duty-free sales frustrate the required internalization of the external effects of transport , due to cross subsidies .
We should not forget the environment .
To conclude , there are more than sufficient reasons to reject all amendments tabled .
Mr President , I would like to congratulate the rapporteur and point out that , although formally this debate ought to have been limited to the Commission 's report on the vendor control systems used by Member States , it is clear that it has been brought up at every Parliamentary committee meeting in which the economic and social repercussions of the abolition of duty-free shops within the boundaries of the European Union have been debated .
Has this been the case , as some speakers have suggested , because the commercial sector affected has taken the opportunity to inform us of its arguments against the abolition of duty-free shops ?
Or is it because the Commission 's report itself and the debate within the Council has led some of us , as Members of the European Parliament , to consider the possible disadvantages of their abolition in greater detail and with greater interest , and - why not ? - with some anxiety ? The fact is that there are valid arguments both for and against this measure .
I think the Committee on Transport 's conclusions have shown us that it would be fitting for the Commission to prepare a more detailed study , particularly on the effects the abolition of this kind of shop might have on the funding and management of transport infrastructures , and the possible threat to consumers of an increase in terms of transport service costs as a result of increased airport charges .
Mr President , I am not in a position to express such a forthright opinion as some Members have done .
I would like to see a more detailed study of the subject , which is being called for not by the sector but by the representatives of some Member States .
I would also leave out some of the accusations we have heard concerning the sinful attitude of certain Members or Member States .
I should like us to avoid debates of that sort .
I , at least , have had neither the opportunity nor the intention of speaking to any representative of the lobby involved .
In any event , Mr President , what the Commission 's report does say is that there are serious problems regarding controls in terms of the level of sales , especially for airport and in-flight sales .
And I totally agree that we should support all measures to enforce the observance of the laws of the European Union and its Member States and prevent abuses in that sector .
Mr President , the question under debate here is how the control of the duty-free system works .
The Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and Industrial Policy decided after voting that it cannot , nor , consequently , can Parliament itself , take a position on the main question under debate .
It is the question of the possible continuation of dutyfree sales which interests the ordinary citizen .
I would like to make two marginal notes .
Firstly , the decision to end dates from 1991 .
At that time , Finland and Sweden , for example , were not members of the European Union .
However , duty-free sales were absolutely essential for their shipping traffic , and partly also for their air traffic .
Finland , isolated as she is by the sea , has through them built at reasonable cost a bridge over to mainland Europe .
Ending duty-free will sever this connection .
Secondly , ending duty-free will create unemployment .
40 000 people in the Union and 13 000 in Finland will lose their job .
This is in direct conflict with the EU pledge to pay serious attention to averting unemployment .
The one hand does not know what the other is doing .
Besides , even if duty-free sales are abolished and there is apparent harmonization , the high and disharmonious levels of tax on alcohol and tobacco in the Nordic countries will continue .
Who will benefit ?
There might be a spurious element of prestige in it for the Commission and Ecofin .
Another beneficiary will be Estonia , which is outside the EU .
Ships plying between Helsinki and Stockholm may preserve the duty-free system by stopping off in the future in Tallinn .
But how high will the port costs be that Tallinn will levy in that case ?
The matter has not been thought through from all sides thanks to a bullheaded Commission and a toothless Ecofin .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , at a time when unemployment remains the main concern in all our countries , I am not at all sure that it is wise to further increase unemployment through changes which some are immediately planning for duty-free trade . This has been properly pointed out in the study prepared by Parliament 's Directorate-General for Research .
With regard to the study , I would also like to point out that the Commission has not fulfilled its commitments or kept its word as given at the time of Mrs Scrivener .
Between the commitment made at the time and today , a lot of time has passed but nothing has been done .
We should also remember that the Commission did not think it worth replying to the request from the Transport Council of 17 March 1998 nor to the European Parliament 's resolution of 3 April .
Nor does its proposal , of the Ecofin Council of 19 May , correspond any better to its promise of 1991 or to Parliament 's request , reiterated in its resolution of 3 April and adopted by a very large majority .
Once again , therefore , we have to point out that the scheduled end of duty-free trade within the Union cannot take place unless certain very specific conditions have already been met .
Otherwise , we shall run the risk of very serious repercussions in terms of jobs in the regions affected .
So , ladies and gentlemen , whereas paragraph 19 of the Commission 's report on vendor controls recognized that duty-free sales make some contribution to the funding of airport infrastructures , help to minimize the effect of airport taxes and thus favour the tourist industry , it would be quite appropriate to provide for aid and appropriate compensation measures , especially in peripheral regions , which will suffer disproportionately from the consequences of the abolition of duty-free trade .
In this context , particular attention will also have to be paid to transport services in isolated and peripheral regions , and the Commission must look seriously into the possibility of Community funding .
Therefore , Mr President , no-one will be surprised to learn that our group will vote against Mr Garosci 's report in its current version , as it represents an accelerated death warrant for duty-free trade without there having been any study or serious actions and will inevitably have disastrous repercussions on employment and on the regions concerned .
Mr President , when I was a young boy living in Scotland , at nighttime I used to listen to a children 's programme called ' Jackanory ' ; it told you fairy tales .
Well , tonight I think I have sat through another episode of it because I have never heard so much disinformation coming across on the question of duty-free .
I heard Mrs Boogerd-Quaak saying ' duty-free is going ' .
Duty-free is not going .
Duty-free will still exist for all those travellers outwith the EU .
Can I say why it is important that we discuss vendor control tonight ?
I will give you a prime example .
If you travel via Brussels airport , as most Members here do , you go into the main lobby in terminal B and you can buy a bottle of spirits and 200 cigarettes .
You then go down terminal B to get to your gate and there are another two duty-free shops there where you can buy another bottle of spirits and another 200 cigarettes at each one of these shops .
Therefore , you have three litres of spirits and 600 cigarettes .
While you are flying back to Glasgow they come around asking if you would like to buy duty-free .
You can buy another bottle of spirits and another 200 cigarettes .
Then you have 4 litres of spirits and 800 cigarettes .
The only problem you would have in getting them back is not whether customs stop you , it is actually carrying the bloody stuff .
If we are going to continue to operate properly as a Union , we have to tighten up on the vendor control system .
Let us drop this whole question of duty-free coming or going .
That argument will be won or lost in the Ecofin Council ; it will not be won and lost in this Chamber .
It is high time people recognized that .
Therefore , the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and Industrial Policy have put down amendments to the Garosci Report showing ways that we can get around the abuse of the system within airports , ports and airlines .
It is important that we take these up and implement them .
If we do not we are allowing fraud to continue within our system and also there is loss of revenue to exchequers in the various Member States .
Therefore , let us concentrate on the issue which is in front of us .
It is not duty-free , it is vendor control .
Please stick to the issue .
Mr President , it has been a stimulating debate so far and I particularly appreciated the contribution from Mr Miller who demonstrated very clearly the point made by the rapporteur , in his excellent report , that vendor control is simply not working .
Mr Miller described graphically what happens at Brussels airport .
Let me tell you what happens on cross-channel ferries .
Some rogues collect up boarding cards from innocent and naive passengers and take them along to the duty-free shop and cash them in for much larger amounts than they are actually permitted by the regulation .
It is a system which is subject to wide-scale abuse .
I agree with those people who have regretted that the whole debate has been hijacked into an entirely irrelevant consideration about duty-free .
I am a great supporter of lobbies , I believe profoundly in their ability to come here and try to influence us .
I do not agree however that they should tell lies in doing so .
One of the worst of the untruths that they have been telling is about job losses .
There has been an unscrupulous playing on the fears of their employees for their job futures .
Obviously people are going to continue to travel by air .
Indeed , in the United Kingdom airports are expanding their shopping facilities all the time .
There is , of course , a problem on some ferries , particularly those crossing the Channel .
Those problems are caused by the fact that there are too many ships chasing too few passengers , particularly now that the Channel Tunnel is open . The Channel Tunnel , where incidentally you cannot benefit from duty-free if you travel on the Eurostar .


So I support what Mr Garosci has done , I entirely agree with the points made by Mr Miller and indeed somewhat exceptionally too , with the points made by Mr Metten .
So I hope we will support the rapporteur and reject most of the amendments .
Mr President , the decision to abolish the duty-free sector on 30 June 1999 was confirmed by the refusal of the Ecofin Council on 18 May 1998 to comply with Commissioner Scrivener 's promise made to the Members of the European Parliament to carry out a study on the impact throughout the Union .
Since I only have two minutes , I will simply deal with one single aspect of this problem .
The directive which was passed in 1991 formed part of an overall plan for a harmonized tax system for Europe .
Unfortunately , we are hardly , if anywhere , near that yet .
Europe must not be created at the expense of jobs .
And yet , during the hearing of 29 October 1997 , Commissioner Monti recognized that the abolition of duty-free sales would affect employment and the economic activity of certain regions in Europe .
Of all duty-free products sold , 41 % are of French origin and duty-free trade is the best possible shop window and the best possible way of promoting products made for export .
I come from the Cognac region in France and more than 30 % of its production is sold duty-free on the world market .
It is the main sector in the Cognac region and accounts for a major share of top quality sales .
A specific study has shown that 1 000 jobs are affected by this European decision and that 2 000 hectares of vineyards will be grubbed .
And this comes on top of the Asian crisis .
In some regions , such as the Nord-Pas-de-Calais , which already has 20 % unemployment , 3 500 jobs will be lost .
Europe will not be able to justify itself to the electorate with such inept and brutal decisions .
Have we thought about a different approach , which would be more in harmony with the economic and social constraints which prevail at the end of the century ?
What about , for example , a progressive tax rate which would be more flexible and more pragmatic ?
Perhaps there is still time to step back .
Who is going to pay the bill ?
Airports ?
The airline and shipping companies ?
The consumer ?
No doubt all of them will to some extent .
But it will cost far more to rehabilitate the credibility of the European institutions and the prime movers within them who deliberately destroy jobs .
Mr President , we must agree with the position of the Committee on Transport and Tourism and others that problems caused by the ending of duty-free sales should have been discussed in connection with this present topic for discussion .
I will take the liberty of wondering out loud how difficult it will be to effect and conduct proper discussions on the subject .
We tend to stick rigidly to legal interpretation without paying sufficient attention , for example , to the EU 's massive aim to substantially reduce unemployment .
The EU should not be making decisions that run counter to this aim .
But that is what appears to be happening in this debate .
It is patently obvious that ending duty-free sales will weaken , for example , Finland 's ability to maintain communications with the rest of the European Union .
Finland is an island as seen from Central and Western Europe , and one that needs sufficiently efficient and competitive maritime links .
Duty-free sales have done a great deal to guarantee high-quality Finnish maritime links to Scandinavia and the Baltic .
Because of duty-free sales , fares have been kept so moderate that anyone , including the unemployed , can enjoy these crossings .
This is the main thing that has kept passenger numbers high and traffic busy , thus enabling , furthermore , high freight capacity .
Some have clearly laboured under misconceptions such as the idea that all this has to do with protecting the interests of the wealthy .
But this is really not the case ; on the contrary , it is emphatically about the interests of the less well-off , and therefore about equality between citizens .
Effective and regular car ferry services are a part of Finland 's main route connections to Scandinavia , the Baltic and thus to elsewhere in Europe . Any deterioration in these will mean higher freight costs and bottlenecks regarding capacity , causing problems for economic development for the whole country .
Discontinuing duty-free sales will mean higher fares and the threat that some services will cease altogether . This would have an immediate and deteriorating effect on maritime employment .
The effects on employment will not , however , be confined to the maritime sector .
Road traffic employment will similarly come under threat .
The rise in costs and transportation difficulties will also mean an increase in costs to the export industry , affecting its competitiveness and , indirectly , employment .
A fall in capacity will also result in fewer orders for the shipbuilding industry with a crushing effect on dockyard employees and subcontractors everywhere in the EU .
We sincerely hope that the Commission will take seriously the demands expressed in the European Parliament for a thorough clarification of the total effect of discontinuing duty-free sales .
Mr President , in 1991 by a unanimous vote the Council of Ministers decided to abolish duty-free sales for journeys by air and sea within the European Union from 30 January 1999 .
The best estimates we have indicate that up to 140 , 000 jobs may be lost as a result of the Council decision . Despite considerable pressure , the Council of Ministers has refused on a number of occasions to reconsider their decision to abolish duty-free .
It is clear that many air companies and ferries , in particular those operating in peripheral regions such as Ireland , will have difficulty surviving the loss of income the abolition of duty-free will bring .
In addition , the ticket cost to the travelling public will undoubtedly increase .
I will continue to strive to overturn that Council decision .
However , it is necessary to consider the plight of those whose jobs will be put in jeopardy by the Council decision .
The Commission must urgently examine the situation of people whose jobs will be put at risk by the abolition of duty-free sales and bring forward a proposal in good time to alleviate the adverse consequences for those involved .
A number of ferry companies face severe loss and even bankruptcy as a result of the Council of Ministers ' decision .
The Commission must examine in particular the structure of air and ferry companies servicing peripheral regions and bring forward measures to prevent loss of services to those regions concerned and prevent job losses .
Mr President , when the Council decided in 1991 to extend the existence of duty-free shopping until 1999 , it could certainly not have known that unemployment in the EU in 1998 would be 18 million and rising .
The Council also had no idea that in 1999 , despite monetary union becoming a reality , there would still be no question of tax harmonization .
So the internal market has not really been completed .
The Council and Commission 's inflexibility on this point borders on irresponsibility !
Abolishing duty-free means killing several birds with one stone , in a negative sense , of course .
A large number of additional unemployed people will come onto the job market .
The EU will voluntarily sacrifice an important shop window for its branded export goods , and the tourist trade will suffer demonstrable damage .
A cynic might say that the first concrete employment policy measure taken by the Community will be the destruction of over 100 000 jobs by abolishing duty-free .
I find it absolutely incomprehensible that the Council has not reviewed its position given the situation in the job market .
There is a wide and unanimous consensus that the main topic of political debate and the objective of all our actions should be the fight against unemployment .
So why is not possible to reach unanimous agreement to alter this decision , which will clearly create so many additional unemployed ?
The new President of the Council , Austria 's Federal Chancellor , yesterday appealed to the EU partners to make the fight against unemployment the focus of their attention .
If he means that seriously , than he should convince his partners that by keeping duty-free , many jobs would be saved .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the system that applies to duty-free sales up to 30 June 1999 involves the exercise of controls by the seller over his own sales .
Two years ago , in July 1996 , the Commission drew up a report on the application of these controls by Member States .
The conclusions were somewhat negative , inasmuch as they highlighted , in particular , the diversity of the measures taken at national level and the gaps in their control systems .
At this point I would like to thank Parliament , and especially the rapporteur , Mr Garosci , for his work on this issue , the sensitive nature of which is generally acknowledged .
I am delighted that Parliament agrees with the Commission 's approach regarding the conclusion to be drawn concerning controls .
The Commission fully endorses the recommendations for the improvement of controls , whether by the airline ticket cancellation method or by increased use of computer technology .
Nevertheless , we would draw your attention to the fact that it is less appropriate to introduce measures of this kind now that we are only a year from the deadline of 30 June 1999 .
The fact is that the need to introduce additional control measures would require further investment , which might amount to a misleading signal to operators as regards the deadline of 30 June 1999 .
I would also emphasize that since preparing its report the Commission has been informed that operators have tightened up their controls .
They have already started to make the adjustments that will be necessary until these sales are abolished , and will now have to concentrate their efforts on actions at ground level .
Mr President , I would now like to talk about the proposed changes , most of which are separate from the question of controls and relate to the general problem of duty-free sales .
On this point , my colleague , Mario Monti , has had occasion to explain the Commission 's position to you a number of times .
I can confirm that there has been no change in that position , and indeed it has recently been reaffirmed here at the Ecofin Council on 19 May 1998 .
I would , therefore , like to restrict myself to the following observations .
In the first place , we will not in any way entertain the suggestion that the date for abolition of these sales should be postponed .
On 19 May , let me say again , the Ecofin Council gave no indication to that effect , not did it even agree that the debate should be re-opened .
It also seems to me that any association between duty-free sales and the introduction of the euro would be artificial or even dangerous for the image of the Community .
The Commission still considers that Member States are in the best position to examine the consequences of abolishing duty-free sales at national level , and to take the appropriate decisions , if necessary .
There are also a certain number of changes relating to sectoral and regional support measures . These recommend the use of Community funds to assist in dealing with local difficulties .
Measures proposed by Member States which involve the use of Community mechanisms , such as Structural Funds , will be considered by the Commission on the merits of each case .
In addition , the Commission has promised the Council that it will draw up a working document clarifying which Community instruments can be used by Member States in that connection .
Obviously the European Parliament will be kept informed .
Finally , Mr President , Community legislation does not contain any provision allowing passengers travelling to third countries to buy duty-free goods at airports within the Community where they first embark .
This is initially an intra-Community flight .
There is nothing , however , to prevent contact between strictly Community passengers and passengers travelling to third countries .
This fact could lead to abuses which would be unacceptable to the Commission and Member States .
Mr President , I would very briefly like to thank the interpreters for going beyond the maximum time limit and for bearing with me earlier when I forced them to rush during the reading of my speech .
I would also like to thank the draftsmen and remind them that I have only tabled two amendments for tomorrow .
If these two amendments go through - and I also say this to the Commissioner - we will solve a lot of the sector 's problems .
The first amendment concerns the possibility of making purchases already at the points of sale of boarding , something that according to our verifications I do not believe is contrary to Community rules ; the second amendment is to use regional funds .
I repeat , if these two amendments go through , we will be solving most of the sector 's problems .
Thank you for those concluding remarks .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 11.00 a.m.
( The sitting was suspended at 8.15 p.m. and resumed at 9.00 p.m. )

Recognition of professional qualifications
The next item is the report ( A4-0232 / 98 ) by Mrs Fontaine , on behalf of the Committee on Legal Affairs and Citizens ' Rights , on the proposal for a European Parliament and Council Directive amending Directives 89 / 48 / EEC and 92 / 51 / EEC on the general system for the recognition of professional qualifications and supplementing Directives 77 / 452 / EEC , 77 / 453 / EEC , 78 / 686 / EEC , 78 / 687 / EEC , 78 / 1026 / EEC , 78 / 1027 / EEC , 80 / 154 / EEC , 80 / 155 / EEC , 85 / 384 / EEC , 85 / 432 / EEC , 85 / 433 / EEC and 93 / 16 / EEC concerning the professions of nurse responsible for general care , dental practitioner , veterinary surgeon , midwife , architect , pharmacist and doctor ( COM ( 97 ) 0638 - C4-0657 / 97-97 / 0345 ( COD ) ) .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , we approve the Commission 's underlying principle in presenting us with this proposal for a directive on the recognition of qualifications , that is , the consideration of three distinct elements : firstly , to take account of the initial lessons to be drawn from experience and , in this respect , I would like to point out that our European Parliament had very carefully studied the Commission 's first report in April 1997 ; secondly , to take account of the SLIM initiative aimed at rationalization ; and , finally and obviously , to take account of the development of the case-law of the Court of Justice .
On this basis , the Commission proposes some measures which will , undoubtedly , make it easier to grant recognition of qualifications , by incorporating , in particular , the principle established by the Court of Justice in the Vlassopoulou judgement which puts a value on professional experience .
I would remind you , ladies and gentlemen , that our European Parliament had frequently argued this point and we are absolutely delighted that the Commission has listened to our demand and has respected the commitments it had formulated in this connection .
Our wish to have the powers of the group of coordinators strengthened and extended has also been heard .
Our Committee on Legal Affairs and Citizens ' Rights was able to talk to the group of coordinators and question them . We noted that they were putting together key items in the provisions for the practical application of the system of recognition of qualifications .
As we are now dealing with horizontal modifications of sectoral directives , we are delighted that the Commission is tackling the problem of Community nationals who have had training outside the European Union .
This is a very delicate matter , which has been frequently raised and which often continues to be raised by our citizens .
Of course , the Commission is still taking a very timid approach since all that is happening is that the qualifications in question are only being taken into account , rather than being recognized . Nevertheless , we consider this to be progress and we welcome it as such .
The specific amendments of sectoral directives do not require any particular comment from our Committee on Legal Affairs .
I would simply like to say that , in this context , we thought it important to point out the need to find an appropriate solution for Irish architects whose training could not be recognized in time for that to be possible .
I think it is worth saying that such recognition could not go beyond the specific problem raised , and we would like to hear what the Commission has to say on this point .
Finally , we have no objection to the reform of the advisory committees , which would make them less cumbersome and more flexible , inasmuch as - and I would like to stress this point - these committees will be required to operate with maximum efficiency and transparency , and we are making a number of proposals to this end .
Please allow me , Madam President , to finish with a much broader observation .
Today , our three institutions feel the urgent need to bring the citizens of Europe closer . I am tempted to add that we say this every time .
Moreover , we are not forgetting that the people of Europe face two very important stages in the months ahead : ratification of the Amsterdam Treaty in those countries where this has not yet happened , and , of course , the elections to the European Parliament next June .
What better way could there be of achieving this aim of getting closer to our citizens than to make it practically possible for citizens to carry out their profession without hindrance outside of their own national borders ?
However , we have to recognize that we are not there yet .
Our Committee on Petitions could , moreover , bear witness to this as it receives a constant stream of complaints on this subject and we know that most of the complaints involve the refusal to grant recognition .
Commissioner , we know that the Commission is very aware of this , but more than being aware of it , we must act and remove the last obstacles which remain .
To date , we have received no formal assurance from the Commission that the revision of the system will take place , as expected in 1999 , following a substantial evaluation of its implementation .
That is why we are sending you a very strong signal via the amendments from the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs which our Committee on Legal Affairs has taken up .
Commissioner , can you give us an assurance that there will be a new directive in 1999 , and that this directive will go as far as possible in the right direction ?
The European Parliament and the citizens of Europe are waiting for an encouraging reply from you and I would like to thank you in advance .
Madam President , there is no doubt a great need for mutual recognition of professional qualifications throughout the EU Member States .
We have heard of cases in which a well-qualified professional person from one Member State is denied a job or compelled to accept a lower salary in another Member State because his or her qualifications are not recognized as equivalent .
Mrs Fontaine 's report will extend freedom of movement in actual practice , allowing workers greater mobility and ensuring greater transparency in legislation .
Experience and qualifications meeting minimum standards gained in one Member State should contribute towards the experience required in another Member State .
To ensure equality throughout the Union , if Member States require professionals to undergo further tests , they should firstly inform the Commission .
This proposal is not only a welcome move towards transparency in decision-making we should also see it as a move against unfair discrimination and even xenophobia .
Xenophobia and racism are already prevalent throughout the Union .
Especially with the onset of enlargement , my fear is that it will increase dramatically unless we can set in place measures which bring about fairness in recognition of qualifications .
This proposal of Mrs Fontaine will give well-qualified migrant workers from countries outside the EU who have worked in one Member State the right to transfer their skills and expertise across the Union .
I therefore propose that a certificate of equivalence be issued by the host state to ensure that these workers from third countries gain equal - no more , no less - rights to their counterparts in other EU states .
I urge Parliament to support the Fontaine report .
Madam President , I would like to congratulate Mrs Fontaine on her excellent report .
She has a very distinguished history in dealing with these issues .
I have to confess to a certain national relief that Mrs Fontaine has accepted the amendments relating to the rather unique position of the Irish architects .
I am most grateful for that .
This has been a difficulty in my own country for as long as I have been in Parliament .
As both previous speakers have said , the Committee on Petitions receives more petitions from people who are experiencing discrimination in relation to the recognition of their professional qualifications than for any other single issue affecting our citizens .
To give you a bit of history , you may recall that the first directive on architects came at the end of 18 years of trying to decide what an architect was .
The architects ' directive became the first under the Fontainebleau Agreement to say finally : Let us get out of the deep water and recognize certain basic qualifications .
At the beginning this was not noticed and in many cases with the first attempt to draft some kind of recognisable harmonization of qualifications , the vast majority of professionals in all areas of life in our countries were simply unaware of the need to feed into that process and to take care of their best interests .
That is the reason why there is this anomaly in Ireland which Mrs Fontaine has very generously agreed to accept as an amendment to her report .
I look forward to hearing whether Mr Pinheiro is going to accept the amendment .
This significant group containing some of our most eminent architects will receive this recognition .
The practical aspect of it is that without this kind of recognition they are unable to tender for contracts outside their own country .
Madam President , our Vice-President , Mrs Fontaine , has produced an exceptional report as always .
The Committee on Legal Affairs , as Mrs Banotti has commented , has adopted a very clear position on the matter , and at the meeting of 23 April it examined the proposal and approved it unanimously .
The directive brings the whole Community system for recognizing qualifications up to date and gives concrete expression to its undertaking to simplify the up-dating of qualification lists .
To recount the events that support this measure : the Commission has submitted a report on current progress in the implementation of the general system for the recognition of higher-education diplomas ; there have been developments in the case-law of the Court of Justice , which has given several preliminary rulings ; and the Commission has sent the Council and Parliament its communication on the SLIM initiative .
The result of all this is a proposal to amend at least 14 directives , a number of which have certain problems in common , and it is thus possible to identify them and examine them much more systematically .
Experience shows that this formula guarantees a sufficient degree of legal certainty and fully respects the principles of subsidiarity and proportionality .
The contents of this proposal will incorporate the principle of case-law whereby , on receiving an application for the recognition of a qualification , the host Member State must take into consideration the experience acquired by the interested party since that qualification was obtained .
Directive 89 / 48 must also introduce the concept of regulated education and training . The aim of this is to oblige the host state to take account of any education or training received by the emigrant even if the Member State of origin or the home Member State has no corresponding regulation of the profession to which such training relates .
This new provision will make it possible to prevent the host state from demanding years of professional experience .
Three explanations should be made regarding the Committee on Legal Affairs ' interpretation of these amendments .
The first is the amendment of the 1989 and 1992 directives relating to the general system .
From now on , the host Member States must recognize a citizen 's even where training , as I mentioned , the Member State does have any corresponding regulation .
The second is the horizontal amendment of the directives .
The third is the specific amendments to the sectoral directives , implementing specific amendments and adjustments , and updating lists of diplomas , certificates and other qualifications .
In my opinion , the directive has advantages : it incorporates into the general system the obligation , which - as I have already said - is established in case-law , whereby experience gained after obtaining a qualification is taken into consideration when considering the application for recognition , and it introduces , too , the concept of regulated education and training .
By way of conclusion , it may be said that this directive responds to the need to enable citizens of the Union to work where they like by recognizing their higher education and professional training qualifications .
In short , the aim is to ensure that no citizen of the Union is ever again confronted with same old problem , and to create genuine freedom of movement through this directive .
These , Madam President , are the objectives .
Will it all work in practice ?
Obviously the directive is a very important step in that direction , and it is logical that we , the Members of the European Parliament , should place very significant emphasis on it .
Madam President , I agree with the previous speakers that Mrs Fontaine has produced an excellent report .
It is an important plank in the free movement of workers which is a basic right in the Treaty of Rome .
If qualifications are not recognized by other Member States , then mobility is extremely difficult for workers to achieve .
Sadly , problems still occur in this area and most MEPs receive case work on this subject .
Therefore , the directive is welcome as it addresses an important problem .
There are two main thrusts to the report .
Firstly , it applies to two general directives on higher education diplomas and on professional education and training .
The second area relates to specific professions such as nurses , veterinary surgeons , midwives , architects , pharmacists and doctors .
In particular , the report seeks to set out clearly the provisions for Member States being allowed to apply aptitude tests .
Although we see the sense of aptitude tests , sometimes Member States have used them to distort the true purpose of the directives .
I reiterate the points made by Mary Banotti .
I too have had correspondence on the specific problems of architects .
I trust these have been successfully resolved .
I can only stress that in my view the free movement of workers is essential for the proper operation of the Treaty of Rome .
I commend this report .
Madam President , I should also like to thank Mrs Fontaine for a very excellent report and also my colleague Mrs Berger who took on board several amendments regarding the architects .
As you know , in the original directive of 1985 on the recognition of architects ' qualifications , certain Member States did not get derogations for what is known as an established right to practice .
These architects were seen by the competent authorities in their Member States as having sufficient acquired experience and ability to be allowed to practice as de facto architects .
This was despite their not having the exact qualifications laid down elsewhere in the directive .
Unfortunately , while countries like Germany , the Netherlands and the UK received the derogations , Ireland did not .
The result was huge discrimination and a large group of practising Irish architects of great ability and experience failed to get their status recognized elsewhere in the Community .
This situation continues to this very day .
The amendments we tabled and which have been taken on board by the Committee on Legal Affairs and Citizens ' Rights will hopefully help to bring about the free movement of workers , as Ms Oddy mentioned , and these people will be able to practice anywhere in the Community .
I hope I will be able to report back to these architects that the result of what we are doing here today in conjunction with the Council will contribute to the ongoing completion of the single market .
It is up to Member States to recognize these workers ' rights to fair treatment and I hope that Member States and the Commission - especially Commissioner Monti , who has been rather intransigent on this whole issue and I hope the message can be taken back to him - can agree that those countries that did not apply for the 1985 derogation should have the right to do so now .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I too wish to express my very warm thanks to Mrs Fontaine for paying special attention in her report to the outstanding proposals regarding the directive on architectural qualifications .
Parliament only recently had occasion to formulate some of these proposals when it considered a report specifically about the architects ' directive which I had the honour of drafting . Thanks to Mrs Fontaine 's report , these proposals may now be implemented .
This applies in particular to Amendment No 14 , which has already been mentioned several times today .
Its aim - and like Mrs Fontaine I wish to stress that this is its only aim - is to give a small group of Irish architects a fresh chance to have their qualifications and attestations of competence recognized , something they were inadvertently deprived of when the directive was implemented in Ireland .
The architects ' directive has a number of peculiarities that set it apart from the other directives , which is why we also wish to keep this as a separate directive .
However , these peculiarities in no way justify the fact that the advisory committee established under the architects ' directive is to be excluded from the proposed reform of all the advisory committees .
Just as with all the other directives , a reduction in the number of members on this committee and more effective procedures would also help to improve its workings under the architects ' directive .
I would also like to emphasize that a solution to the problem of recognizing educational qualifications gained in third countries is also of great importance in the architectural world .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , first of all I would like to thank Parliament for the interest which it has shown in this proposal and for the important work carried out by the Committee on Culture , Youth , Education and the Media , the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs and the Committee on Legal Affairs and Citizens ' Rights , as well as the rapporteur .
I would like to thank Mrs Fontaine in particular ; she has provided an excellent summary of all the proposals , reports and amendments which have been tabled .
The Commission is delighted to see that the substance of its proposal has been well received .
The main aim of the Commission 's proposal , in accordance with the recommendations of the team on recognition of qualifications , is to simplify the updating of the list of qualifications appearing in the sectoral directives , as part of the SLIM initiative : nurses , dental practitioners , veterinary surgeons , midwives , pharmacists and doctors .
This new proposal has been seized upon as an opportunity to implement other recommendations which appear either in the Commission 's report on the general system for the recognition of professional qualifications , or in the Commission 's report on specific training in general medical practice .
It is , therefore , in this context that the amendments tabled by your Parliament should be considered .
In this respect , we unfortunately have to note that the majority of amendments would , if accepted , impede the efforts aimed at simplifying laws and administration , since they are likely to impose new procedures which would sometimes be very onerous on Member States and / or on the Commission .
Examples of this are Amendments Nos 1 , 4 , 6 to 9 and 11 , which seek to oblige Member States to inform the Commission of their intention to introduce compensation measures for each professional sector involved .
It is also true of Amendments Nos 5 and 10 , since they tend to afford a great deal of publicity to the deliberations of the Coordinators Group .
It is further true of Amendment No 12 , which extends the system for updating the list of qualifications proposed by the Commission , and delays its application .
Amendments Nos 3 and 13 aim to establish automatic recognition of training obtained in a third country , where these have already been recognized by the first host state within the EU .
On this subject , the Commission wishes to reiterate its position expressed during the consideration of the proposal for a directive aimed at inserting comitology rules into Directive 1100 .
This is a matter which will be studied further , after the publication of the report which the Commission will present in 1999 on the general system for the recognition of professional qualifications .
The Commission therefore believes that the proposal contained in Amendments Nos 3 and 13 is premature .
As regards Amendments Nos 2 and 14 concerning the architects ' directive , the Commission carefully notes the invitation extended to it via Amendment No 2 to give some thought to the desirability of including in the architects ' directive the formula to simplify the updating of the lists of qualifications . We will consider this matter .
As to the message contained in Amendment No 14 , which aims to regularize the situation of some architects , the Commission would like to point out that your Parliament rejected a similar proposal when considering the report on the architects ' directive on 26 March last .
On that occasion , Parliament suggested that Article 7 of the Directive already offered an adequate opportunity .
Amendments Nos 15 to 21 , in the field of general medical practice , will also be looked at in the context of the Commission 's report on the system of recognition for professional qualifications , to be presented , as I have said , next year .
In conclusion , Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , the Commission cannot support the amendments which contradict the legal and administrative simplification sought by the SLIM initiative , or which are contrary to the letter and spirit of current directives .
It notes the messages contained in other amendments , and will present the result of its deliberations as and when appropriate .
Thank you very much , Commissioner Pinheiro .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 11.00 a.m.
Citizenship of the Union
The next item is the report ( A4-0205 / 98 ) by Mr De Clercq , on behalf of the Committee on Legal Affairs and Citizens ' Rights , on the second report from the Commission on citizenship of the Union ( COM ( 97 ) 0230 - C4-0291 / 97 ) .
Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , what is the state of the citizenship of the European Union ?
This is the question concerning us in this debate .
A number of rights to which European citizens can lay claim have been incorporated into the Maastricht Treaty under Article 8 .
Union citizens comprise all those possessing the nationality of one of the Member States .
Fortunately , the Amsterdam Treaty specifies that Union citizenship is complementary to national citizenship .
The implementation of rights associated with European citizenship has accomplished much , though there is still room for improvement .
Allow me to put forward some key points .
As far as the right of persons to move and reside freely in the whole of the European Union is concerned , we are certainly dealing with a right which is possibly the most concrete for citizens .
It is , therefore , unfortunate that these same citizens still experience so many difficulties .
The main cause lies in the fact that this right is regulated through different clauses , depending on the category of citizens .
We would , therefore , call on the Commission to convert all existing legislative instruments to an easy and generally effective instrument .
Free movement and residence in the Union will not come about until the last barriers are lifted , including : the abolition of all border controls and the comprehensive acceptance of the Schengen acquis ; education systems which are geared to each other , aimed at the mobility of employees with children of school-age ; a simplified recognition of all diplomas and professional qualifications , in particular for young people ; the tracking down of unfair administration practices which are practised by national governments to hinder the policy right ; and the protection of rights relating to supplementary pensions . There is much to be done .
Another important point is the direct functioning of Article 8a .
This would mean that each citizen would be able to petition their right to free residence and movement in front of any national judge in the Union .
As far as the active and passive right to vote in local elections is concerned , I will be brief and to the point .
This means that the right to vote in local elections should be introduced for all EU citizens by all Member States , including Belgium .
France has done so already .
In terms of the active and passive right to vote in the European elections , the implementation of the directive by all Member States should be simpler and more uniform .
EU citizens often are not aware of how they can exercise this right in the Member State in which they reside .
Better information is , therefore , required .
As far as consular and diplomatic protection is concerned , we are only just at the initial stage .
A common definition must urgently be sought , so that the European citizens realize that this produces added value outside the Union as well .
As far as the right to petition and the right to apply to the ombudsman is concerned , the first annual report by our European ombudsman shows how these rights are useful and necessary , even if their exact scope is still unknown .
Here , too , better information is required .
In conclusion , I would say that the Amsterdam Treaty has added something , namely , the right to apply to any European institution in one of the official languages of the Union and the right to reply in this language .
However , this has not yet been implemented and can , therefore , not be evaluated today .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , the introduction of European citizenship underlines that European integration is also a political project .
The rights associated with this must certainly make an essential contribution to a greater European awareness in the same way the plans relating to jobs , and recently the euro , have undoubtedly brought Europe closer to the citizen
Our task is to make this permanent and to show the citizens that Europe offers added value , and is there for them .
This is not only done by legislating for a number of citizenship rights through a Treaty .
It is just as important for these rights to become known and for them to have sufficient content and not least their practical implementation is of fundamental importance .
Free movement , the right to free residence , the right to vote , the right to apply to an ombudsman belong , of course , not just to the European Union .
They belong to any self-respecting democratic constitutional state .
Whatever its importance , it is not sufficient to involve the citizen closer in Europe .
More attention paid to European symbols or to our shared history will certainly help us , but we are in urgent need of restoring the confidence of the citizen in Europe .
This requires a change of mentality amongst not only the citizens , but first and foremost among the European decision-makers , the administration and the media .
The Europe of the citizen begins with those who are concerned every day with European matters .
They must prove their solidarity with Europe .
The European Parliament has a large role to play in this .
Parliament is one of the main players and we help to determine the strategy .
As European representatives we must ensure that the citizen is involved as much as possible in this game , that the game is an attractive one and , in particular , that we ourselves adhere strictly to the rules .
In short , we must set a good example in Europe .
Good examples always come from the top .
Madam President , Commissioner , anyone who has ever worked on the European Parliament 's Committee on Petitions knows how much trust citizens ' petitions express in the institutions of the Union .
For that reason , citizenship of the Union has to be strengthened , developed and made a separate issue if we want to reduce the present democratic deficit in the Union .
The Commission 's report formed a good basis for Parliament 's opinion , because it openly addressed the evident shortcomings and weaknesses in the current legal position and practice .
I do not need to repeat the details , so I shall restrict myself to those areas where we need to go beyond the Commission 's observations .
We need to surmount the limited and sectorally circumscribed applicability of the article on freedom of movement , Article 8a .
At the very least , the right to invoke freedom of movement in national courts should be upheld , as called for by the rapporteur .
The most effective way of doing this would be for a charter of fundamental rights to be included in the EU Treaty , which would define citizens of the Union as those entitled to the rights contained in it .
Access to citizenship of the Union should not depend solely on nationality but should also be open to nationals of third countries after five years ' residence in the Union .
Moreover , it is a matter of the utmost urgency , in view of the forthcoming elections in 1999 , that the obstacles to exercising the right to vote in European Union elections which still exist in some Member States , and which are generally of a simply administrative nature , should be eliminated .
We are delighted that France 's National Assembly has just removed an important obstacle .
This is exactly the kind of thing that will make citizens of the Union feel that we are not just talking about their rights , but actually doing something about them .
My thanks go to everyone involved in this work , to the Commission and , above all , to the rapporteur , who has truly led the way here .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , the rapporteur deserves to be congratulated on his thorough and committed work .
I offer these congratulations without any reservations , but at the same time I must admit that I am somewhat envious of Mr De Clercq .
I envy him the auspicious moment at which he is presenting his important report on citizenship of the Union .
The timing could not be better !
With the introduction of the euro , we have laid the last foundation stone for Economic and Monetary Union .
Now we can concentrate on our citizens , on their wishes and dreams .
There is nothing more to stop us going ahead with European political union at full steam .
The De Clercq report points in the right direction , and my group will therefore be voting for it .
We have tabled a few amendments , but they are not at odds with the report .
They are simply intended to amplify certain areas and make some points even more explicit .
I hope that the rapporteur will see it that way , and that he will find this helpful and recommend acceptance of our amendments .
The recitals include various references to encouraging citizens ' European awareness .
What could be more obvious than to demonstrate this awareness with a symbol as delightful as a common European holiday ?
But we must not fool ourselves .
Our citizens will not be satisfied with symbols and fine declarations alone .
They expect citizenship of the Union not just to deliver rights on paper , but also tangible advantages .
Our citizens expect political union in Europe to make their everyday lives easier .
For instance , let us take the example of the citizen 's right to freedom of movement , which we love talking about , but which so far has only progressed in Lilliputian stages .
Our citizens cannot see any more than that .
Freedom of movement is not just a question of pulling down barriers : first and foremost , it is about dismantling bureaucratic obstacles .
The Commission must , therefore , immediately bring forward a legislative proposal to eliminate differences in rights of residence as between Member States and to promote genuine freedom of movement for the Union 's citizens .
In particular , we need to remove obstacles to mobility for young people and to make it easier for them settle wherever they wish .
We therefore need simple , easily comprehensible and unbureaucratic means of recognizing diplomas and professional qualifications , which we have just been talking about .
That means that school-leaving qualifications , professional qualifications and diplomas should be equally valid in all Member States .
If we adopt this approach in all areas , we can transform citizens ' rights from pieces of paper to a living European reality .
There is a long road ahead of us , and we should never forget one thing : we should be focusing on people and not on profits .
Madam President , it really is reassuring to listen to this report here today .
It is reassuring because the conclusions of the Cardiff European Council are still ringing in our ears , and because we can still hear the echoes of recent statements that people want less from Europe , less integration , declarations that even call for certain policies to be placed back in the hands of the national authorities .
I therefore think it important that the European Parliament is today flying the flag of citizenship in the splendid presentation we have heard from the Chairman of the Committee on Legal Affairs and rapporteur .

It is a balanced report ; balanced between the real world and symbolic values ; balanced between practical measures and the poetry , which Mrs Gebhardt mentioned .
We too need a little imagination and poetry .
Among those practical measures , Mr De Clercq has emphasized the need for the free circulation of persons and choice of country of residence for European citizens to become a reality . Article 8a must also become a reality that can be directly pleaded in our courts of justice .
Publicity must be given to the rights already conferred by this still embryonic European citizenship , such as the right to vote in local elections and the right to vote in European elections . Finally , we must continue to create - and this is where we move from reality to poetry , from reality to the realms of myth - symbols of integration .
We need to make Europe exist as a cultural concept .
The European People 's Party will not only support Mr De Clercq 's report , but also the Socialist group 's amendments and some of those tabled by the European People 's Party , although we have rejected Amendment No 5 .
The fact is , Madam President , that these are bad times for Europe .
Against such scepticism , it may be said - and here I agree with Mrs Gebhardt - that our ally , paradoxically enough , is the market .
Life is full of paradoxes : the Europe of the markets is going to help us to create a real Europe of the citizens , because if the euro is to succeed , if the single market is really going to work , we shall have to shape free circulation in its fullest sense . We shall have to move on to further integration .
And therefore , Madam President , I believe that here today , at the beginning of the Austrian presidency , we must all congratulate ourselves on this European Parliamentary report which , once more , reaffirms its role as the voice of conscience , as a warning , against certain circumstances which today seem to advocate a hard-nosed , short-sighted Europe .
Now , against that hard-nosed , short-sighted Europe , the European Parliament is raising its voice , and that of its citizens , saying that Europe will come into being only through integration , and that , in contrast to the concept of the Europe of the markets , we have to ensure that the reality of the Amsterdam Treaty translates into a genuine citizens ' Europe .
Madam President , I want to congratulate the rapporteur , and I am pleased that Parliament is once again advocating the implementation of the rights enshrined in the Treaty , in the framework of citizenship of the Union .
I would like to suggest that we take a look at the fundamental significance of citizenship of the Union .
What is it all about ?
I firmly believe that it means the Union recognizing nothing less than that our citizens are the driving and sovereign forces of the European unification process .
Citizenship of the Union therefore plays a key part in legitimizing the Union .
And it is not just legitimized indirectly via national governments and treaties , but also directly , personally and immediately , by giving all citizens a legal status .
Citizenship of the Union was , therefore , quite logically introduced in the Treaty on European Union to strengthen the protection of the rights and interests of the nationals of its Member States .
We are , therefore , looking at a statute that covers the fundamental and civil rights of all citizens .
So far , so good , as far as the theory goes .
In practice , however , we are still a very long way from achieving an all-embracing guarantee of fundamental and civil rights , from recognizing the citizen 's sovereign role in integration .
Of the four freedoms , surely the most personal , the most existential , the most human is freedom of movement of persons , the implementation of which has been the most protracted , subject to the greatest reluctance and has had the most obstacles put in its way .
Border checks for individuals have not been abolished .
They have not been eliminated by the Schengen Agreement , but rather replaced by barriers that are sometimes even higher than the old ones we pledged to get rid of .
The right to vote and the right to stand for election to the European Parliament is often undermined , and even more so the right to participate in local elections .
These rights are often sabotaged to some extent , and in some capitals , in Vienna for example , they are limited to taking part in city district elections .
Consular protection is also virtually non-existent in practice .
However , I also believe that we have to look beyond the Treaty texts , and the rights enshrined in the Treaty , to the comprehensive protection of fundamental and civil rights .
I hope that the special summit in Vienna will allow us to progress from mere technocratic institutional reform to genuine democratic reform .
Mr President , I should like to thank the rapporteur for his learned and thoughtful report and commend his European vision .
If we are to ensure that the European Union flourishes , the citizens of Europe must feel that we have ownership of this project and that we benefit too , not just the commercial organizations and governments .
The Commission 's second report on citizenship is therefore an important plank in building a corps d 'esprit and a sense of European belonging .
I particularly welcome the right to vote and stand as a candidate at municipal elections in the European Parliament , although I would flag up the generous voting rights granted to Commonwealth citizens in the UK and urge there is no reorganization of this and no attempt to water down the rights which exist .
As draftsperson on the Commission action plan on free movement of workers , I welcome the remarks of Mr De Clercq on obstacles to the free movement of people , such as pension mobility , family responsibilities and the educational needs of children .
I fear that this is a little adventurous for my British group as yet but I believe the Commission could look at promoting the international baccalaureate .
The creation of the Ombudsman can only be commended but I feel that its office needs greater promotion .
I agree that the key to feelings of closeness with the European Union hinge on information .
I therefore ask the Commission to make even greater efforts to inform the citizens of Europe .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , this evening 's debate is concerned with citizenship of the Union .
We all know what that means and what a key role citizenship of the Union occupies for the citizens of Europe , and above all in European integration .
But I wonder if people in Europe actually know about this ?
Do the very people whose rights are associated with citizenship of the Union know this ?
Do they know to whom they can turn , whom they can ask and where they can obtain information ?
In the course of many conversations with ordinary citizens , I have repeatedly had the feeling that people only have a sketchy idea and precious little knowledge about this .
However , it is not only our citizens who know very little about this .
For example , take a look at the information issued by the European Commission , which often does not deal with certain areas at all .
For instance , we were recently sent a brochure , the Single Market Review , which contains over 38 reports describing how the internal market is being implemented in practice . Yet this brochure contains next to nothing about freedom of movement .
When I see that , I wonder how our citizens are actually supposed to be informed ! Another example : when I mention to officials in the Commission or Parliament or even outside that as a citizen of the Union with a Dutch passport I have a seat in the European Parliament for Germany , I always get asked : how is that allowed ?
Where does it say that ?
How is that possible ? This demonstrates that even the right to vote and to stand for election , to the extent that it must be in the Treaty , is something we have not really grasped .
Nor has it really been grasped by the people who decreed it or by our citizens or by my colleagues . Many of my colleagues have not actually realized this yet either .
I think it is important that we ourselves should take on board citizenship of the Union , with everything that it implies , and give it serious thought .
We will then be better placed to inform people about it , so that people really understand it too .
Madam President , on behalf of the Commission , I am very pleased with Parliament 's detailed examination of our second report on citizenship of the Union and , in particular , I would like to highlight the excellent work of an outstanding European called Willy De Clercq .
I consider this debate on citizenship of the Union as a kind of invitation to all politicians to concentrate on the essentials of the construction of Europe , and a warning regarding the advances and setbacks that are taking place in the construction of Europe , and may detract from our citizens ' sense of ' belonging to a political community under the rule of law ' , to quote the expression used in your resolution .
As Members are aware , this concern was also expressed at the recent Cardiff European Council , where it was declared that all citizens should be able to benefit from the advantages of Economic and Monetary Union and the single market , and that the Union should be brought even closer to ordinary citizens .
This second report on citizenship of the Union covers 1994 , 1995 and 1996 .
It therefore pre-dates the conclusion of the Intergovernmental Conference that led to the adoption of the Amsterdam Treaty .
In this report , the Commission has been at pains to describe and analyse the new rights conferred by the Maastricht Treaty , to investigate what progress has been made since the publication of its first report in 1993 and to indicate a series of objectives to be achieved .
Your motion for a resolution is rightly addressed to all interested institutions , and likewise to Member States .
The fact is that future progress can only be achieved by means of combined action at all levels , particularly in the field of improving legislation by making it more readable and capable of more efficient application .
I can assure Mr Willy de Clercq and this House that as far as Schengen and the application of Article 8a are concerned , the following issues are on the table before the Commission : infringement procedures , administrative practices , the right to vote , consular and diplomatic protection , permanent dialogue mechanisms , education and the recognition of qualifications , protection against threats to individual safety and freedom and trade .
Even today , at the Commissioners ' meeting , the first part of the meeting was , in fact , dedicated to European citizenship .
And we hope that with the impetus provided by this House and input of the kind we have received through this resolution , we can all achieve real citizenship that much earlier .
Thank you very much , Commissioner Pinheiro .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 11.00 a.m.
Safe use of the Internet
The next item is the report ( A4-0234 / 98 ) by Mr Schmid , on behalf of the Committee on Civil Liberties and Internal Affairs , on the Commission proposal for a Council Decision adopting a Multiannual Community Action Plan on promoting safe use of the Internet ( COM ( 97 ) 0582 - C4-0042 / 98-97 / 0377 ( CNS ) ) .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , until a few years ago , the Internet was the preserve of specialists .
Today it is so much a part of everyday living that even we as Members have access to the Internet in our offices .
This is clear proof that miracles can still happen !
The Internet offers great potential - more than ever before in human history - to gain rapid access to a large volume of information .
On the other hand , there is also a certain amount of material on the Internet which is harmful to minors or illegal .
Also , like traditional forms of telecommunication such as the telephone or even the post , it can be used for criminal activities .
The advantages of the Internet largely outweigh its disadvantages .
Nevertheless , action is needed on the problems I have touched upon and we need answers .
But the answer cannot be a stricter yardstick than we apply to other media such as film or television .
Just because there has been a heated debate , especially on the part of people who have never used the Net for a single second , it does not mean that we should treat it differently from other media .
The response should , therefore , reflect the specific characteristics of the Net rather than stipulate stricter standards .
What is special about the Internet ?
First of all , it does not belong to anyone .
No-one is the overall owner of the Internet .
I always say that it is really a fundamentally communist structure .
Second , the Net is global and , therefore , accessible worldwide .
Third , legal action against criminal content is in accordance with the criminal law of the country where computer on which the data is stored is located .
Fourth , material can be transferred from one computer to another easily and quickly , in just a few seconds .
Fifth , access to the Internet is anonymous .
A computer cannot tell who is sitting on the other side of the screen and it is not limited to certain times .
This has implications for the protection of minors , because on the Internet there is no-one behind the counter or in the ticket office as there is in a cinema or video shop , who can say to a six-year-old ' you cannot come in here ' or ' I am not letting you take out that video ' .
That is the real problem .
The Action Plan that the Commission has now proposed to us claims to guarantee safe use of the Internet .
I believe that it can perhaps help , but 100 % safety is not possible in this case .
Furthermore , this idea promotes the misconception that parents no longer need to worry about bringing up their children , because they can leave the protection of minors to technical systems and filter software .
We should not be encouraging this misconception .
That is why I am in favour of changing the whole concept to ' safer use of the Internet ' .
That would reflect the real world .
In any case , we need to be aware of the limitations of the measures proposed .
Given that the number of commercial pornography providers is growing every day around the world , it would be rather naïve to expect much from self-regulation .
The fact that Members of the House yesterday received an advertisement for pornography in their e-mail - not a very good one , incidentally , and the price was far too high - shows the direction we are heading in .
The embargo on the Dutch XS-4-All server because the journal Radikal was being disseminated on this server shows how far you get with that approach .
Previously , Radikal was only available on that one server .
After the embargo it became available on 53 servers on the Internet , because mirror sites were immediately set up around the globe .
So the embargo approach has its limitations .
Because of the multiplicity of languages in the European Union , it is also doubtful whether the use of word recognition programmes for filtering would really help .
Using image filter programmes also involves blocking all pictorial scientific material and all graphics .
I am certainly in favour of this proposal , let there be no misunderstanding .
I am simply pointing out that it has its limitations and that we have to be aware of these limitations .
Another of these limitations is that in the real world children generally understand more about computers than their parents do .
As regards the idea of installing filter software on PCS , I have put it to journalists like this : filter software is a programme that a 12-year-old can use to prevent his dad accessing porn websites on the Internet , because he has been stopped from watching television .
That is how it really is .
Nevertheless , I am in favour of using filter software ; we simply need to be aware of its limitations .
The proposed action plan is chiefly intended as a tool for combating undesirable content on the Internet , that is to say , pornography , politically extreme sites and so forth .
Because the European Union lacks criminal law and law enforcement powers , the action plan addresses illegal content only in terms of encouraging the preparation of a study on national measures necessary .
In my view , the real problem is not so much illegal content as undesirable content .
It is truly amazing what you can find if you spend just a few hours on the Net and make a specific search ; I was doing that just yesterday while preparing for a press conference .
You can find instructions on making your own bombs , unlocking doors without keys , producing illegal drugs , other terrorist activities , forging credit cards , hacking into computers without permission , and so on ; a whole range of things .
As things stand , combating illegal content is a matter for Member States .
I have no intention of questioning that .
In practice , it is made considerably more difficult by the fact that not even in the European Union are there identical or at least comparable legal standards governing important issues .
Prosecution in the case of child pornography is difficult if the age at which ' child ' stops and ' adult ' begins is defined by differing age limits under different legal systems .
In some Member States it is 14 years , in others it is 16 years .
It is difficult if there is no definition of what illegal pornography is .
It is also difficult if an illegal content is subject to prosecution but a pointer from another Internet site to that content , at the click of a mouse , is not itself subject to prosecution .
It is quite a simple matter then .
It is also difficult if - as is the case today - you can connect a computer to the Net without it being possible to establish who the operator is , and if - as is also possible today - an e-mail can be sent without it being traceable to a particular person , in other words , if servers can be operated anonymously and electronic mail sent anonymously .
We therefore require at least preparatory studies to establish what kind of legislation we need .
I know that there has been some resistance during deliberations in Council .
Home affairs are now the preserve of the nation state , whereas they have lost military policy : NATO does that now .
The only area where there the state has a monopoly on the use of arms is the police .
This is the apple of their eye and is protected accordingly .
I know that there is some resistance to the idea of embarking on such studies , but they are still needed .
The fact is , we can ultimately only solve the problem of illegal content by global agreements .
Global agreements on such things will face the same problems as we have with GATT : if the Community turns up with 15 different opinions , we will not get anywhere !
If the USA , the European Union and Japan all have roughly the same ideas , it will happen relatively quickly .
For that reason , we need to establish common standards , not only because of law enforcement within the European Union , but also because of the need for international agreements .
Without such standards we will not make any further progress on this issue .
I would like to ask the Commissioner to tell me in his summing up what amendments the Commission is willing to accept , because that would help me .
Madam President , the opinion of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and Industrial Policy on this issue , with the amendments it has tabled , aims to promote the development and the adoption of efficient technical systems , the main aim of which , of course , is the protection of minors and human dignity , but also the strengthening of business and financial activity .
It also attempts to improve global cooperation on this issue , in order to ensure the dynamic growth of the Internet industry .
More specifically , regarding the field of implementation of the action plan , and taking account of the possibilities offered by the Internet for financial and business activity , and indirectly in the employment sector , it proposes the adoption of a broader approach . Beyond the issues that affect minors or human dignity , the possibilities offered by the action plan for the protection of financial and business activity will be examined .
The trust of users , both individuals and businesses , of the Internet will create a favourable environment for the growth of business activity in the information society sector .
In this way , the Internet will be , in addition to a secure source of knowledge , a valuable tool for business activity .
The second important issue in the opinion concerns the principles which must govern the actions to get rid of the harmful and illegal material on the Internet .
Briefly , these principles are as follows .
First , we must support industry in the development and adoption of desirable and effective systems to control the content of the Internet .
In addition , cooperation between interested bodies , above all industry , is the determining factor in the successful institution of self-regulatory systems and filtering and rating mechanisms .
The second important condition for the effective control of the content of the Internet is the clear separation of the roles and responsibilities of each element involved in the creation and distribution of that content .
The final point I would like to stress is the demand , due to the transborder nature of the Internet , for substantial cooperation and coordination of the actions of the programme at global level .
Cooperation is the only way to ensure maximum efficiency of the actions undertaken at European level .
For this reason , I think that the European Union must aspire to a leading and active role in the process of instituting principles and technical models that are acceptable at global level .
In finishing , I wish to congratulate Mr Schmid and my coo-draftsmen on their contribution to the issue of the safe use of the Internet , and to thank them for supporting the opinion of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and Industrial Policy .
Madam President , this is not the first time that we have discussed the Internet , nor will it be the last .
Developments are going in the right direction .
Not only here , but everywhere , there is growing awareness of the value of this revolutionary form of free information .
It is the freedom we should safeguard , not the rules .
A year ago we discussed the Pradier report on harmful and illegal content on the Internet .
The demands for regulation from various quarters then were extensive , including the registration of Internet users and a ban on digital encryption .
Many were then unfamiliar with the new and thought that old world thinking should also apply to the new world .
Once upon a time , those who did not see the new age wanted to smash Gutenberg 's printing press .
The Reformation started because they did not succeed .
Through the printing press , citizens were given entirely new ways of obtaining new and much more easily accessible information .
That time it led to a decentralization of power .
Now we are facing the second reformation in that citizens are able to obtain knowledge and information and become more and more independent of authorities and states .
In the long term , this will probably lead to less regulation of the day-to-day lives of individuals and entirely new opportunities for contacts and supply .
However , illegal material on the Internet must be dealt with , but without affecting the basic premise of freedom .
The Commission wants to set up direct lines for the reporting of illegal material on the Internet , to support filtering and classification systems and education and information .
The report complements the Commission 's line by wanting to investigate the legal aspects of harmful and illegal material on the Internet .
These are reasonable proposals , since they take into account the nature of the medium .
Before , there was a preoccupation with developing separate European systems .
However , we should respect the fact that this is about global and international contacts .
It is a global and international medium .
The solutions must , therefore , be international and global .
Internationally workable systems have already been developed and have won acceptance and popularity .
In this context , I would like to thank the rapporteur for having been so accommodating with regard to my amendments in this area .
Finally , I would like to welcome the understanding which has been shown with regard to avoiding compulsory systems .
The market has , of course , a direct interest in self-regulation .
In addition , quality marking could lead to a better market position for Internet service providers who want to make use of it .
It is pleasing that the Commission does not regard it as the task of the authorities to regulate the content and use of the Internet .
However , it is the authorities ' task to combat and suppress criminality wherever it appears , whether it is with the help of the Internet or out on the streets .
Madam President , the explosive development of the Internet is seen by most of us as positive .
However , as we all know , it also has a very dark and unpleasant side .
Through the Internet , everyone , including children and adolescents , can easily find detailed recipes and descriptions of drugs , as well as recipes for explosives , paedophiles can look at child pornography and women can be bought and sold , etcetera .
It is quite clear that we all want to put a stop to this .
The problem with the Internet 's dark side is that it is global and does not recognize any borders .
A complete solution must , therefore , also be global and can only be brought about in cooperation with the industry .
It is something which we all must work towards .
Meanwhile , the Commission 's draft action plan is a beginning which could also effectively contribute to a real international debate and hopefully a solution .
Among the most important points in the action plan are the proposal to work together with the industry for self-regulation and codes of conduct , the development of systems for filtering and classification and a broad information campaign .
Personally , however , I distance myself from all attempts to regulate the Internet problem through directives at EU level .
It is something we have to resolve in a different way and more internationally .
I am , therefore , going to vote against Amendment No 23 .
However , the Green group as a whole is going to support the Schmid report .
Madam President , when we talk of the safe use of the Internet , the notions of free expression and the dissemination of illegal material often travel along a collision course .
By its nature , the Internet is free and unrestricted , and it must be kept so .
The flip side to the coin is always the knowledge that someone is trying to abuse freedoms .
The grossest form of abuse is unarguably the spread of child pornography and paedophile material .
The general availability of this material on the Internet is stunning .
According to a study by Interpol , the result of just two months ' monitoring of the network revealed over 70 000 sights containing images of child pornography .
The number is so large that ethical selfregulation among those active on the Internet will not be enough in itself to restrict it .
It would be wrong to charge Internet server providers with transmitting illegal material .
Although their role as guardians of self-regulation is a crucial one , we can only achieve the results we want through tight cooperation between the authorities responsible for the form and content of the computer technology industry and the Internet .
Because the Internet is a worldwide phenomenon , mere action on the part of Europe will not be sufficient in the struggle against child pornography .
What are needed are global publicity and information systems and standards , by means of which those purposely transmitting porn can be caught .
A good example of official initiative in the fight against child pornography is the tip-off phone and web page set up by the Finnish police , which you can contact to give information on paedophile activity you have found on the network .
When international material has been found , the police propose to tip off , in turn , the authorities in the countries concerned .
Finally , I would like to thank Mr Schmid for some excellent work in tackling this difficult subject on such a large scale .
Madam President , may I begin by congratulating the rapporteur not only on his excellent report but also on his absolutely brilliant speech .
This is a very important subject , which is fundamental to our future as a society that protects both the rights of the individual and industrial development .
But all this should not cause us to forget the fundamental issue that justifies our existence : our decisions must be rooted in the Treaty , the legal basis of our political acts .
My speech , therefore , will concentrate on the proposal put to us by the Committee on Legal Affairs , that the legal basis of the proposal for a decision be changed and that we use Article 129a relating to consumer protection , instead of Article 130 relating to the competitiveness of industry .
Madam President , there is no doubt that Article 130 tells us that measures will be taken to encourage an environment favourable to initiative and to the development of undertakings , and it is true that a better and safer environment will encourage industry .
But it is no less true , Madam President , that it is very difficult to apply the objectives of Article 130 , for example , that of establishing the necessary conditions to make Community industry competitive , to actions intended to warn consumers about the content , be it sex or violence , on the Internet by creating self-regulation systems and setting up filter mechanisms .
Having examined this proposal for a decision , therefore , the Committee on Legal Affairs has decided that the appropriate legal basis is Article 129a , which allows us to take this kind of action to encourage and protect a safe environment for consumers in general terms .
Madam President , I would also mention that this change of legal basis gives this Parliament more of a leading role in the whole of this action , because Article 129a provides for the codecision procedure , whereas Article 130 ( 2 ) merely provides for consultation .
And I think it is essential that on such a socially relevant and indeed burning issue this House should have a loud and strong voice , and not merely a consultative role .
Therefore , Madam President , I believe this is a subject that concerns all of us . The Treaty gives us a clear basis to participate with the Council on an equal footing , and we should try to see that this change of legal basis is reflected in the proposal .
Madam President , I would first like to speak as the rapporteur for the document ' Initiative for international coordination of the Internet ' in the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and Industrial Policy .
I agree with the European Commission 's communication on the action plan for the safe use of the Internet , but I am not convinced that all the amendments which the rapporteur suggested making to the Commission 's text are appropriate .
Just this Monday , at the invitation of the European Commission , I participated in a panel discussion with the leaders of this world industry and a consensus was reached on three points Firstly , we must avoid setting up complicated rules that create conflicts between states and that are difficult to enforce , but we must also take a political initiative so that the courts do not have to issue rulings and set legal precedents . Secondly , we must promote a legislative framework which allows the Internet to develop , imposing self-discipline within the industry , together with involvement by the political authorities and the competent international organizations in a form of structured dialogue similar to the successful Transatlantic business dialogue .
And finally , we must try to achieve an international consensus on a multilateral basis that includes , therefore , not only the United States and Europe but many other countries , in as global a context as possible .
While it might be obvious that there are areas where new codes must be written , for example , electronic signature specifically for use on the Internet , it is not obvious that new crimes will be committed on the Internet that have not already been invented and provided for in law .
Rather , the Internet is an extraordinary means of communication that enables each individual to become a publisher , gives companies an instrument for the globalization of electronic trade and - I emphasize - makes it possible , if necessary , to trace all too well the origin and destination of transactions .
I personally believe that we are faced with a young child that is taking its first steps and that we must help it grow in a favourable legislative context .


I have problems with certain amendments , Amendments Nos 6 and 12 , on the authorities responsible for the content of the Internet , and Amendment No 7 , on the responsibility of the distributors , but I am sure that we will come back to this debate with other thoughts and experiences .
The Commission wishes to thank the rapporteur Mr Schmid and the Committee on Civil Liberties and Internal Affairs for a very positive report .
The Internet is growing at a rapid pace and is no longer just used by scientists and researchers .
Now it is part of everyday life in offices , homes and schools .
It has proven to be extremely useful and important for business , education and culture .
The vast majority of content poses absolutely no problem .
However , the Internet can be used for illegal activities and distribution of illegal contents .
Parents and teachers are concerned at the availability of content which could be harmful for children .
If the consumers and industry of Europe are to take full advantage of the opportunities offered by the information society , these issues must be addressed .
Over the last year the Commission has worked hard with the Council , the European Parliament , Member States , industry and users to propose solutions .
The action plan is the result of the response received when the Commission first addressed the problem and it has been developed in coordination with the Council recommendation on the protection of minors and human dignity .
The present action plan takes a non-regulatory approach , involves industry and proposes concrete measures to deal with the problems .
It implements a political consensus and ensures the follow-up of actions already undertaken at EU level and in Member States .
This approach has received strong support from the Bonn Conference , the Internet working party and the Council and European Parliament .
The action plan has four action lines : first , creating a safe environment , including the creation of a European network of hotlines and support for self-regulation ; second , developing , filtering and rating systems taking account of Europe 's cultural and linguistic diversity ; third , encouraging awareness actions ; fourth , support measures .
Each of the action lines aims at reaching certain main objectives : to empower the user to protect himself and his family from undesirable harmful material ; to strengthen reporting mechanisms for illegal material to be dealt with by existing legislation ; to ensure that the specific multicultural and multilingual needs of Europe are addressed adequately ; and to build trust in the new environment so that the consumer can benefit from the new services and so that industry can use the opportunities of electronic media .
The action plan is not the only means for achieving these objectives .
It is a financial instrument that stimulates initiatives that must be addressed by Member States , the industry and users .
It is not a legal instrument for solving the various legal issues connected with the Internet .
However , many of the problems in the new environment do not call for new legislation .
They calls for approaches where existing legislation can be applied to the Internet and how to provide sufficient solutions without legislation .
Therefore , care has been taken to focus on the non-regulatory measures in this action plan .
Concerning the amendments , the Commission is able to support most amendments tabled by Parliament .
In fact , 20 of 24 amendments tabled are wholly acceptable to the Commission .
Regarding Amendment No 14 on comitology , I must point out that the Commission intends to use the exact wording of the 1987 Council decision on type 1 committees .
There are , however , three amendments - Nos 7 , 12 and 17 - which cannot be accepted .
Two of them deal with legal issues and , in particular , liability .
These certainly need to be addressed but the action plan , being a financial instrument , is not the place to do it .
The Commission is , however , working on a legal instrument , a proposal for a directive , to deal with this subject .
The third amendment proposes the inclusion of labelling systems in industrial codes of conduct .
The need to adopt labelling systems is already stated in the recommendations on protection of minors and human dignity .
We can expect codes of conduct to be developed along the lines suggested in this report .
I can assure you that if a separate European labelling system is needed , the action plan will certainly promote such a system .
Nevertheless , if flexible international systems can be adapted and this proves to be convenient , there will be no need for a separate European system which could be a waste of money .
However , there is no reason to believe that the concerns reflected in the suggested amendment are not already covered by the proposal .
I again thank Parliament for its work and its response so far .
In line with this , now is the time to follow up on the initiatives of the European Union institutions .
Parliament has already recognized the importance of dealing with these issues and I hope its decision will confirm the need for action by giving the action plan the full support needed to have a substantial effect .
Thank you very much , Commissioner .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 11.00 a.m.
Combined goods transport
The next item is the recommendation for second reading ( A4-0239 / 98 ) , on behalf of the Committee on Transport and Tourism , on the common position adopted by the Council with a view to adopting a Council Regulation concerning the granting of Community financial assistance for actions of an innovative nature to promote combined transport ( C4-0173 / 98-96 / 0207 ( SYN ) ) ( Rapporteur : Mr Ulrich Stockmann ) .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , you have just heard the full title of the regulation .
Intermodality is the key concept of present and future European transport policy .
It aims to create an overall transport system .
By linking together various means of transport to create door-to-door transport chains , the advantages of each one are put to good use .
Combined transport , which we are debating here today , is a tried and tested forerunner of intermodal goods transport .
Combined transport has long been a keynote of our speeches , speeches by politicians concerned with transport , so that the rhetoric has far outstripped the reality .
However , last year 's statistics may mark a change in the trend here .
In addition to possible regulatory measures , at European level we have had the pilot actions for combined transport , PACT , since 1992 .
Following the success of the first programme , which expired in 1996 , we have been working on PACT II since last year .
The combination of the regulation and the increased , although still far from adequate , budget should now result in a proper programme , by which I mean one with a legal basis .
The fact that we have not reached the second reading of the regulation until today very much reflects the birth pangs of the regulation , during which the Council showed itself to be a poor midwife .
Regarding the content of the regulation , we in the Committee on Transport and Tourism welcome the partial agreement of the Commission and the Council , particularly the inclusion of inland waterways and the reference to trans-European networks as a criterion for project selection .
On the other hand , we consider the rejection , in the Council 's common position , of some of the amendments which we originally tabled at first reading to be short-sighted , given that we need a strategic , and as I see it , forward-looking transport policy .
The Committee on Transport has , therefore , confirmed the need for Amendments Nos 1 to 6 before us today .
So what do we consider important here ?
Firstly , just as this has now become feasible for certain other programmes , we want PACT to be extended to candidate countries with which negotiations have already started , with a corresponding additional budget of ECU 4 million for the years 2000 and 2001 .
A far higher level of funding for infrastructural measures for the central and eastern European countries was envisaged in Agenda 2000 for this period .
We would like to see a small part of this earmarked now for combined transport .
We are already witnessing an excessive increase in goods transport from the candidate countries .
There is also a marked trend towards shifting goods from rail to road .
This trend is generally irrevocable if it is not resisted early enough ; we can tell you a thing or two about that in Germany 's new Länder .
We cannot just stand by and watch changes like this .
That is why we are calling for a strategic policy to be formulated at this point , and not a reactive policy that could cost us much more in ten years ' time .
Our second main concern is to establish synergies .
A good programme can always be made better if it both aims at synergies with other programmes and it supports other policy objectives .
We still believe that synergies with the PHARE programme and projects under the Cohesion Fund should be possible .
We consider that priority should be given to PACT projects in the catchment areas of freight freeways , which are politically desirable even if they are still hard to implement .
Synergistic effects could also be achieved with activities planned under the Fifth Framework Programme on Research .
This is the aim of a further amendment we have tabled .
At this point I would like to say a few words about Mr Jarzembowski 's amendment , even though he is not here today .
We have certainly not made things easy for ourselves with the reference to preventing competition , which initially sounds plausible or even self-evident .
However , we finally decided to reject the amendment because we believe that any support programme inevitably implies positive discrimination , in this case away from transporting goods exclusively by road and towards combined transport , and also in favour of regions and competitors who give priority to combined transport .
I would like to thank all my colleagues , including those who are absent today , who played a part in this report and I urge you to adopt it tomorrow .
Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I would firstly like to thank the rapporteur very sincerely for the excellent work he has done and to congratulate him on it .
The Commission 's proposal on support for combined transport takes account of the fact that the European Union needs a reliable trans-European transport system to guarantee efficient trade and also mobility .
I therefore deeply regret that the Council has only accepted a small number of Parliament 's proposals .
This would be a perfect opportunity to act instead of just talking for once .
As I have already said , I think it is a matter for regret that in its common position the Council has not seen fit also to give priority to projects which create links with the central and eastern European countries and thus achieve synergies .
Likewise , in selecting projects the Commission should try to strike a balance between regions and Member States , so as to avoid distortions in competition .
Parliament accepted this point at first reading and it has now been confirmed in the amendment tabled by Mr Jarzembowski on behalf of the Group of the European People 's Party .
I urge the House to support this amendment too .
I would also like to mention that it is essential to integrate trans-European ' rail freight freeways ' for the sake of environmentally sound development and to utilize trans-European transport networks .
I see these freeways as a particularly important and innovatory aspect of the transport policy .
Regrettable is not a strong enough word for the budget , which the Council has set at just ECU 35 million .
Appropriations of at least ECU 43 million are required for the period from 1997 to 2001 , if , as has already been said , we want action and not just words .
A budget of this level should therefore be approved , even if I still think this is only a drop in the ocean .
I believe it is vital to develop the European Union 's transport system , particularly in view of enlargement and the everincreasing significance of environmental issues .
I therefore support the amendments tabled , as do all the Members of my group , and I hope that they will also enjoy the support of the House .
Thank you very much , Madam President , particularly for giving me an opportunity not only to congratulate the rapporteur , but also to say that he is an excellent role model for people willing to retrain from being theologians or musicians to real technicians and politicians !
Let me now change over into my own language and say something on the report itself .
In my opinion , we have here a typical example of how the Council could have shown for once through deeds , rather than just through words , how we , in this Parliament , as a body support the idea of a general shift from road to railways and inland waterways .
We are once again here compelled to accept that we will have a major collapse in traffic before long if we do nothing .
The responsibility for this lies with the Council and the Commission , not with Parliament .
Madam President , let me first of all thank the rapporteur , Mr Stockmann and the House for the work on the proposals to continue our successful experience of pilot actions for combined transport , PACT .
It is a clear demonstration of Parliament 's continuing commitment to promoting combined transport .
While we appreciate the constructive attitude of Parliament in this dossier , I am sorry to say that the Commission will only be able to accept two of the amendments , although this should not detract from the broad agreement that exists between Parliament , Council and the Commission .
Amendments Nos 1 and 4 seek to introduce , as Parliament proposed in the first reading and the Commission agreed , the notion of the trans-European rail freight freeways into the regulations .
Since the rail freight freeways are an important Commission initiative , I can continue to support their inclusion as an evaluation criterion in the PACT regulation .
The freeways are a significant step towards the true liberalization of the rail market .
I can assure the House that both the Commission and the Member States will give high priority in the selection of procedures to any project that wants to make use of the freeways .
Amendments Nos 2 , 3 , 5 and 6 seek to reintroduce the possibility of funding actions outside the European Union and of allowing non-EC companies to be beneficiaries of PACT funding .
The Commission is quite aware that combined transport policy cannot stop at the EC borders .
Traffic flows and the opportunities for inter-modal transport are too important with our eastern neighbours .
Therefore , the Commission proposal originally foresaw this possibility .
However , discussions on this point in the Council have clearly shown that the regulation as such would not have a chance of being accepted by Council if the Commission insisted on this point .
Member States agree that the Community must help the candidate countries in their endeavours for a sustainable transport system .
Many Member States thought that other instruments , for instance within the PHARE programme , should be used or further developed to assist combining transport services .
The Commission will , therefore , examine whether the current programmes can be used for PACT-like projects for inter-modal transport in the candidate countries .
In the same vein , the Commission cannot accept the topping up to ECU 43 million because this sum conflicts with the financial perspectives of the Community for PACT .
Moreover , certain aspects of Amendments Nos 3 and 5 cannot be accepted ; neither can we accept Amendment No 7 .
On the one hand , synergies with other funding programmes will be ensured through the necessary inter-service consultation within the Commission .
On the other hand , the Commission continues to believe that the selection criteria , in simple terms , improvement of competitiveness , of combined transport through innovation are clear and limited in the interests of transparency .
Other priorities or considerations could , we believe , only muddy the waters .
Even if I am not able to convince Parliament of the Commission 's position in all respects , I hope I have at least clarified that position .
Let me close by again thanking Parliament , and in particular the rapporteur , for the interest taken in combined transport and for the valuable contribution it has made concerning these regulations .
Thank you very much , Commissioner Pinheiro .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 11.00 a.m.
( The sitting was closed at 10.50 p.m. )
Approval of the Minutes
The Minutes of yesterday 's sitting have been distributed .
Are there any comments ?
Mr Rübig wishes to speak in connection with yesterday 's Minutes .
Mr President , I would just like to ask if the thefts and break-ins in our offices here in the European Parliament could also be recorded in the Minutes ?
Mr Rübig , that is not something which should be recorded in the Minutes , but it will be recorded that you have spoken today on this issue .
( The Minutes were approved )
Transnational trade union rights
The next item is the report ( A4-0095 / 98 ) by Mrs Oomen-Ruijten , on behalf of the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs , on transnational trade union rights in the European Union .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the Social Charter was adopted at the Strasbourg Summit of December 1989 and was seen at the time by many as a great step forwards .
I had my doubts and I remember very well a discussion I had prior to the Summit with a member of the COREPER who tried to bring me to an understanding of the far-reaching consequences of the text to be adopted in 1989 .
My lack of understanding at the time was caused by the fact that I come from a country where the rights of employee and employer organisations are well established and so my feeling was that the European Charter would not add anything new .
Now we are ten years on and - the report is the best proof of this - I must say that the Social Charter of that time is not yet firmly anchored in the EC Treaty .
We have now had two Treaty amendments , Maastricht and Amsterdam .
The Social Protocol is indeed well established , but the limitations that were formulated with regard to pay , the right of association and the right to strike or the right of lock-out have unfortunately not been adopted .
Our European social policy is thus to my mind still not mature .
With regard to the initial report itself , the history , I am keen to establish for the benefit of historians that the long period needed to get this report to the House cannot be blamed on any unwillingness on the part of the rapporteur or her political party .
Let it be known that the christian democrats were standard bearers of the socially-orientated market economy and I know from experience that allowing social partners responsibilities leads to a successful society .
I am also keen to mention that the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs ' decision to write a report was based on many petitions , namely from the United Kingdom because trade union rights were not settled there and the idea was that if we now have something at European level then it will happen here as well .
Thirdly , because I must also persuade the free marketeers , it is too crazy for words that Europe has repeatedly pressed for the freedom to form trade unions and the freedom to negotiate to be adopted in international or global agreements , for example within the framework of the WTO , while we have not adopted these guarantees in our own EC Treaty .
The matter that we have to sort out is trade union rights as such .
What I would like is for the European Commission to come forward with an initiative , I am not asking for a directive , a proposal , but rather an initiative for specific research .
The group of experts that is at present already analysing the Treaty of Amsterdam , looking at what the shortcomings are , could very well report on this point .
I ask also that the social partners make a first move , because it concerns them .
They must ensure , and the annual report from the reports by the group of experts is possibly a good starting point , that a proposal is provided .
In connection with trade union rights I have also made a number of remarks about the social dialogue and also the rules of that game .
I am sometimes concerned as to whether there is sufficient room for this social dialogue .
I am well aware that for some Member States we cannot settle very awkward matters from one day to the next .
All the same , I think that in a mature society where it is observed that there are still too few rights , the social and political organizations should be able to tackle the problem quickly .
I thank all those who have contributed to the creation of this report .
Thank you , Mrs Oomen-Ruijten .
I must tell you that I am pronouncing your name better , Mrs Oomen-Ruijten , because I am receiving lessons from the interpreters and I am taking advantage of these lessons . They enable me to improve more and more and to pronounce your name , if not perfectly , as I would wish , then a little better each time .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the Treaty of Amsterdam brought about significant progress in the domain of social policy and employment .
In particular , this includes alignment with the European Social Charter of 1961 and the Community Charter on Fundamental Social Rights for Workers of 1989 , the complete integration of the Protocol on Social Policy in all 15 EU Member States , the strengthening of the employment policy dimension in a separate chapter of the EC Treaty , the orientation of policy towards issues relating to the employment market and active measures to ensure equality between men and women .
The social model in Europe is based on solidarity , balancing of interests and state involvement .
The essence of this was confirmed and developed at the Intergovernmental Conference .
Strong , independent trade unions form a key pillar of our social Europe .
As a Social Democrat and trade union member , it is a personal honour for me to represent the Group of the Party of European Socialists here .
I am well aware that historically the unions and social democrats have been at the heart of the international workers ' movement .
In this report the European Parliament is staking out an important arena for the continuation of the integration process , and this process must operate on two levels .
On one hand , in our common tradition trade union rights have often been fought through tough negotiations and fierce conflicts .
In their actual form , they ought to develop in tandem with genuine social progress and should no longer be limited by bureaucratic rules .
There is always the danger with regulations that they will result less in the assurance of union rights than in their restriction .
On the other hand , first and foremost the European Union must set up a framework of guarantees and constitutional standards within which union rights at a European level can blossom fully .
This means that there must be some impetus from above , for example through institutional structures such as the European Parliament .
I would highlight the following key issues .
Firstly , we must take pragmatic steps to promote union rights at European level .
Secondly , complementary legislative measures must be developed which do not restrict the openness of union developments .
Thirdly , we must block the democratic deficit in the social dialogue , in other words whenever an agreement is made between social partners at Community level , if it is made by means of a Council decision and is legally binding it must be subject to approval by the European Parliament .
Fourthly , the further-reaching institutional demands in the Treaty of Amsterdam which have not yet been met must remain on the table for future discussion of reform in the EU .
Before the next Intergovernmental Conference , the European Parliament must advise how they will be raised again in the discussion .
Fifthly , and this is a personal comment after thirty years ' membership of the DGB , I would like to see the unions becoming more European .
This would have implications for practical work at grass roots level , for organization and for strategic planning .
Sixthly , the unions of Europe are already providing the momentum for global standards in working life .
In terms of globalization , this is a particularly important factor .
For example , workers in Korea have indicated that they are no longer prepared to stand for heteronomy .
The unification of Europe in the 19th century was borne primarily by the workers ' movement and parts of the liberal bourgeoisie .
Almost 150 years ago , appropriately here in Brussels , Karl Marx and Friedrich Engels drew up their manifesto in which they called for the democratic parties in all countries to join together and to reach agreement .
The 1848 revolution used the slogan of unification for the free peoples of Europe .
Nowadays , the Community is based on peace and cross-border division of labour .
I could phrase this loosely .
In the past century , the organized workforce pushed forward the European concept , and in this century multinational concerns have created the European reality .
In any case , the EU must never be just an Economic and Monetary Union .
It must move towards a social union at the same time .
We must remember , however , that there will only be a European social union with the involvement of European unions .
Thank you very much , Mr Schäfer .
You have informed me that you thought you had four minutes and I have accepted this , but , concentrating on Marx and Engels , you took up almost five minutes .
I would ask you , please , although you have such important points to make , to be careful with the time .
I would ask you all to be aware of this in future , particularly those who have yet to speak , including Mr McMahon who is going to speak for two minutes on behalf of the Group of the Party of European Socialists .
Mr President , I am fascinated by people negotiating their speaking time across the floor of the House , a very interesting departure from our customary procedure .
Mrs Oomen-Ruijten has produced a very good and interesting report and this is an area where there is very considerable concern within the Union for the whole issue of workers ' rights .
There is no doubt that the Social Charter lays down the guarantee for fundamental rights for workers , in particular the right of association for workers and employers .
The interesting thing too is that there were one or two little gaps in the Maastricht Social Protocol which led my country to a lot of misrepresentation about what was actually involved in the Social Protocol .
It did not apply to the right to strike , the right of association and it did not apply to pay or to lock-outs .
Despite that , the UK Government of that time decided that it could not sign up for it and that was regrettable .
I believe it is important that the rights of free association collective bargaining are regarded as a basic human right and that any attempt in Europe or anywhere else to violate these rights are a violation of fundamental human rights .
The development of the social dimension in Europe has contributed to a general trend towards the Europeanization of industrial relations and as my colleague , Mr Schäfer , said there is going to be increasing Europeanization of labour relations and organization .
The euro is going to give fillip to this and there will be more collective bargaining on a European basis .
As one example of that , the union of which I am a member , the GMB has reached an agreement with IG BCE , the chemical union in Germany .
They have actually got collective bargaining right across the board .
I believe the model that the GMB and IG BCE have developed will be a good model for the future .
With this and with the development of the social dialogue , which is one of the priorities of the Austrian Presidency , I believe the union movement will go from strength to strength within the European Union .
Mr President , I should like to congratulate my colleague , Mrs Oomen-Ruijten , on her report , to which she gave an excellent introduction and with the main points of which we are in total agreement .
Although the subject of this report is transnational trade union rights in the European Union , I maintain that certain lines of argument within it can , by analogy , be applied to the other side of the social dialogue .
Out of respect for the rapporteur I did not want to alter the specific nature of the report and have refrained from tabling any amendments .
However , I wish to widen the scope of the debate .
The report refers to ILO Conventions Nos 87 and 98 concerning freedom of association and the right to collective bargaining .
It states that these Conventions must also be applied at Community level .
The report also rightly emphasises that the social dialogue is an outstanding aid in continuing to bring together the economic and social aims of the European Union .
A good dialogue naturally requires an opposite number , who can best represent his group as broadly as possible .
The rapporteur will already have realized that yet again I unfortunately find myself forced to exclude the SME partners from the European collective agreements process .
This House has repeatedly called on the Commission to do something about this , but unfortunately in vain .
Today once again I call for the attention of all democrats to the fact that the right to negotiate is also a fundamental right for SMEs and that this right is a cornerstone of social rights as they have been established by the ILO .
This last sentence is not mine . It is a quote from Professor Blanpain , a labour law professor of international repute .
Perhaps by firmly rooting trade union rights in the Treaty we can in the end also obtain something for SMEs .
If this report also leads to that then the SMEs , Madam Rapporteur , will be eternally grateful .
Mr President , Madam Rapporteur , our party is naturally also of the opinion that fundamental freedoms to organize and to negotiate are very important in order to promote the social dialogue at European level .
I should also like to underline Mrs Thyssen 's point with regard to the right that small and medium-sized enterprises must also have to participate in this sort of negotiations .
However , I wish to use my brief opportunity to speak to ask you to look at point 10 of Mrs Oomen-Ruijten 's report , specifically the second indent where it is asked that free participation in trade union organizations in enterprises be provided for .
I should like the European Commission , when it considers this report , to consider also the right of the individual not to have to join an organization .
Hitherto , in international law , for example both in relation to the Universal Declaration of Human Rights and to the same declarations in relation to fundamental freedoms granted through the Council of Europe , there has been a refusal to establish a fundamental right not to be organized .
I wish to point here to the fact that in a number of countries there is still a closed shop system or enforced unionization .
I think that , on the one hand , the right to join an organization must include the right not to join .
Also , I did not wish to table any amendments as I did not want to whip up the issue in this sense , but I hope that the European Commission will also establish this right when it works out its proposals .
Mr President , Mrs Oomen-Ruijten 's report has an unusually long and colourful history here in Parliament .
This time the report has altered considerably and it is important that the trade union movement managed to have an influence on the final outcome .
When our committee discussed the report last February , most of the group voted against it .
The basis for that decision then was that the matter was so much one of principle , and a delicate one too , that we could not come to any hasty conclusions .
Time has passed since February , however .
This time , in Finland at least , a debate has arisen on the absolute necessity of transnational trade union rights as a counterweight to transnational markets .
This debate has convinced me of the need for European trade union rights .
Obviously , however , when European trade union rights begin to be formulated , both management and labour must be fully involved in the work from the start .
Under no circumstances can European trade union rights be allowed to have a weakening effect on national and statutory rights .
Mr President , on behalf of the Green Party I welcome the report by Mrs Oomen-Ruijten .
As Mrs Ojala said , it had a long history in the committee , an interesting history as well .
I believe at one point the report was pulled from the committee because it was seen to be too pro-union and too pro-European .
Just before the British election it was thought it might be a little embarrassing , particularly for our Labour colleagues , to actually have to vote in favour of this since Mr Blair was not known to favour the kind of trade union rights that Mrs Oomen-Ruijten speaks about in her report .
Indeed he boasts that Britain has the most lightly regulated industry and toughly-regulated trade unions of all the European Union .
The disappointment for us in Britain , of course , is that the new Trade Union Bill , which is before the British Parliament , does not restore the many rights which had been taken away from trade unions in the many years of Tory rule .
So I welcome Mrs Oomen-Ruijten 's report and I can only conclude that really she is very old Labour and is welcome to join the independent Labour network , well to the left of new Labour .
Mr President , Member States have differing traditions with regard to industrial relations , and we should respect this .
Thus , I am glad to see that we have established that the report is dealing with transnational rights rather than national professional rights .
I am also glad that we have established that the question of wages will remain exempt from European legislation .
In my opinion , the report is good because it paves the way for much-needed debate .
It could be said that the parties to the labour market can already enter into European agreements in the social dialogue .
If so desired by the parties concerned , such discussions could be raised to the level of European legislation , so European trade unions already have some collective rights .
However , there is a problem in that little progress has been made in the social dialogue .
The social partners are not terribly keen to enter into agreements .
That is one of the difficulties in developing a European model where , to a large extent , the social partners have to take the blame for initiatives in industrial relations .
The slow pace of the social dialogue is particularly regrettable for someone like myself , as an ardent fan of the Danish model , where the parties to the labour market settle industrial relations questions jointly .
However , it would be disastrous if this were to mean we would be unable to develop a strong social dimension at European level .
We would risk finishing up with multinational companies pitting national trade unions against each other .
Thus , seen against this backdrop , it may not be so stupid to be discussing a new framework for the social dialogue and giving trade unions more effective instruments with which to force the employers ' organizations to the negotiating table .
It may well be that collective action or some kind of European employment legislation should or could resolve any conflicts in industrial relations .
Finally , I would like to emphasize that the most important players of all the parties to the labour market are those responsible for laying down transnational union rights .
Mr President , I wish to express my deep concern regarding the state of the social and union rights of workers in the European Union .
Community intervention in fundamental issues of labour legislation tends , especially nowadays , to undermine and overturn the most basic achievements of the labour union movement .
Unfortunately , the report we are debating does not avoid , to any large extent , going down the same road .
Three references suffice to support this assessment : the recommendation to abolish the provisions of the Treaty which concern freedom of association and the right to strike ; the elevation of social dialogue as the fundamental duty of trade unions , instead of the fight for workers ' rights ; the adaptation of the policy of employment to the objectives of EMU .
The labour movement 's rights are currently under attack as never before and the European Parliament should be concerning itself with assisting it in its struggle , instead of taking a hand in the attempt to undermine it .
Mr President , within the last two weeks the ILO has adopted a new convention on global labour standards which includes the right to join unions and bargain collectively .
Ireland is a member of the ILO and yet the Irish constitution , as interpreted by our courts , gives employers the right to refuse to recognize unions .
The most recent and blatant example of this was the case of an airline company , Ryanair , where the management of that company refused to negotiate with the trade union SIPTU in relation to a group of young , very badly paid baggage handlers .
It is absolutely essential that we enshrine in European law the right to join trade unions and the right to bargain collectively .
Partnership at work must be based on the firm foundation of union recognition .
I call on Commissioner Flynn to begin work now on drafting a new directive to this effect .
The Amsterdam Treaty was defective in this regard .
It did not give us the trade union rights that we so badly need .
Mr President , Commissioner , no-one can deny that in these days when capital is becoming transnational it is reasonable to give transnational trade union rights their proper effect .
The recognition of the right of association is in line with that argument and should serve as a basis for it .
This own-initiative report therefore appears to be the natural outcome of a process in which the inclusion of the Social Chapter in the Treaty is its main justification .
But this is not just a report that has been produced on its own .
It goes hand in hand with other initiatives and reports making up a package which is worrying to those who think trade unions have other purposes and tasks apart from merely participating in the social dialogue , the sole purpose of which is to protect economic interests in a market in which the workforce is no more than one kind of merchandise .
Furthermore , the recognition of the freedom to form trade union associations at Community level , while necessary , may have the undesirable result of causing trade unions to lose their character as class organizations , which they also can and should continue to be , particularly at national level .
We consider that the effect of this initiative is not to close , but rather to open a debate or bring it up to date .
Mr President , I would firstly like to congratulate Mrs Oomen-Ruijten and the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs for the comprehensive work they have just produced on the subject of transnational trade union rights in the European Union .
As you know , the right of association with the object of forming professional or trade union organizations , as guaranteed by the European Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms , is recognized in Article 6 ( 2 ) of the Treaty of Amsterdam as a general principle of Community law .
In that context , it is important to emphasize that , for the first time , the Treaty of Amsterdam gives the Court of Justice jurisdiction over matters relating to human rights and fundamental liberties , including the right of association .
Freedom of association and collective bargaining are recognized in the Community Charter on Fundamental Social Rights for Workers and implicitly referred to in Article 136 of the Treaty of Amsterdam as guiding principles of Community social policy .
Nevertheless , I should like to make it absolutely clear that , since the right to associate and the right to strike are not within the scope of Article 137 of the Treaty , the Commission does not intend to draft any legislation on those matters .
The Commission does , however , consider , Mr President , that the question of fundamental social rights requires more sustained and detailed thought at Union level .
In that connection , one of the sessions of the European Forum on social policy held last week touched on the question of how to widen and deepen the debate on fundamental rights .
In addition , a group of experts has been set up to examine the progress that has been achieved in that field by the Treaty of Amsterdam , identifying any omissions and recommending courses of action for the future .
The report is expected to be completed by the end of this year .
I am sure my colleague Padraig Flynn will keep Parliament duly informed of the results of our present deliberations and the courses of action the Commission will be suggesting .
Thank you , Mr Pinheiro .
Ladies and gentlemen , the Commissioner 's speech brings this debate to a close .
I would remind you that the report by Mrs Oomen-Ruijten , on which she has been congratulated many times , will be put to the vote this morning at 11.00 a.m.
Voluntary organizations and foundations
The next item is the debate ( A4-0203 / 98 ) by Mrs Ghilardotti , on behalf of the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs , on the Communication from the Commission on promoting the role of voluntary organizations and foundations in Europe ( COM ( 97 ) 0241 - C4-0546 / 97 ) .
Mr President , today we are dealing with quite an important Commission communication , and the debate in the House comes at a rather delicate moment , because , as everyone knows , organizations , associations and foundations are faced with the problem of how to finance their activities because of the decision of the Court of Justice .
The Court ruled that the Commission had to stop all funding until a Council decision defines a legal basis for this financing .
I will return to this later , but certainly it is strange to talk about promoting associations and foundations , the voluntary world , the third sector - to which we give particular importance in Parliament 's communication and work - and at the same time observe that the activity of these organizations is paralysed .
I therefore believe that today 's debate can be an incentive for the Council to reach an interinstitutional agreement , as the Parliament has been proposing for some time , that can effectively solve the problem , not just for the 1998 budget but also for the future .
The communication that we are talking about today is the result of more than ten years of work based on an own-initiative report of the European Parliament in 1987 , a report that prompted the European Commission to set up a ' social economy ' unit at Directorate-General XXIII .
The Commission did a tremendous amount of work , proposing two actions for legislation and the drafting of a White Paper .
However , all these initiatives encountered difficulties in the Council and in the Commission itself and went no further than a few measures .
In any event , these problems remain completely unsolved , and we think that today 's debate and the approval of this report and the Commission 's communication can break the deadlock so that the planned legislative activity can continue .
Even if the communication is an instrument that is a little weaker than what Parliament wanted and what the unit at DG XXIII planned to do , I believe , as does the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs , that it is nonetheless of great importance because it defines two elements in what is broadly speaking the social economy , that is associations and foundations , and it defines the characteristics and recognition at European level .
It is an important operation because it serves to pool the various experiences and realities of the different Member States .
In addition , it recognizes and promotes the various roles that these organizations play , for example in providing employment : Parliament has already worked on this aspect these past few years ; a lot of the studies and research work done recognize that the world of the third sector , broadly speaking the voluntary sector , is a sector that these past few years has on the one hand promoted new job opportunities , especially at the local level , and on the other hand has been able to meet a series of needs - relational , social , cultural , environmental - old and new , which today neither the public sector nor the private sector is able to meet .
It therefore has a very important role in providing employment , a very important social role , but also a very important political role .
The possibility of recognizing , promoting , finding various ways for citizens to participate in the collective good - because that is what we are talking about - in relation to the tradition of the organizations of political parties and trade unions plays a major role in involving citizens in Europe 's construction .
This civil dialogue , as we have called it , was promoted by the European institutions throughout the Intergovernmental Conference debate and there is no doubt that the voluntary sector is a new way to resume building a legitimate relationship of trust and participation between citizens and the institutions .
It is for this reason that we greatly appreciate this communication and I would indeed like us to use this debate as well to urge the Council to arrive at an agreement on the legal basis before the first reading on 17 July , otherwise we demonstrate an inability to act for and to have faith in Europe 's citizens , in that we make statements and then , by and large , behave quite differently - even if it does not depend on us but on the Council ; in short , the European institutions say one thing and then do another .

Mr President , I have two observations to make in my two minutes , .
The first , on procedure : I still do not understand the headlong rush of the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs in this matter .
The deadlines given to the Committee on Legal Affairs and Citizens ' Rights for delivering its opinion has prevented it from paying serious attention to the day-to-day legal problems raised by the communication , and with which the associations are very familiar .
The problems in question include those of definition , mutual recognition , responsibility and taxation .
I fear that such precipitate action by our colleagues might also have prevented Parliament from giving a proper hearing to the voluntary associations and from studying their problems in depth .
I feel , in this matter , that Parliament has wasted an opportunity to make its contribution to this debate , and I fear that this indifference , coming on top of the catastrophically negative signals given by the Court of Justice , the Commission and by the Council with regard to legal bases , will only serve to create a huge gulf between ourselves and these very important groups , as Mrs Ghilardotti has reminded us .
The second observation , Mr President , concerns the fundamental issues at stake here .
For my part , I believe that the communication provides an interesting inventory of practices and problems .
I welcome this step which is a kind of tour of Europe carried out by the Commission and its staff to open up discussions with the authorities of the NGOs of various associations : it represents an attempt to create awareness , to provide information , and also to mobilize forces .
I would simply like to draw attention to the danger that all this could end up as some kind of pointless intellectual exercise , if it does not result in any concrete proposals , and we are awaiting these proposals .
It is my hope that these proposals will be clearly incorporated in the very notion of a large market , of economic activities , and that we shall not treat the voluntary organizations and foundations sector as being simply the place for some kind of voluntary and charitable activity , but that we take account of the real difficulties which will one day have to be tackled .
Mr President , I think that this report by the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs as this was , and I stress this , drawn up in committee following the marvellous work of Mrs Ghilardotti , is a responsible political position at which the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs has arrived and which it is presenting for debate during this sitting .
The Commission communication is undoubtedly a significant piece of work , which brings to the forefront the important topical issue of the promotion of voluntary organizations and foundations .
However , this work of the European Commission cannot surely be regarded , I am afraid to say , as having provided a bold and effective solution to this big problem .
So the report , the long preparation , the assessment of experiences , which has resulted from the work in the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs ( and at this juncture I must say that I cannot understand Mr Cot 's position ) , accurately underlines the importance of this issue in the European Union today and gives it the fillip it needs .
Today , in view of overall progress , of the problem of employment and the problem of unemployment , of proof that local initiative and the exploitation of local human potential as well as of natural resources , can pay off in this global society , this report indeed makes a significant contribution .
I believe that it must be regarded in this way , as a point of contact with the society of citizens and an activation , a recognition , of the role that it can play .
In conclusion , I wish to stress that two topical issues , the promotion of national action programmes against unemployment and the reorganization of the Structural Funds for the regions are , taken together , I believe , an opportunity to link the issue we are debating with these major developments in the European Union .
Mr President , I believe that the whole question of voluntary organizations and the third system is one whose full significance we have only begun to appreciate in the last few years .
In our modern , differentiated and individualized societies it is necessary to establish a clear social coherence , and in this context the various associations are a key factor .
The European Union has a rather complicated history in this issue , as the rapporteur for the Committee on Legal Affairs and Citizens ' Rights has explained .
We have not yet succeeded in creating a common legal basis for associations , mutual societies and foundations , and this is regrettable .
Yet the Commission 's communication is to be welcomed . I do not believe it is an avoidance tactic since it is necessary to develop broad communications and broad advice throughout this sector concerning what we want .
We want strong development in this sector .
We want this sector no longer to be regarded with mistrust by the authorities or by certain sides of industry which consider themselves to be removed from everyone else .
We want to see this sector developing in all its many facets , and I think that to do this we urgently need time for examination , reflection and consultation .
Then we should gradually plan and devise options for sponsorship , for a suitable legal framework and for the development of activities within Europe .
I think that this communication from the Commission is a good first step in all of this and therefore I welcome it .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , we have already heard quite a bit about the importance of charitable associations and foundations .
They have important functions in socio-political and employment terms .
The rapporteur has taken this on board , and I can only praise her for her commitment in this area .
Unfortunately , she was less than cooperative during the debate in committee and she did not take into account any ideas which were further-reaching or tried to go into more depth .
I only want to look at the most important of these again : it must be clear that we do not want to create a new network of national agencies to manage and coordinate this sector , but rather that this network should grow from the existing agencies through cooperation .
I warmly welcome the proposal to improve access to Structural Funds for NGOs , but we must also be realistic about the allocation of these funds .
Often very little is left over for those who really need it , especially in small projects , after the cost of administration in terms of both allocation and sponsorship .
Consultants and the sponsors themselves are financed from it .
And this leads me on to my most important point .
In point 14 of the conclusion , the rapporteur mentions that part of the funds for SMEs should be held back for third system SMEs .
Firstly , there is no such thing as third system SMEs .
It is a case either of the profit or the non-profit sector .
Secondly , the existing funds for the SME are currently so small that the charitable sector cannot also have a share of it .
Thirdly , notwithstanding the euphoria about the effects on employment of the third system , we must differentiate between two things .
This sector has an important role to play in reintegrating people into employment and in promoting enterprise .
Management in its truest sense is often carried out under the most difficult of conditions .
However , long-term , subsidyindependent jobs are created primarily by private industry , especially the SMEs .
We all agree that the NGOs have an ever more important part to play in the citizen / state relationship , and we must promote this .
Autonomy and solidarity are core principles of this .
For this reason , we in the PPE group are voting for this report despite some points of criticism .
Mr President , there are many different voluntary organizations throughout Europe , such as in the environmental area , the social area , trade unions , peace movements and women 's movements , which often have very active members and a lot of contacts with their members in the respective Member States .
By supporting voluntary organizations you support the many people throughout Europe who have the energy to do something just like us in Parliament .
Supporting voluntary organizations and foundations also creates understanding of our work here in Parliament , and shows that we do more than simply concern ourselves with trade and economics .
I would like to emphasize three things .
Firstly , increased support for voluntary organizations through the Structural Funds is positive . One per cent of the European Social Funds is good .
Secondly , voluntary organizations can create jobs . It is possible to create jobs in a third sector .
We should not exaggerate the opportunities , but they exist and we should make use of them .
Thirdly , and most importantly , we must make use of the expertise and commitment of voluntary organizations and foundations by including them in our legislative work and other Parliamentary work in a natural way .
In Scandinavia we have a very good system of consultation which means that on important issues voluntary organizations and foundations are regularly given an opportunity to express themselves and their views are gathered .
That is also a good way to improve understanding of the EU and the work of the European Parliament .
But there are also some things I think we should guard against .
We should not interfere with the internal workings of foundations , such as who should be their representatives .
In my opinion , paragraph 24 is close to the limit .
Finally , our task is not to regulate and control .
Our task is to encourage and support voluntary organizations and foundations .
So this is a good start .
Mr President , I am very happy to add my voice to those who support the concept of voluntary citizen participation in the work of community development .
We are fortunate to have people who give so freely of their time .
Their role in society is not always sufficiently recognized , in particular at a time when reward for work is generally measured in terms of money .
From an EU perspective and in the context of the application of the principle of subsidiarity we cannot ignore the potential and desire of our citizens to participate in the work of nation-building .
I give the example of the LEADER programme .
Given the opportunity and a favourable community infrastructure , the citizens of rural Europe are actively participating in enterprise programmes , creating much-needed employment and contributing to the sustainability of rural communities .
It is not , however , good enough just to pay lip service to their work .
All of us must be concerned with the continuing decline of rural populations , the deteriorating age profile of our farmers and the real threat to the traditional family farm .
After all , the European agricultural model is supposed to be about their survival .
With new technology and the availability of more financially rewarding opportunities for young people , let us not close our eyes to this real threat .
We cannot , however , turn the clock back but through carefully constructed training and educational programmes involving organizations such as CEJA , the European umbrella body for farm organizations and , in my own country , Macra Na Feirme , our young farmers ' organization , we can create the economic and social infrastructure necessary to encourage and help more young people to pursue farming as a credible career .
We must take up that challenge in the context of Agenda 2000 .
Mr President , voluntary organizations , or the charitable sector , are an important sector of society as the bearer of values which we want to safeguard and which we want to encourage , that is , that citizens actively participate in and thereby also gain influence over the development of society .
Society 's collective responsibility is not going to be replaced . Instead this should be seen as a complement .
This is a growing sector in which many new jobs are being created .
Therefore it is particularly shameful that funds for the support of the charitable sector have now been frozen . I hope that we reach a swift solution with regard to this .
I would really like to support Mrs Ghilardotti 's proposal to strengthen the charitable sector at the local level as far as the Structural Funds are concerned , so that they can be active partners in the planning and implementation of co-financed measures .
Furthermore , I would also like us to bear in mind that cooperatives can also be included in voluntary organizations and the charitable sector , even if their charter says they should promote the economic interests of their members .
Those interests are restricted to keeping the activities going , so it is not about making a profit .
Mr President , with the euro 's arrival a few months from now , the Member States will be talking the same monetary language , and this will help further their growth together .
Similarly , another aspect that we must discuss together and concerning which we must take action , is voluntary and cooperative activities .
Indeed organizations and foundations today play an important role in what the Commission calls the Community scenario , intervening in all areas of social activity .
We must therefore pay greater attention to them and be more and more available , helping them to develop synergies , use a common language and meet the needs of their members , collectively speaking , in order to create an ideal environment in which they can operate to achieve the objectives of representing their own groups .
In addition to protecting social interests , this can create major opportunities for work , cultural growth , vocational training , as clearly recalled by the rapporteur whom we thank .
Let us therefore hope that the next Intergovernmental Conference finally promotes the role of organizations and foundations , recognizing non-profit organizations and non-governmental organizations as fundamental bodies for common social growth in Europe .
Mr President , the PPE group is in favour of the communication and believes that the report by Mrs Ghilardotti complements and improves it .
Congratulations !
Both documents contain interesting remarks on the role of associations and foundations at national , regional and local levels , but a European dimension is also mentioned , inter alia with reference to the proposal for a Statute for a European association in 1992 .
Mrs Ghilardotti accepted the PPE group 's suggestion made in the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs , that any regulation on European associations in future must be clearly differentiated from the European public limited company .
A European statute of association must not be viewed unilaterally as a business association , but it must also be compatible with charitable associations and the issues of subsidiarity , the freedom to form articles of association and the freedom of citizens and association .
In this spirit we are in favour of the report by Mrs Ghilardotti .
Mr President , the fact that we have many economic and social experiences and many ways to manage the related activities is typical of the European model of development and a source of wealth that must be protected .
The report by Mrs Ghilardotti on the role of organizations and foundations in Europe rightly recalls the need to develop the entire third sector , the so-called non-profit sector .
Today we are talking about foundations and NGOs , but soon we will have to talk about mutual societies and cooperatives .
The Council must , however , move beyond the attitude that it has had up until now , which has been an attitude of objectively blocking the third sector .
In Europe , there is not just the State and the private sector , but a wider range of experiences that cannot be ignored .
We cannot talk about reform of the welfare state or innovation in international cooperation without the contribution of the private social work of the foundations and NGOs .
Mr President , the report by Mrs Ghilardotti whom I highly commend is an in-depth , comprehensive examination of all the problems related to the promotion of the role of organizations and foundations .
We largely agree with all the assessments made in the report : to begin with , the need for genuine regulation of the non-profit sector at European level , a valuable sector that in this historic period is witnessing extraordinary growth , precisely because it has been the only sector capable of filling the gap left by the crisis of the public welfare systems in providing social services .
For this reason , we can only agree with the recommendations in the report : first , the creation of a European statute that guarantees the voluntary sector recognition of a clearly defined legal status that protects and encourages the activities carried out ; second , genuine , clear rules in legislative and fiscal terms , in particular the revision of VAT ; finally , adequate financial resources .
Only this way , only if we clearly recognize the right of the non-profit sector to play its role , will it be able to make that precious contribution suggested by the Treaty of Amsterdam of developing solidarity and social participation under the best conditions .
Mr President , I would like to begin by saying how gratifying it is for the Commission to see the interest with which the document has been received by the general public , the national bodies , the sectorial organizations and also the European institutions .
I would like to emphasize the opinion of the Economic and Social Committee and the Committee of the Regions , which have expressed their clear intention of supporting the development of organizations and foundations .
I would also like to congratulate Mrs Ghilardotti , Mr Cot and Mr Wolf most heartily on the frankness with which they have approached the subject , showing an interest in all activities undertaken or proposed by socioeconomic organizations .
Since presenting its communication , the Commission , in collaboration with representatives of the organizations and foundations , has developed a plan of action to implement its conclusions , to exploit the potential of those organizations and foundations , and also to identify the difficulties to be overcome to enable them to play a more effective part in defending the interests of European citizens .
It is a fact that organizations and foundations which participate in all aspects of economic and social life often have considerable economic power and represent an important source of employment .
Most of these socioeconomic organizations are corporations in the broadest sense of the term .
And in many cases they represent alternative forms of corporation related to traditional economic and social models .
That in fact is why we have also included the socioeconomic sector in the Commission 's communication under the heading ' Promoting the entrepreneurial spirit in Europe ' .
I will not go over the conclusions and suggestions contained in that communication here .
I would , however , like to mention the actions we have taken since it was adopted and , at the same time , I will try to deal with the questions that have been raised by Members and especially by the rapporteurs .
One important point , on which many others depend , is undoubtedly that of the status of European associations .
I understand why you are not happy about the fact that little progress has been recorded in that area .
I can , however , assure this House , and especially the rapporteur , Mr Cot , that the Commission has taken various initiatives to achieve the progress we seek .
And , although the matter was referred back to COREPER and the Austrian Presidency at the last Council of 4 June , it should be noted that negotiations within the Council have already reached an advanced stage and a good number of the European Parliament 's concerns have been taken into consideration .
So we are confident that some positive progress will be recorded by the end of the year , particularly , may I say again , with regard to the status of associations .
Ladies and gentlemen , I would now like to give you an account of the suggestions we have sketched out in our communication .
We are moving forward in three directions .
Firstly , national conferences are being or will be held in Member States , nearly all of them on the subject of this communication .
In the second place , the Commission is organizing a series of meetings of experts on topics relating to the present and future status of organizations and foundations , among which I would particularly mention relations between the sector and the public authorities , the need for information and better knowledge of the sector , an aspect widely confirmed at the 6th SocioEconomic Congress held a few days ago , and also the potential of organizations and foundations to create jobs .
The Commission agrees that the socio-economic dynamic has not yet fully developed as regards the ongoing preservation and creation of jobs or the creation of appropriate services in response to new needs .
We are asking Member States to pay due attention to the application of the guidelines for the employment sector .
At the same time , we are trying to ensure that the results of the pilot schemes included under the heading ' The third sector and employment ' are widely publicised so that everyone can gain some benefit from these experiments .
There are other proposed topics for discussion , including the use of the euro and enlargement , a subject which has been particularly emphasized by Mrs Ghilardotti .
A third field in which we are working is that of actions that can be taken directly by the Commission .
With the objective of advancing dialogue and cooperation between the Union and the relevant organizations , we have set up a Consultative Committee for Cooperatives , Mutuals , Associations and Foundations .
In addition , the Commission is meeting with a platform of European NGOs twice a year , and has set up a new group of experts in succession to the ' Comité des Sages ' with the object of re-examining the code of basic social rights provided in the Treaty in order to present recommendations for action at Community level , including a charter of rights if necessary .
We agree that there is a great deal to be done .
It is in fact essential that we should re-appraise the situation and find the right way of developing the social dialogue in all European institutions .
We must achieve the right balance between maximum flexibility and participation on the one hand and absolute transparency and consistency on the other , while avoiding excessive bureaucracy and the creation of complicated frameworks .
Mrs Ghilardotti and Mr Wolf place particular emphasis on the difficulties many NGOs have in collaborating with the Structural Funds .
It is a source of particular satisfaction to me that the new proposals on the Social Fund represent a significant step forward in improving and facilitating access to that fund for NGOs .
I would also like to inform the House that the report by DG V , referred to in points 2 and 3 of the resolution we are discussing , only relates to the various internal departments of that Directorate-General and not to the Commission 's relations as a whole with NGOs .
Finally , when reading this resolution I could not help noticing point 19 , ' Enlargement and external relations ' , in which the ACP countries are not mentioned .
I would therefore like to remind the House that giving full value to the socio-economic sector is a mainstay of our development policy , and this is clearly expressed in the mandate for the negotiation of future relations between the European Union and the ACP countries which has just been approved by the Council .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , we are not , therefore , sitting back and doing nothing .
We intend to continue our efforts to see that the organizations and foundations are given the recognition due to them at local , national and Community level .
And , last of all , I would like to thank the rapporteurs once again and also to assure them that we will take their suggestions and comments seriously .
I am sure we shall have the support of the European Parliament for all the actions we undertake for the benefit of socio-economic organizations .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place at 11 a.m.
Working time directive
The next item is the report ( A4-0229 / 98 ) by Mr Chanterie , on behalf of the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs , on the Commission White Paper on sectors and activities excluded from the working time directive ( COM ( 97 ) 0334 - C4-0434 / 97 ) .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , Commissioner , if there is one social issue in which the European Union can play a role and thus carries responsibility , it is the protection of the safety and health of workers at the workplace in accordance with Article 118a of the Treaty . The fact that the workplace is mobile does not detract from the right of workers to a safe and healthy working environment .
Working times are , as the Court of Justice explicitly established in a judgement of 1996 , definitely a matter of health and safety .
In 1993 the European Union issued a directive which lays down rules on daily and weekly rest periods , weekly working hours , annual leave , breaks , night work and shift work .
The minimum requirements specified in that directive are rather low and the number of exceptions rather high .
In addition , at the instigation of the Council of Ministers a range of sectors and activities were completely excluded from the scope of the directive .
These are doctors in training , activities at sea , both the fisheries and the offshore industry , and the transport sector , namely road , air , sea and rail transport as well as transport on inland waterways .
People who work in these activities or sectors , even in an office or a workshop , are denied the protection of a European working time regulation .
The European Commission realized at the time that this could not be and announced an initiative , the initiative that we are debating today , namely the White Paper which has finally seen the light of day after four years .
In this White Paper the European Commission has looked at the working time situation in these excluded sectors and activities , which , taken together , concern around six million workers , of whom around five million are in the non-mobile part of these sectors .
The European Commission proposes to bring the non-mobile workers within the scope of the directive and to include the mobile workers only partially , namely for the following four elements : annual leave , annual working time , appropriate rest periods and health assessment for night work .
The other , let us say more important , aspects such as minimum rest period and maximum working time and suchlike would have to be regulated sector by sector .
The Committee on Employment and Social Affairs for which I appear here as rapporteur wants the Commission first of all to try and bring all the excluded sectors and activities as far as possible within the scope of the directive .
The existing directive has , as I just said , an article , Article 17 , which allows a number of exceptions , which in theory offers enough opportunities to consider specific cases and also to take account of the competitiveness of the various sectors and activities .
Should it appear , however , that this is still not sufficient for some sub-sectors , our Committee on Employment and Social Affairs agrees that there should be sectoral regulation , preferably based on agreements between the social partners , but if this is not possible then based on the initiative of the Commission itself .
The Commission does ask the social partners to negotiate the matter effectively in the Joint Sectoral Committees because in this way we believe they can best take account of the specific situations .
I offer one such example , the situation whereby road-haulage drivers , in addition to their driving time , must also carry out other activities such as loading and unloading , which have so far not been included in the working time directive .
We are aware that a directive alone is not enough .
It is also a question of turning it into national laws , of regulation , controls and sanctions .
But there should be regulation , a European framework , as the problems cross national borders and this issue is also part of the working of the internal market .
I should also like in particular to go into the situation of doctors in training .
I begin with a quote from one of the many testimonies .
The quote is as follows : " From Friday morning to Monday evening I slept five hours , had two night duties in accident and emergency .
During this entire period I did not see a bed and did not earn an extra franc .
I walked around like a zombie but during the day I also performed operations . '
That is all for that quote . Who among us would want to work under such conditions and , especially , who would let himself be operated on by someone who is in such a state .
This sort of situation still exists and maybe more than we think .
Doctors in training are in many cases exploited far beyond the bounds of acceptability and this puts human lives in danger .
The lives of patients but also those of the trainee doctors themselves who , due to excessively long working hours , can for example cause accidents with fatal consequences or fall asleep at the wheel .
Over-tiredness , depression , heart attacks and suicides are not fabrications but reality .
The exclusion of doctors in training from such a working time directive can be considered to be downright criminal .
Allowing or forcing people to operate after dozens of hours of nearly uninterrupted work is playing with people 's lives .
That is why we can no longer accept this situation .
There are even two countries which , like Belgium , have no national regulations .
All the people I have listened to in this file call for an extremely urgent initiative .
The existing directive is indicated here as a framework and I call on the doctors ' unions , on the High Commission for Medical Professionals and on the Minister of Health to take action .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , we expect a legislative initiative from the European Commission soon , so that Parliament can complete this legislation before the end of this legislature .
Mr President , I congratulate you on your elevation to the Chair .
I have three minutes but it would take a lot longer to go into all the intricacies and difficulties of the fisheries sector .
I would certainly like to congratulate Mr Chanterie on the amount of work he has put into trying to accommodate all the very detailed differences and specificities of the different sectors that are excluded .
We have to recognize first of all that there was a reason for the exclusion of these sectors .
That was their complexity in the first place .
Secondly , as regards fishing , there is a deep-seated suspicion of Brussels in many respects and a lot of opposition to the whole idea of fishermen being told when to sleep or what to do at sea .
They feel that once they are at sea they have to be masters of their ship and their own destiny .
There is a deep-seated instinctive hostility to any kind of directive coming from Brussels for the fishermen .
The idea of maximum hours at sea has to be matched against the fact that some countries impose maximum days at sea and that constrains the working hours of a fisherman where that is done , for example , by the UK .
So all the ideas relating to days at sea or that you must sleep at certain times have to be taken into account .
I would like to focus mainly on what exactly will be the scope of such a directive .
This was the cause of vigorous debate within the Committee on Fisheries .
Perhaps I could address the question to Mr Pinheiro who , coming from Portugal , is very familiar with the way in which fishing is organized .
Many fishermen are organized on a family basis , many are share fishermen and many are not employees in the sense that we would understand it .
Is this directive going to affect them or not ?
If it is not , then most of the fisheries sector of Europe is excluded , even after the passage of a resolution like this .
These are the key questions : what is the scope and who are the persons employed in fishing ?
There is perhaps scope for flexibility in Mr Chanterie 's remarks about saying ' as far as possible ' but we have to know from the Commission its view .
There are huge differences between a long-distance fleet where fishermen are employed for months on end by a company and a small boat that goes out based on a family or cooperative from Galicia or the Adriatic , or in the case of the latter , people who go out to fish at night because that is their tradition .
They all worry about being regulated and put into straitjackets .
So , we have to know who are involved .
How do you tell self-employed people to take a holiday ?
I would love to hear the answer to that one . And if the answer is that you do not because they are excluded , then we have to recognize that we are talking about a very small sector of the whole industry .
My last point is about the idea of partnership .
This is very difficult in some cases where there are no trade unions representing the workers because the workers are self-employed .
It is very difficult to tell a country to come up with an agreement between the unions and the employers when there are no such partners .
There you have a rather bogus situation .
Consultation has to be genuine .
It has to affect those who go to fish at sea and let them be involved thoroughly before we come up with something .
Otherwise , there is a danger that yet again Brussels will be blamed for being more interested in red tape than in red mullet .
Mr President , five years after the adoption of the working time directive , it is extremely urgent that we look again at the problem of the excluded sectors .
It is , moreover , regrettable , that so many salaried workers have been excluded , from the start , from the scope of this directive .
We can see this more especially in the road transport sector , with serious consequences for the health of workers and for road safety .
Several trade union disputes have shown the growing rejection of inhuman working conditions , particularly in this sector .
The specific issues at stake in the transport sector are real , but no less real are the need for rest , for leisure , for respect of the biological rhythms of salaried workers .
The existing rules in the road transport sector permit a driving time of 56 hours per week , and even this is not properly respected .
There is a social but also an economic need to improve the rules on driving time and introduce more effective controls , as requested by the Committee on Transport and Tourism , in order to combat unfair competition and social dumping , especially with the entry into force of cabotage .
I am thankful that the two committees are requesting an amendment to regulation 38 / 20 so as to reduce working time and driving time .
In this regard , loading and unloading time as well as waiting time must be included in the calculation of working time .
To conclude , I would like to express one regret : namely , that the inclusion of mobile workers in the Directive , with - obviously - limited and negotiated derogations , as I proposed in my capacity as rapporteur , has been rejected .
This could have sent a strong signal in favour of a social Europe which , sadly , is eluding us .
The adoption of the Chanterie report can nevertheless provide some support in the context of the joint negotiations which are taking place in the various sectors that have been excluded .
It is clear that the salaried workers concerned must continue to make their requirements for sufficient rest and living time heard , in the face of liberal dogmas about free competition which deride the most basic rights .
Mr President , I too should like to congratulate you on your first session as a Vice-President of Parliament .
Mr Chanterie is also to be congratulated .
He has produced a report which is both fair and balanced It has taken some considerable time to produce because of the differences of opinion within his committee and other committees , which we have just heard about .
It is very difficult to impose ideas on working time across so many different industries .
The industrial groups affected are offshore workers in the oil and gas industries , the fishing industry , transport workers such as inland waterway workers , airline pilots and their crews , and railway workers .
They are all known as mobile workers for the purposes of this directive .
It also includes training of doctors but not emergency workers .
They are dealt with under the compensatory measures in the original working time directive .
However , inclusion of those people who are not mobile workers but in sedentary employment in offices serving people who are mobile , is to correct what was thought to be a mistake in the previous working time directive when they were excluded .
That has to be welcomed .
The difficulties faced originally are being overcome because of an arrangement between the social partners .
That has to be recognized and congratulations should go to those people who hitherto have found it difficult to talk to each other .
No arrangements previously existed for this .
So , decent health and safety standards are now for the first time on the table for many of these workers only because of the social dialogue .
Commissioners Flynn and Kinnock are both to be congratulated .
The important thing to remember is that this is about health and safety and it would perhaps be more appropriate to call it the ' stopping people dropping dead at work act ' .
If one looks at the statistics one finds that 20 % of all accidents on the roads involving heavy goods vehicles are , in fact , caused by drivers suffering from fatigue .
It is not only drivers who are killed but the families in the other vehicles they might plough into .
It is very important that we solve this issue .
As Mr Chanterie has also pointed out concerning the training of doctors , if they are to have survivable periods of work and if we are to get the very best out of these professionals , we must all do our best to put pressure on our governments to get a reduction in working time for them so that their judgments and their reactions are not skewed or affected in such a way that we are not gaining the optimum benefits of their training .
This is about stopping people dropping dead at work .
The consequences of this are recognized in Japan ; they are now being recognized in Europe .
We look forward to a directive next year .
Mr President , may I first also congratulate you on your election as Vice-President , so that you can preside here today .
But secondly I wish to thank the rapporteur , Mr Chanterie , who I think has achieved a great piece of work with this report .
He has developed a vision and that was not easy , as Mr Skinner also said , because there were different inputs from all sides .
He has developed a vision that is well constructed theoretically but which is still very practical and in fact more practical than that which the Commission itself had previously put forward .
On the one hand I must congratulate the Commission for the fact that it has spent so much time sorting out these apparently very difficult sectors , but on the other hand we have been dogged by the fact that the two Directorates-General in question found it very difficult to agree with each other on some points and that has certainly not speeded things up .
But I think that in this case the Commission has in the end played a positive role .
I think that the White Paper is in general a good thing but I also think that what we have now put on the table adds something extra .
The rapporteur 's idea in the first place to take the people who are not mobile workers and then to include them as far as possible in the existing directive is a good idea , because it contributes something new , which is a strengthening of the social dialogue .
It has already become apparent in a number of sectors that it is now possible to reach an agreement that did not previously exist .
In this context , I find it regrettable that it has not yet succeeded in the fisheries sector .
We can of course go on and on about how difficult it all is , but if we cannot reach agreement then we do not strengthen our own case very much .
I think that it is very important that the fishing sector should follow what has taken place in other sectors .
Those are my main points .
I think that we have put forward a good report and that we must continue in the same fashion .
I hope that the Commission adopts it in its entirety .
Mr President , I also want to congratulate the rapporteur , Mr Chanterie , for his report .
Here is an extraordinarily careful report which examines thoroughly what the maximum legal basis would be for a nagging problem which we , as Members of the European Parliament , have all faced in letters and requests for meetings , namely the problem of working times and rest periods .
It has already been said here by a number of Members that in virtually all cases there is also danger for other people involved as well as for those who do not have sufficient rest , for example in the case of those who are responsible for piloting a plane , driving a car or working in health care .
This can have far-reaching consequences for the safety not only of these people themselves but also of other people .
It is a shame that the Commission still reacted rather slowly to pressure from this House in producing this White Paper , which is now here , and I agree with all speakers who say that the report by the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs , namely as a result of the work of Mr Chanterie , has been well done .
I think that we must now decide together to convert a number of the proposals into binding legislation .
In this context , I think that the social partners have their own role to play and I would wish to call on them to press ahead with consultations on these policy areas and to complete them as quickly as possible .
Mr President , I support Mr Chanterie 's proposal to ask the Commission to submit a proposal to amend the working time directive .
As others have said , it is quite unacceptable that around 6 million workers are excluded from what we call basic rules on the length of working time .
In addition , it relates to workers who work in sectors where it is really essential that they are get their rest and have had holidays in order to be able to do their jobs in a safe way . It relates , for example , to people working in the transport sector , railways and aviation , and also doctors in training .
The people who work in these sectors have precisely the same need of rest , sleep and holidays as we ' ordinary people ' .
In fact , I think it is a matter of human rights to provide these basic rules on working time and holidays .
I think paragraph 11 of Mr Chanterie 's report is very important .
It states that future legislation must not undermine the regional or local collective employment contracts which apply in the Member States and which offer higher levels of social protection than those now envisaged by the Commission .
I would really like to congratulate Mr Chanterie on his report .
Mr President , I would also like to congratulate Mr Chanterie for his excellent and balanced report .
Other colleagues have already said it - some 6 million workers are currently excluded from the working time directive , of which three and a half million are in the transport sector - how sensible !
One has only to think , for example , of the strikes which paralysed France and parts of Europe last year .
Once again , the champions of liberalism have well and truly put the cart before the horse .
The total liberalisation of road transport on 1 July 1998 , comes into force without any fiscal or social harmonisation having been implemented .
No protection has been anticipated at Union level to avoid a race towards the state which is the lowest social tenderer , in a damaged sector where small firms find it difficult to survive , and for which liberalisation often means death .
I therefore accuse some governments of having deliberately sought this legal vacuum in order finally to do away with certain social rights achieved after a huge battle in this sector .
I demand therefore that European drivers should benefit , here and now , from paid waiting time and equal annual holidays for all .
I hope that , even if some flexibility is possible , the number of annual hours should be limited , with an average week of 35 hours .
If this is not the case , it is essential that all drivers who travel between two points in any one country of the Union respect all aspects of social legislation in that country .
I think that as regards harmonisation , we must begin at the beginning and first decide the days and dates that long-distance lorries can drive on the roads and motorways of the Union , so that we can emerge from the fog which currently surrounds us .
This is the first essential element in the construction of a Europe for road transport .
Mr President , allow me to congratulate you on your election to this very important post .
The Commission very much welcomes Mr Chanterie 's report .
We also appreciate the hard work which has been done in three committees , the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs , Committee on Transport and Tourism and the Committee on Fisheries .
It has been a long story but we are making real progress .
I would just like to remind you of some of the background .
In 1993 when the working time directive was adopted , the Council decided to exclude certain sectors and activities from the scope of the directive .
These were air , rail , road , sea , inland waterway and lake transport sectors , sea fishing , other work at sea and the activities of doctors in training .
At that time Mr Chanterie was the rapporteur .
The Commission undertook ' to take appropriate initiatives as soon as possible in respect of the different sectors excluded from the scope of the directive .
The preparatory work for the implementation of these initiatives is being undertaken in the context of the joint sectoral committees for the sectors concerned where they exist ' .
Accordingly , we asked each of the joint committees in the five transport sectors and the sea fishing sector to give their recommendations on how to adapt the principles of the working time directive with regard to their area of work .
We also arranged for factual studies to be undertaken of the working time arrangements in respect of the so-called ' other work at sea ' and doctors in training .
While some progress had been made in most sectors , it was not sufficient and so last year the Commission decided to publish the White Paper setting out how we intended to take matters forward .
In the White Paper we considered the possible options and came down in favour of what we called the differentiated approach .
We have subsequently confirmed this approach in the second-phase consultation documentation adopted by the Commission on 31 March .
Under the differentiated approach we seek to make the distinction between those activities which can be accommodated under the working time directive and those which require specific measures .
We therefore propose a three-pronged approach .
Firstly , as your resolution states in paragraph 1 , non-mobile workers must enjoy full protection in relation to working hours and must therefore be brought fully within the scope of Directive 93 / 104 .
We propose to do that .
Secondly , as you say in paragraph 2 of your resolution , mobile workers must also enjoy full protection in relation to working hours and must therefore be brought as fully as possible within the scope of Directive 93 / 104 .
In your resolution you agree with the Commission that there is in particular a need to provide for all mobile workers and those engaged in other work at sea a guarantee of adequate rest and for a maximum number of hours to be worked annually , and to extend to them the directive 's provisions on four weeks paid annual leave and health assessments for night workers .
Thirdly , the Commission stated that it proposed to introduce or modify specific legislation for each sector or activity concerning the working time and rest periods of mobile workers .
Again this is what we intend to do and again we are pleased to have your support on this matter .
I am pleased to report that as a result of these initiatives there have been serious discussions in nearly all the main sectors , especially since the second round consultation document was issued .
Consequently , we are very hopeful that agreement will be reached in a number of sectors .
I know that some of you are concerned about the way in which we propose to proceed .
The table after paragraph 1.4 of the explanatory statement to your resolution illustrates very clearly our intentions .
Non-mobile workers will be covered by an amendment to the working time directive .
This will include doctors in training .
Other amendments will provide basic protection for mobile workers and those engaged in other work at sea in respect of annual leave , annual working time , adequate rest and health assessments for night workers .
All this will be done by means of an amendment to the working time directive under Article 118 ( a ) of the EC Treaty .
Independent fishermen are not covered by this directive .
The Commission nevertheless believes that minimum standards of protection of health and safety with regard to working time should apply to all workers , including share fishermen , that is to say members of the crew of a fishing vessel who are remunerated by a share in the earnings of the vessel .
Such protection should , of course , take account of the special nature of the sea fishing industry .
It will be much easier to draw up such proposals if both sides of industry are fully involved in their preparation .
Fourthly , the central provisions where an agreement between the social partners is reached before 30 September 1998 and if the parties so request the Commission will make a proposal for a Council decision in accordance with Article 4 ( 2 ) of the agreement on social policy .
In addition , the Commission will make complementary proposals , for example to make comparable provisions for self-employed drivers .
If the social partners are unable to reach agreement before 30 December 1998 the Commission will prepare a proposal for a directive on the working time of mobile workers in the different sectors .
This would take full account of the result of the negotiations reached so far .
Finally , my colleagues Padraig Flynn and Neil Kinnock expect to be tabling appropriate proposals later this year .
I would like to thank you on their behalf for your support today .
We very much look forward to your continuing support in the future .
The debate is closed .
The vote will be taken at 11 a.m.
Fair trade
The next item is the report ( A4-0198 / 98 ) by Mr Fassa , on behalf of the Committee on Development and Cooperation , on fair trade with developing countries .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , fair trade is without doubt one of the most important ways found these past few years to help development .
Begun somewhat inconspicuously and as purely voluntary initiatives , fair trade has today become a highly respected and ethical way to do business .
For this reason the European Parliament has dealt with the matter on several occasions , first with Mrs van Putten 's report and then with the report by the late Alex Langer .
The purpose of the present motion for a resolution and the related report is basically twofold : first , to provide criteria with which to define in clear and precise terms what is actually meant by fairness and solidarity in trade ; second , to establish the need for a common label for fair trade and to establish the principle that certification organizations operate independently from organizations which engage in importing or selling products .
In the first case in particular , paragraph 10 of the report very clearly lays down ten criteria , a set of rules so to speak , for fair trade .
These criteria are : direct buying , fair price , advance payment , no import or sales monopolies , price transparency , stable and long-term relations with producers , conditions of production respecting ILO Conventions , non-discrimination between men and women , no child labour , respect for the environment , respect for development and encouragement for the autonomy of local population groups .
Thus we have here a series of criteria that are , in the view of the Committee on Development and Cooperation and in the view of the rapporteur , sufficiently precise but in no way rigid , that reflect the existing reality of what is already today fair trade and that offer consumers ample protection .
For this reason , allow me to say that I do not support the amendment presented by Mrs Maij-Weggen whose commitment and expertise in the sector I nonetheless recognize , for in my view it does not seem to have very acceptable consequences .
I will mention at least two of the consequences here : first , the criteria as proposed in the amendment are vaguer and weaker than the criteria listed in the motion for a resolution that came out of the Committee on Development and Cooperation ; second , the amendment states that the criteria only have to be observed when the Commission helps fair trade organizations and producers .
Instead , it is my view that these criteria should be observed - as stipulated in the original text of the resolution - whatever the case and not just when the Commission provides aid , and this as basic protection not only of the producer but also the consumer ; otherwise , any product could arbitrarily be defined as fair by whoever produces , imports or resells it , regardless of whether the Commission provides aid or not .

Finally , there is no reason to fear that the European Union 's support for fairness and solidarity in international trade will , as some have inferred , contravene the rules of the World Trade Organization .
I recall that the Director General of the World Trade Organization informed the Committee on Development and Cooperation that there are instruments which are compatible with the WTO and which governments can use to support fair trade and avoid discriminations between developing countries .
The World Trade Organization is also planning additional special measures to be adopted to support developing countries , measures that will be clearly defined in the next round of negotiations .
It will be precisely by including fairness and solidarity in the great movement of international trade that we will lend greater relevance and credibility to the motto that has always been adhered to in carrying out this commendable activity : Trade , not Aid .
Mr President , the growing importance of the fair trade sector emphasizes the need for the European Union now to properly assess its institutional and financial arrangements vis-à-vis this sector .
The Committee on Development and Cooperation report makes a number of important suggestions in this regard .
Equally , however , any assessment of the success of fair trade should take place with a view to including the elements and principles of fair trade into the European Union 's own development and trade policies in the future .
In its opinion the REX committee has chosen to focus on these principles .
Effectively , local producers are given a step up by being included in the fair trade network .
That provides them with a chance to become competitive and builds up their capacity to trade in general .
As this is one of the European Union 's primary objectives in its trade and development policy , the fair trade experience is of particular relevance .
The following elements are at the basis of the fair trade approach and should equally be the basis of the European Union 's own approach to trade with developing countries .
The elements are : direct access to European Union markets ; a fair price ; income stability - the fact that fair trade organizations pay part of the price in advance is crucial for small-scale producers who can then buy inputs and perhaps get through the season without resort to moneylenders ; finally , feedback and capacity building , where producers gain confidence to approach a trading system they once saw as too complicated .
This approach underlying fair trade effectively removes the obstacles to trade that exist for producers in developing countries .
Where the fair trade approach has not succeeded and European Union policies and instruments are floundering is in linking the various mechanisms into an integrated and coherent effort in support of local producers as they face the many obstacles in trying to sell their products in the European market .
Finally , in short , fair trade makes for good business and is a concept , the objectives and approach of which we should seek to include in our broader European Union policies as well as to promote it in a global world trade arena .
Mr President , the movement of fair trade and solidarity with developing countries is now a concrete and important reality that is becoming particularly relevant in all European countries .
A lot has been accomplished since the European Parliament 's approval of the report by the late Alexander Langer a little over four years ago .
I would like to recall that the general objective of fair trade actions is to correct and begin changing this reality , which is extremely characteristic of international trade and which is profoundly unjust for developing countries .
Fair trade is therefore an essential instrument with which to correct and transform the most perverse dynamics of the world market . It is a way of using the mechanisms of the market itself to promote better awareness of the inequities in the relationship between North and South but also to begin experimenting with innovative practices .
Fair trade clearly takes into account the objectives of sustainable and participatory development , giving guarantees to producers in poor countries , respecting the environment and promoting more advanced economic and social rights .
The fair trade movement in Europe has grown at an exponential rate these past few years ; more and more shops and points of sale are carrying fair trade products which in some cases can now even be found in supermarkets , involving millions of consumers .
Meanwhile , networks have been organized to market and promote fair trade products , and the action to directly support producers has expanded .
In the report that we are voting on today and on which I would like to congratulate Mr Fassa , we are asking that fair trade principles and practices , far from just being a success story , become an integral part of the European Union 's more general policies of development cooperation .
We firmly endorse the criteria listed in paragraph 10 of the report - which is why we think that this part of the report should not be amended by the House 's vote - and we are especially asking that the European Commission and the Community institutions in general take a comprehensive approach to questions of fairness and solidarity in trade .
It is for this reason that we are asking the Commission for a specific communication focusing on four essential points : first , the incorporation of the principles of fair trade practices in more general policies of cooperation in international trade ; second , the determination of specific instruments that are stronger than the instruments used today to support certain projects involving fair trade ; third , the establishment of criteria to define fair trade or the production of specific fair trade products ; fourth , the development of political dialogue with operators practising fairness and solidarity in trade .
This calls for comment .
In the report that we are about to approve there are proposals to increase Community support for fair trade projects , not only to educate people about development , which is certainly an important aspect , but also to provide direct support to producer organizations .
Mr President , first of all my thanks to Mr Fassa for his sound report on the work of fair trade organizations and fair trade producers .
We think that he has provided a good overview of the situation and has also provided useful insight .
It is good that the report is being dealt with now as the Commission has already said it wishes to put forward a number of concrete proposals to help fair trade organizations and fair trade producers .
It would however be good if Parliament first made a few comments and recommendations .
My party thinks fair trade is a good thing .
Whoever has seen fair trade producers at work , and in the past few years I have seen a number of projects in developing countries , knows that the commercial profit is perhaps somewhat lower but that at the same time the producers , many of them poor farmers , are often much better off if there really is a question of higher incomes for the workers involved , many more subsidiary social activities , such as schools and clinics that are set up , and that the population in the region also makes more profit .
And the environmental approach also commands much respect .
In short , these fair trade projects are good for the developing countries , often even better than ordinary investment projects and ordinary trade projects .
It is also no longer a question of a very marginal business . The European Trade Association now works with 800 trading partners in 45 countries with 800 000 producer families and five million people indirectly involved .
So it really is something worth taking into account .
In my own country the Max Havelaar coffee and the Okee bananas in particular form a very positive shoot on the fair trade stem .
The Okee banana plantation in Ghana , which I visited recently , is a marvellous project .
Around 1 000 people work there together as breadwinners for around 10 000 people .
But when you see the little villages in the surrounding area you can see for yourself that the situation is much better than a bit further off in Ghana .
There is really very good visibly positive work going on there .
Well , Mr Fassa 's proposals are very much in line with these types of activity .
However , we still have a few problems .
Because we see the report above all as an own-initiative report , we have limited it to a correction to paragraph 10 .
This paragraph contains the criteria that fair trade companies , fair trade organizations and fair trade producers should satisfy .
Now , we feel that that is rather detailed and before you know it the Commission will be saddled with an enormous bureaucracy in order to check it all .
That is why we have tabled an amendment to make it all a bit shorter and a bit clearer .
In our opinion it is sufficient that fair trade producers and organizations who want to receive support from the European Union satisfy a limited number of criteria .
There must be an fair price , a price in line with the market with a fair trade supplement , that we can understand , and the consumer must know exactly what is paid to the producer .
Middlemen , import , export and sales monopolies must be avoided as much as possible so as not to obstruct free trade .
There must be an effort to achieve longer and stable relations with producers and all ILO Conventions must of course be respected , as well as trade union rights , equal treatment of men and women must be respected and the use of child labour must also be excluded , but that goes without saying .
Methods of production must be shown to be environmentally friendly .
They must lead to better social and economic development , the promotion of independence and they must be in harmony with local tradition .
These are the points that we think are the most important .
We will of course give the report as much support as possible , but we would appreciate it if the rapporteur adopted this realistic amendment so that we do not degenerate into bureaucracy and unnecessary administration .
Mr President , although my country , Spain , was 20 years late in practising fair trade , in the last five years its use has grown by 100 % .
In addition , given that , according to the rapporteur , there are 800 000 producers in the Third World who practice this kind of trade , it is essential to emphasize the importance of such fair trade .
We are in complete agreement with the rapporteur in that the criteria with which this trade must comply need to include direct buying , fair prices , transparency , respect for labour regulations , exclusion of child labour and respect for environmental regulations .
But we believe that , for the European Union , this can mean a different form of development .
The European Union should support , both economically and politically , initiatives which begin modestly but which might be an alternative to an unjust , unfair and mercantile society .
Mr President , the fact that the European Parliament is now debating fair trade is largely due to grassroots activities that have been underway over the past 10-15 years .
This is because idealistic organizations have shown that by means of a conscious policy , the market can be used to promote socially and environmentally responsible production , as well as , quite significantly , income for small producers in developing countries , and this is very useful experience .
We must , of course , support sustainable production in developing counties , both for our own sake and for the sake of the developing countries .
But we must not insist , for example , that this requires harmonization of EU labelling .
It is correct that a universal label makes it easier for consumers to find their way through the market , but the situation today is that we have labels such as Max Havelaar , which enjoys huge recognition and confidence among consumers .
Replacing this with an EU label would be a setback to development to the tune of several years .
We must look at the experience gleaned by the labelling organizations .
Despite several years of endeavouring to come up with a joint label , they have not yet succeeded in doing so .
This is not due to a lack of will , but simply to the fact that the existing labels are household names .
I do not believe the advantages of having a common label would go any distance towards offsetting these risks .
The Fassa report recommends that the EU should strive for social and environmental standards , and that these should be worked into the WTO system .
I can but agree with that .
But it is not enough .
We must require that it will be possible to set special quotas for products that do fulfil the criteria .
Currently , that is not possible today .
Unless definite pressure is applied , neither will it be possible in the future .
The EU must support production in developing countries that is sensitive to the environment and to human welfare , but we must not use this noble intention to centralize the work being done by organizations all over Europe .
The people currently working with fair trade understand the problems .
We need to support them and the producers , but that is a far cry from requiring an EU label , which would take a long time to work its way into the minds of consumers .
We support applying strong pressure to the WTO and making funds available for education and for changing production in developing countries .
Finally , I would just like to say that I support Mrs Maij-Weggen 's amendment .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the issue of fair trade arose during a long discussion when we were debating neo-liberal free trade ideology , and a number of specific criteria were developed for social and ecological sustainability .
We had a long fight before this demand was even recognized .
Obviously , in the history of these demands , the time comes when their implementation can no longer be prevented , but then someone goes and waters them down .
And that is precisely what the European People 's Party is doing with its amendment ; the criteria for fair trade are being watered down to such an extent that the demand is hardly recognizable any more .
It is precisely this that we need to stop , for if even here in the European Parliament which calls for fair trade and has established fair trade as a central demand in setting up new fairer and more sustainable relationships between North and South - if this Parliament also sank to watering down these demands , it would indeed be a setback - I will not say a catastrophe - but the European People 's Party should be ashamed for the damage they have done !
Mr President , there are very , very few Europeans who take the trouble to look at the products which they consume , be they coffee , sugar or chocolate .
However , what if two cups of good coffee constituted very different political messages ; or if two slabs of chocolate , which look very similar , harboured two different stories ?
And what if , at the other far end of the chain , thousands of producers sweated blood and tears to increase the wealth of others , whilst , little by little , some others began to work hard , but for themselves ?
Because , little by little , not in theory , but thanks to slow , patient campaigns , where charity work has an important role to play , new practices are beginning to appear .
Whereas the resolution adopted by the European Parliament in 1994 spoke of niches , of justice and of solidarity as regards these practices , today , Raimondo Fassa 's report presents fair trade as another alternative which aims to establish fairer trading relations between rich countries and producers in the South .
Because the first task of fair trade is to free producers from the current conditions of slavery which is the context within which they are struggling . However , we need to adopt more of a marketing strategy , that is to say a strategy which aims to satisfy the consumer .
So I would like to support the Fassa report , and particularly certain points in it : its definition of fair trade , the creation of a European label in order to avoid complexity and confusion for the consumer , the incorporation of fair trade into the Union 's overall policies , and not only as an instrument of development policy , but also in all economic and commercial policies , so that it can be properly promoted .
This implies the instigation of a code of conduct for European transnational firms which operate in the developing countries .
Moreover , the Union must strive to ensure that environmental and social clauses are included in the WTO criteria .
In conclusion , we are waiting for a communication on fair trade from the Commission at the earliest possible opportunity , which will include both the method for developing fair trade and the means which will be used to achieve this .
Mr President , I too want to express my appreciation for Mr Fassa 's report .
For quite a few years now there has been fairness and solidarity in trade with good results , but this type of trade clearly assumes a whole new relevance at the end of this millennium , characterized by the liberalization and internationalization of economic trade and by the obligation imposed by the WTO to dismantle our systems of preferences with the world 's poor countries .
Since Parliament dealt with this matter in 1993 , not enough has been done unfortunately to promote this form of cooperation , and the European Commission itself does not have a specific political line in this regard .
And yet , past experience and Community statistics prove that fair trade has developed in the right way and , with adequate awareness campaigns , is successful in large European consumer areas .
This instrument is important not only because it immediately improves the living standards of the communities concerned , today estimated at five million people in 45 developing countries , but also and especially because in the long term it turns small local producers into autonomous economic operators .
The Commission , the Council , the Member States should make a greater effort to promote the marketing of fair trade products .
In practical terms , fair trade must be recognized in its own right as an instrument of development and promoted without delay by making adequate human and financial resources available , possibly by also creating a specific line in the Union 's budget .
Only in this way will the European Union be able to abide by its commitment expressed in Article 103 of the Treaty to promote the integration of developing countries in the world economy .
Mr President , this report is held up mainly by the issues of consumer protection and the prevention of abuse of trading channels .
What is completely lacking is consumer motivation .
We are also lacking the understanding that this is a form of development aid in which we must reach the consumer so that we may be able to motivate him or her to pay higher prices .
We are not marketing a product , we are marketing an idea .
My only reservation is that the bureaucratization heralded in the report will only prevent this .
We must finally realize that Europe also has a responsibility to help developing countries to sell their products in Europe .
In this form the report is a good idea .
What is missing is the consumer motivation to buy these products .
Mr President , in welcoming this report I should like to highlight the purpose of my own amendments to the report by the Committee on Development and Cooperation .
It is to urge the Commission to produce its communication on fair trade which can act as a base for new legislation ; for global research which can bring direct support to developing fair trade networks in the south as well as fair trade principles in the north ; to support in principle a separate budget line ending the necessity of using NGO co-financing monies which are often not appropriate for producer cooperatives within the developing world ; to end European discrimination against fair trade in fiscal terms , bringing forward preferential treatment which is compatible with the WTO because of the voluntary nature of the labels ; and finally , to recognize the dangers of the proliferation of labels and the need to have a serious dialogue about the link between fair trade and the new ethical trading being promoted through codes of conduct , on which I am drawing up a report for the Committee on Development and Cooperation .
Fair trade is about the poorest and most marginalized people in developing countries not being lifted out of poverty through aid , important as that is , but lifting themselves out of poverty through selling to the European consumer .
Forty-five thousand outlets in Europe , three thousand different products , a turnover of at least ECU 250m per year .
Not great as a proportion of total trade but not charity either .
This is serious commerce and in the European Parliament we have to be serious in giving our support .
Mr President , the rapporteur has taken a great deal of time and care in preparing this report and we thank him for this .
The committee also contributed over 50 amendments to the document which we have before us .
Please do not be offended if I say that the final result is not quite a success .
There is still a lot of talk about protection and support measures and too little said about the structures which lead to market place competitiveness .
In committee , my group attempted to focus on a few points in pursuit of this aim , and indeed the amendment by Mrs Maij-Weggen does so .
Above all , we must take care that we do not leave too much room for bureaucracy . Less bureaucracy would seem to be assured if we support the amendment rather than if we use the original formulation which goes into so much detail as to hardly be practicable .
I am also concerned about the proposal to use funds from co-financing to advertise fair trade .
I am unsure that the already overstretched B7-6000 line should feature here .
In addition , this is one of the budget lines whose legal bases are currently under dispute .
Nonetheless , I hope that common trade with third world countries , including the fair trade discussed here , continues to develop in a positive way , and I also hope that the Commission will continue to support us in this .
Mr President , I think I can deal with this matter very briefly .
Firstly , I should like to thank Mr Fassa for his excellent report ; next I would like to emphasize the importance of this instrument to a North / South cooperation policy ; and , finally , I would like to say that many of the suggestions put forward will certainly be included in the communication which the Commission intends to present in a few months ' time .
The debate is closed .
The vote will be taken at voting time .
Madam President , I request that it be noted in today 's Minutes that , whereas the vote , according to the order of business , should begin at 11.00 a.m. , it is in fact starting at 11.15 a.m.

You have brought us to a problematic impasse : either we will stay for the vote or , bearing in mind that it should begin at 11.00 a.m. , we have arranged a flight for a particular time .
Either we will miss the flight , or we will lose the right and the obligation to stay for the vote .
I request that it be noted in the Minutes because I will invoke it if by chance they wish to deprive me of certain rights , since I am in no way responsible for this delay .
Mr Ephremidis , we will note this in the Minutes but , with your cooperation , we will try to make up the lost time .
Votes
Madam President , you have forgotten to congratulate the rapporteur !
I would take the opportunity to do this now on behalf of the House .
Madam President , the original text refers to a justification for the old legal basis .
Since we have changed the legal basis , we need the new text .
If we only add something to the text , it will not make sense .
It is not a problem of content , but one of logic .
( Parliament adopted the legislative resolution )
Madam President , there is one amendment to this report and it is a crucial amendment .
I understand that Mr Fassa would like the report to be accepted with as much support as possible .
That is possible if our amendment is combined with Mr Fassa 's text in the following way .
We would take Mr Fassa 's introduction to paragraph 10 , together with his paragraphs 3 and 6 .

From my amendment we then take points 1 , 3 and 4 .
I understand that with this combination Mr Fassa can support the amendment and we can then support his report .
Madam President , if I have understood correctly , Mrs Maij-Weggen is proposing that no changes be made to the introduction to paragraph 10 , which states : ' Believes that fair trade , in order not to be open to abuse , should as a minimum comply with the following criteria . '
Is it or is it not true that this remains ?
In other words , that this remains the way it was in the text of the report ?
Is that what her amendment is ?
In practice , with the oral amendment she is taking out the first two lines of the amendment that she proposed , plus the combinations between the various paragraphs the way she proposed them ?
Is that how it is ?
Madam President , together with the combination of the third and sixth paragraphs , plus points 1 , 3 and 4 of my amendment .
Then we are in total agreement .
Mrs Maij-Weggen , I am really very sorry , but it is very confusing and I have to tell you quite frankly that personally I am not at all sure what we are voting on .
( Parliament adopted the resolution )
On several occasions , Parliament has called for the development of a transport policy which would respect the environment , a policy which is innovative .
Thus , the PACT programme concerning the granting of Community financial assistance for actions of an innovative nature to promote combined transport has received a great deal of detailed comment by European operators .
As it is about to expire , the Council regulation which controls this programme has been revamped .
In June 1997 , the European Parliament approved the Commission proposal , insisting on clarification of the procedures for selecting projects and on an improvement in the application of the financial procedures .
Our colleague 's report , sent to us for examination , is faced with an obstacle raised by the Council , on a point which I would like to come back to .
The Commission proposal envisaged a reimbursement of expenditure and costs relating to the implementation of parts of projects outside the Community , in favour of firms in third countries .
This facility was not approved by the Council , which maintained that it was nevertheless possible to finance projects extending to third countries .
I do not think that the Council has been able to justify its decision , in terms of the possible partnership between operators in third countries and from within the Community .
Our Committee on Transport and Tourism is trying to re-establish a logical approach to this matter , and I dare to hope that Amendment No 2 will receive sufficient votes .
Fontaine report ( A4-0232 / 98 )
It could be helpful to recall the need to reform the directives on the recognition of diplomas .
In fact who , in this House , has not been called upon to intervene in such an issue , to persuade national authorities to recognize qualifications acquired in another Member State ?
The report by our colleague , Nicole Fontaine , provides important support for the European educational system , and more specifically for people who are training or are students .
I would therefore like to congratulate her on her work , which also represents a further step towards strengthening the idea of European citizenship .
In fact , with such strong forces trying to hold back the mobility of persons , how can we talk about free movement of goods and persons in Europe ?
Many people use terms like adaptability , reactivity , flexibility , cardinal values for the European salaried worker in the year 2000 .
But , very quickly , they come up against the hard realities of bureaucracies , or more exactly laws made by national governments ?
This observation is also true for other fields , and it interferes with the construction of Europe .
So we must legislate on whatever most closely affects the daily concerns of the individual .
In so doing , we will breathe life back into the idea of Europe , and perhaps put it back on the rails .
Yes , a text which affects the rights and powers of the citizen helps the European Union to come across more clearly .
Aelvoet recommendation ( A4-0165 / 98 )
After Tunisia , Israel , Morocco and the PLO , we must today make a decision and give our assent to the Euro-Mediterranean agreement with Jordan .
Following directly upon the conclusions of the Barcelona Conference of November 1995 , the European Union is forging its relationships with its partner countries in the Maghreb and Mashrek by setting up a new contractual framework .
The Association Agreement with Jordan is entirely consistent with this framework , as its first article announces the creation of a free trade area .
We have to support this objective , as we did for the other countries , because the Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan is counting on our aid .
The various aspects of cooperation will be reinforced regarding economic and social relations , improvement of living and working conditions and the development of regional cooperation .
It is true that Jordan is currently experiencing a relatively high rate of growth , but this does not seem to be shared by the whole of the population .
The effort must be sustained and it is at this level that aid from the European Union will have its full effect .
Finally , let us not forget the problem of the political stability of the region .
The fragility of the peace process , the consequences of which are sometimes felt in the implementation of our MEDA partnership , will achieve a measure of stability with the instigation of a political dialogue with Jordan .
In accordance with the recommendation of our Committee on Foreign Affairs , Security and Defence Policy , I would like to speak in favour of the agreement by expressing our wishes for its future success .
The conclusion of a Euro-Mediterranean Agreement between the European Union and Jordan is a good thing and something which I would like specifically to support .
A dynamic Euro-Mediterranean partnership , together with the enlargement of the European Union towards the East , is one of the cornerstones of the stability and development of the whole of the European continent .
I think there are four particularly important aspects to this agreement :
1 ) the gradual creation of a free trade area which will benefit both parties ;
2 ) the clause for the respect of human rights and democratic principles provided for in Article 2 ;
3 ) the initiation of regular political dialogue ( Articles 3-5 ) and in particular the establishment of cooperation , to be defined , between our Parliament and the Jordanian Parliament ;
4 ) cooperation between the European Union and Jordan as regards the fight against money laundering and drug trafficking .
Schmid report ( A4-0234 / 98 )
The report by our colleague Gerhard Schmid is of great importance both for the communications industry and for Internet users .
I would like , therefore , to support the Community action plan which is put before us today .
However , we must be aware of some truths about this network and its continuing growth .
First of all , I would like to denounce certain voices which seem to assume that ' Web ' necessarily means ' bad ' .
It should be remembered that this gigantic worldwide web is above all a tool and that it can in no way be held responsible for the perversions which some seem to find on their computer .
As with the telephone and the print media , the Internet is being portrayed as the ' mother and father ' of all vices and the creator of sins , though several news items reveal that there are people who were not waiting for this network to be created in order to carry out unpleasant acts . Unfortunately , they simply adapted to this new form of communication .
This preliminary proposal must not be interpreted as a renunciation of any wish to pursue these exploiters of human misery ; quite the contrary .
We need to lay the foundations for a complex reality which sometimes escapes us , and these need to be understood before satisfactory solutions can be found .
In fact , we have to take into consideration a basic fact about information technology .
It evolves and is increasing its power daily ; now , from a portable computer , we can access everything and everyone , and all this without any particular risk , even where this is illegal .
Thus , whilst I support the rapporteur 's proposals as regards illegal content and the way such content is dealt with using technological solutions , it is also necessary to reinforce legal and policing policies at Community level .
Such increased cooperation can alone lead to tangible results .
In order to ensure a safe environment , it is essential that awareness should be developed at international level , and first of all at European level .
It is urgent !
Very urgent !
Pollack report ( A4-0177 / 98 )
We note that this report is one of a long line of reports which demand that a new EU unit be set up , in this case a ' cross-departmental urban affairs unit ' .
We think this growing mass of EU authorities merely creates bureaucracy .
We can manage without this cross-departmental unit .
The European Union is apparently not able to take responsibility for the daily management of the environment in European cities .
This has to be done at local level .
Nevertheless , it is desirable that the Union should continue to specify some guidelines to be followed and aims to be achieved as regards sustainable development in the management of the urban environment , which can apply throughout Europe .
In fact , many environmental problems which can be attributed to the urbanisation of our countries have consequences throughout the Union .
Therefore , the citizens of Europe need an integrated approach to problems , the day-to-day management of which must be ensured by the local authorities , but which also need to be dealt with in a wider context which sets out the methods and objectives .
From this point of view , while we welcome the sectoral measures already taken by the Union , particularly as regards reduction of atmospheric pollution , it is regrettable that the Commission has delayed publishing the White Paper on the Urban Environment which we have been waiting for since the appearance , seven years ago now , of a Green Paper on the same subject .
It would certainly not be true to say that the European Union has been idle .
However , in the absence of a European legal framework , the projects financed by the European Commission which affect the urban environment have not received either sufficient resources or the coordination which the citizen has the right to expect .
Therefore , the Commission should , in the context of the reform of the Structural Funds which is to take place in 1999 , continue its support for these projects , and it should get down to finalising at the earliest possible opportunity a legal basis and an overall action plan for a sustainable urban environment in the European Union .
I am supporting this report today as a representative of exactly the kind of urban area which it is aiming to help .
It is high time that the debate on green issues went beyond the image of green fields and came home to the cities and towns where most of our citizens live .
Greater Manchester is one of the oldest industrial built-up areas in Europe , having been a centre of the Industrial Revolution .
We thought that with the clean air laws of the postwar years pollution had been confined to pictures of smog-wreathed factories in the history books .
However , as this report makes clear , people living in urban areas today face traffic congestion and pollution just as worrying as the old chimney smoke , but often invisible to the human eye .
We should take seriously the Court of Auditors ' findings that current EU policy to tackle urban problems lacks a coordinated framework .
It is time that our citizens reaped the benefit of a dedicated EU programme to improve our urban environment .
I will be looking to the Commission to respond to our call for such work as soon as possible .
Napoletano report ( A4-0172 / 98 )
We think our party colleague Mrs Napoletano has written a good report .
We would particularly like to agree with Mrs Napoletano 's criticism of the Commission 's plans to abolish the URBAN initiative .
It has provided excellent results with regard to specific urban problems not covered by other EU programmes .
In view of the fact that around 80 % of the EU 's citizens live in cities , we think it would be rash to abolish the URBAN initiative .
I have been very concerned about the problem of urban policies for several years , so I congratulate our colleague Mrs Napoletano who has completed this important task with such dedication .
I would also like to express my support for the quality of his report .
Like the rapporteur , I think it is urgent that we define the bases of a voluntary urban policy on a European scale .
At the present time , the city is at the heart of political discussion in the aftermath of tragic events in what are conventionally called the ' districts at risk ' .
In all cases , we have to be firemen and attend to the most urgent things first , waiting for the next conflagration .
As the report underlines , no-one is proposing to set the world of the town against the world of the countryside , but we must support a development process which limits the rural desertification process which affects most of the Member States .
Thus I would like to support Mrs Napoletano 's request regarding the pursuit of the URBAN programme , a Community tool which is all the more necessary as regards the experience of our citizens living in the large conglomerations , who are too often anonymous and rejected to the outskirts of the town centres .
In this sense , the work of the Eurocities network can mean a very interesting global approach to urban policies as regards large European conglomerations .
By defining an urban policy we are defining a framework and concrete and realistic objectives .
The next century will probably see an evolution in the urban environment , both in terms of its form and its size .
It is therefore important to take account of this fact in our discussion and in our political action .
I can only enthuse over my colleague Mrs Napoletano 's report since this report deals with the urban problem as a whole , including the environmental , social , cultural and regional aspects and the citizens .
It is precisely from this angle that the European Union should conceive of its urban action , with the aim of improving the quality of life ; urban policy should not be assimilated to that of deprived areas .
We need better coordination between the European institutions , more particularly between the Commission and the Member States .
This can , of course , be done by means of the principle of subsidiarity , but it really has to happen .
Just as the Commission must integrate the urban dimension with other Community policies and actions , similarly the Member States must develop their urban policy ( town contracts , state-region contracts for France ) in parallel with policies for the application and use of monies from Structural Funds in their countries .
We need a global vision of spatial development , which confirms a European urban strategy which our Parliament prays for .
It is a vision which complements that which the respective Member States should have , and the Member States themselves should put pressure on their local and regional authorities to implement it .
Local self-government , which is now defined in the Charter of Local Self-Government adopted by the Council of Europe , occupies a primordial place at the heart of the Europe which we are trying to build .
In addition to being the closest level of political representation for citizens , whose aspirations and concerns they feel all the more closely , large and small local authorities have a major role to play in a series of key fields .
The resolution which we are voting on today provides a list which , while not exhaustive , nevertheless gives a good oversight , particularly as regards environmental , social and cultural aspects .
The impact of Community policies and actions on urban towns and municipalities is clear .
Their character is also sometimes contradictory .
It is , therefore , essential to take proper account of the urban dimension of this impact when defining the policies and actions implemented by the Commission .
In this context , there is an urgent need to define a European urban strategy , which must be designed to be an integral part of a wider policy of spatial planning , the aim of which is to coordinate the effects of various Community policies throughout the Community and in different towns .
I would like to stress , in particular , the need to reinforce the integrationist role of the urban environment .
And in this regard I strongly support the rapporteur 's proposals on improving security and reducing crime in towns .
Mr President , the reports and the debate that has been going on for so long have provided a sampling of the many serious problems that Community urban space is suffering from .
It is clear that there are more problems , and the outlook is that they will get worse and they will multiply .
What is noteworthy and surprising in this ?
That nowhere does anyone name the main causes or those guilty of causing this situation , namely the jungle of the laws of multinational interests and unbridled competition , which has run amok in the pursuit of profit in the context of the arrant free market .
Unemployment , social exclusion , the poverty of sections of those residing in cities , racism , xenophobia , crime , unbalanced development - not only between different towns and cities in different countries , but even more so within the same country and within the same towns and cities and between neighbourhoods and sections of neighbourhoods - , the excessive pollution , the tragic degradation of the environment and the overall degeneration of the quality of life are neither coincidental nor unavoidable problems and , of course , they cannot be addressed with cover-ups , embellishing homilies and programmes .
Nowhere is it mentioned that the unemployment that is spiralling and ravaging urban centres is the result of the free market policy and the supremacy of big business , which , escorted by the European Union itself and with the support of national governments , is unrestrainedly torpedoing balanced development and labour and social rights .
Nor is there any mention by name of those interests that are squeezing dry the rural , regional economy and mining the balanced relationship between the countryside and the town , creating ever greater waves of unemployed who throng to urban centres to add their numbers to the already tremendous number of existing unemployed .
In the same report it is mentioned that " in 49 districts with an EU Urban programme , 15 of those urban areas have an unemployment rate of over 30 % ' and not one of those who stand for " social justice and cohesion ' asks the vital question " why ? '
It is the law of unbridled profit , the law of the jungle of multinationals , which is overturning any balance in the social fabric and giving rise to conditions in which the phenomena of crime , racism , xenophobia and killing are on the increase . These phenomena cannot be combatted with measures to police social life and measures of containment , which are proposed in the report .
These are the very same laws that are responsible for the rapid degradation of the environment , which has been placed under the " high-level protection ' of industrialists , of motor vehicle manufacturers , of lobbies and of politicians who facilitate their unrestrained activities , who overturn and impede every attempt to propose and implement policies that are environmentally friendly .
The outcomes and the declarations of the Rio and Kyoto Summits are mentioned , but no mention is made of those who rated them as feeble and dead in the water .
The monopolistic networks did not even allow these few measures to be implemented .
This new attempt at a so-called solution to the urban problem that has been announced , with whatever " European dialogues ' there may be and with the squandering of several more million ECU , apart from being a source of enrichment for the " large rodents ' of Community funds , will not solve these problems .
It will make them more acute , it will inflate them , it will become a pretext for taking away resources from other actions of a social nature , a means to mislead and assuage public opinion . We run the risk of being regarded as hypocrites and accomplices in the cover-up of illegal interests , or , it is not the one or the other , we run the risk of being regarded as political and parliamentary masochists , continually bemoaning the problems , not naming the causes , and consequently not confronting the problems in order to find a solution .
Let this Parliament at last rise above these syndromes and let it show that it truly represents the tormented people in the urban centres of the European Union .
Many of the proposals in this report are well intentioned .
At the same time as emphasizing the similarities of cities and the problems so many cities face , we also have to be aware of the fact that there are large differences between cities in the EU .
I therefore think it is important to point out that the principle of subsidiarity must apply .
Exchanging information is very good , because it is certain that many cities could learn from the actions of other cities on certain issues , but I am very sceptical of the idea that we should develop EU programmes and EU directives in this area .
The physical planning must be decided at a lower level than the EU .
The people who live in the area should decide on spatial planning , not some Brussels-based institution .
The Napoletano report on the urban question meets the aim of defining a " European urban strategy ' .
Once again , the Commission is endeavouring to extend the field of responsibility of the European Union .
The challenge is not only a political one , but also a financial one : recognition of an integrated Community urban policy will mean significant budgetary expenditure .
Given the budgetary constraints of the European Union , this expenditure is only possible on condition that funds are redistributed within the Community budget ; the main victims of this redistribution will , of necessity , be the rural regions and the regions dependent on fishing .
Thus , Mrs Napoletano is the spokeswoman for the URBAN initiative which will be merged into the new Objective 2 , under the Agenda 2000 plans , and hopes that it will be maintained with " adequate funding to consolidate its activities ... " .
The Group of Independents for a Europe of Nations has always thought that the Community should concentrate its financial efforts on existing common policies , namely the CAP and the CFP , and avoid the scattering of futile and client-oriented public funds .
This wish to " define a European urban strategy ' is echoed by the wish to create a " broader spatial planning policy ' of which it is " an indispensable part ' .
The whiff of federalism also impregnates some suggestions in favour of so-called European citizenship , one element of which is " the recognition of the right for foreign residents to vote and stand in municipal elections ' , and supports at the first opportunity " the unrestricted application of the provisions of the Treaty on the right to vote for Community residents ' .
Add to all this the numerous pledges made in this report in favour of a fashionable world ideology , using disquieting platitudes about the cohesiveness of our nations to justify multiculturalism .
It is therefore logical that the report should refer to the ' integration of immigrants ' instead of encouraging their assimilation into the civilisation of the host country , in order on the one hand to preserve national cohesiveness , and on the other to help foreigners to become full members of the national community , proud and happy to belong to it .
Therefore , it was impossible for our group to approve a report so opposed to our own beliefs .
Mrs Napoletano 's report asks for a " European urban strategy ' which forms part of an integrated and therefore federalist policy of spatial planning , a Jacobean step which we can only reject .
Urban policy is already the responsibility of towns , of urban districts of course , but also of municipalities , regions and states .
The list of those who have a part to play in this matter is sufficiently long without needing to add the European Union to the list .
The more actors there are on the scene , the more complex the files become , and the longer it takes to bring them to fruition .
Obviously , as Mrs Pollack 's report suggested , we must pay full attention to the urban environment ( waste management , air pollution , water treatment , employment , precariousness , preservation of our urban architectural heritage , migration ... ) .
However , in order to deal with these difficulties , we need to act upstream , by preventing ills and not downstream , by managing the crisis .
Therefore this report appears too often as a catalogue of symptoms the source of which is elsewhere .
Worse still , this catalogue has unfortunately too often the bad taste of sacrificing fashionable globalist ideology , for example by delivering meaningless platitudes on the immigration question .
We must aim for a better balance in spatial planning .
To achieve this , we have to overcome the urban over-concentration which so harms our societies .
We must concentrate our efforts in favour of the rural and maritime worlds , in order to deal with excessive urban concentration which is the source of so many problems .
We must encourage both an agricultural system which is capable of preserving quality and the environment but also a diversification of economic activities in rural regions and thus combat the excesses of production-oriented agriculture .
The Union must concentrate its financial efforts in areas where an integrated policy applies , for example the CAP and the CFP , and avoid scattering public funds around in a futile and client-oriented manner .
The Union must act in such a way that its policies , and in particular the CAP , do not seriously disturb the balance of spatial management .
These two reports deal with different problems which will arise in Europe in the future as a result of demographic developments .
Nowadays 80 % of EU citizens live in cities and the majority of business is conducted there too .
This concentration gives rise to a series of difficulties which the European Union can doubtless be helpful in removing , for example by drawing up a European strategy for cities .
The environment within cities is one of the most acute problems . Air pollution and the gradual disappearance of green spaces and parks to make way for built-up areas have clear consequences in terms of health which can no longer be hidden .
Without intervention throughout Europe , a reversal of this tendency is not foreseeable .
It is rare for environmental problems to be local in nature ; the majority of large cities have the same problems .
This is why it makes sense to set up a cross-departmental body in the Commission for matters specifically relating to cities , if it leads Member States to realize more quickly that the environment has a critical role to play in the future development of cities .
At the same time we also need economic and social initiatives .
Unemployment affects built-up areas particularly badly .
Xenophobia and racism are the unwelcome concomitants of different cultures living together .
So it has been suggested that not only large enterprises and technology parks should be promoted , but rather small and medium-sized enterprises ( SMEs ) , business centres and leisure and culture centres .
Security in conurbations of several million people is also a problem , and fighting and preventing crime is a priority .
We have to conclude from these two reports that a Europe-wide strategy for cities and regions would provide a useful framework from which to approach common problems , even if the solutions need to be adapted to suit individual situations .
In this context , the initiatives of the ' Office International du Coin de Terre Jardins Familiaux ' are of great importance .
This organization of European allotment holders represents some three million families ( ! ) across Europe and is making an important contribution by setting up allotments within cities .
First and foremost , allotments contribute to improving the environment in cities .
They also provide a positive leisure pursuit for city-dwellers .
And what is more , these initiatives by the ' Office International ' particularly benefit the unemployed and those living on the edge of society , as they find useful occupation working on the allotments as well as a cheap source of fresh fruit and vegetables .
Allotments therefore have an important part to play in improving the environmental and social situations in cities .
So it is particularly regrettable that non-governmental organizations were not named specifically to become involved in helping define a Europe-wide city development strategy .
These organizations have been making valuable contributions to their cities for a long time now , both in terms of environmental protection and protection of green spaces , as well as in social terms .
For this reason I tabled an amendment in the Committee on Regional Policy ( recital R ) , which at least mentions the NGOs in this context .
I can only hope that these valuable helpers will be regarded and treated by the Commission as essential partners on this issue .
With this objection , I am in favour of both reports .
Belenguer report ( A4-0206 / 98 )
We note that this report is one in a long line of reports which demand the setting up of a new EU unit , in this case a ' permanent structure that will provide analytical support ... ' ( recital K ) .
We think this growing mass of EU authorities merely creates bureaucracy .
We can manage without this permanent structure .
We all want to see the European Union develop harmoniously .
This is the rationale , notably , of our present action in the field of a single currency .
This wish will only be fully and satisfactorily met if it is accompanied , upstream , by an efficient regional policy and a coherent spatial management policy .
The driving force behind the document ' Europe 2000 ' , approved by the Committee of the Regions , is wholly appropriate .
Given the diversity of our European regions , we absolutely must encourage economic cohesion by providing wholly appropriate trans-European transport and communication networks , in spite of the many problems which persist .
As a representative of the Aquitaine , I would like to talk about the very real difficulties encountered in the implementation of " Europe 2000 ' .
In common with all other regions in the Atlantic Arc , the Aquitaine is a peripheral region which needs to be accessible , particularly as the Union is about to expand into the East of Europe and some centres of interest of the European Union are being moved to the north and east of the continent .
So we must first of all take into consideration the local aspects of the development work which we are proposing , without allowing ourselves to be overtaken by an over-generalised view of the plans .
This does not mean that this common balance must not remain our guiding light , but we shall have to make quite an effort in order to recognize the implications at local level .
The first official project of the plan for Community spatial planning has allowed the local authorities to participate actively and to involve the economic actors in these regions in the debate .
Let us work out a synthesis which takes account of the various local positions in order to establish a true consensus , without going beyond the confines of the current distribution of powers , since the European Union has not granted us strict rights in this area .
For these reasons , I approve the amended and consensual report prepared by my colleague Mr Novo Belenguer .
We would like to protest over the farce played out here yesterday in the Hemicycle , when the Commission came to seek the support of the European Parliament to back its misappropriation of funds .
In fact , it was caught in " flagrante delito ' : the Court of Justice of the European Communities - which is generally not severe with the Commission - had no choice but to condemn it , on 12 May last , for having committed budgetary expenditure without any legal basis .
This affair is a fine example .
The general budget of the European Union for 1995 allocated ECU 20 millions for the prevention of poverty and social exclusion .
But half way through the year , the Council refused to approve the " Poverty 4 ' programme proposed by the Commission ; this programme involved scattering credits in favour of small projects described as the " fight against social exclusion ' . We intervened at the time to support the position of the Council , on the grounds that such subsidies are contrary to the principle of subsidiarity and only serve to maintain the Commission 's clientele .
The Commission , attacked at the very heart of its being , decided to ignore the Council 's prohibition and in January 1996 announced that it granting subsidies to 86 projects relating to the " fight against poverty ' objective , to a total of ECU 6 million . This was a flagrant violation of the Treaty .
The validity of Community expenditure rests on two successive acts : entry in the budget and the definition of a legal basis , the first granted by Parliament and the Council acting together , the second granted here by the Council alone .
The second stage was quite plainly missing here .
The Court of Justice was forced to recognize this .
Several lessons must be drawn from this .
First of all , we note that only the United Kingdom , subsequently supported by Germany and Denmark , had the courage to bring the matter before the Court of Justice .
France stayed safely behind the scenes even though this was a flagrant violation of the Treaties , as well as of the principles of subsidiarity to which we declare ourselves elsewhere to be most firmly committed .
This attitude does not show our country up in a very good light .
Such timidity in the face of the permanent terrorism of the Commission explains in part why so many things are going badly in Europe .
Secondly , today , the Commission does not consider that it has been beaten .
It has just called on the European Parliament to help it to put pressure on the Council so that an agreement between the three institutions can soon be reached , supporting , in rather broadly defined cases , its habit of committing expenditure without any legal basis .
We find this manoeuvre totally unacceptable , and call on the Council to stand up to it .
Even if it gave in , this interinstitutional agreement would be illegal , because an agreement between institutions would not suffice to get round the obligations of the Treaty which were ratified by the people and can only be modified by them .
We do not think that Europe can continue like this : on the one hand , with great proclamations of democracy , respect for the law , subsidiarity ; on the other , behaviour on the part of the Commission which is contrary to such principles , and which does not seem to show any remorse even when caught with its hand in the till .
Unfortunately , instead of censuring the Commission , as it should in such a case , the European Parliament congratulates the Commission and commissions it to continue on behalf of their old federalist complicity .
Not only must the Council reject the new interinstitutional agreement proposed , it must affirm once and for all that this type of agreement must have the explicit approval of national parliaments .
Moreover , the institutional reform to come must include a reform of the Commission , and it must be clearly subordinate to the Council .
Garosci report ( A4-0230 / 98 )
The European Commission , in its report on control systems at the point of sale implemented by Member States , recognizes many anomalies .
In fact , based on the premise that such controls exist in the fifteen Member States , the Commission has found that there are differences in application .
However , how can we coordinate the control of sales at an airport and on board aeroplanes for example , without imposing additional financial costs on the operators for a fixed period .
Let us not forget that the European Commission 's report is linked to an estimation of the way the transitional system for duty-free sales will operate before abolition on 30 June 1999 .
For our part , we are worried about this very important question of the abolition of duty-free sales , for both economic and social reasons .
The economic reason is that the financial support assured by the income from this sector represents a major investment which contributes to the economic health of air and maritime transport .
If this revenue is lost , how will airports finance their infrastructures ?
Then there is the social and very current reason which concerns employment in this sector .
The trade union organizations suggest a loss of some 140 000 jobs !
Can we afford to close our eyes to this fact whilst we are trying to develop policies in favour of employment ?
We would like , therefore , to take advantage of the vote on this report , to remind the European Commission of the commitment of the House , as seen in the vote for a resolution on 3 April last , demanding an urgent study paying particular attention to the consequences of the abolition of duty-free on employment in the single market .
The stated intention of the Commission to persist with its policy to abolish duty-free sales after 30 June 1999 is totally unacceptable , particularly as the Commission has failed to fulfil the undertaking that it gave this Parliament to carry out a study on the economic and social consequences of abolition .
Not only has it betrayed a promise , the Commission is also demonstrating that its commitment to make the EU more relevant and responsive to its citizens is little more than empty rhetoric .
It is estimated that the abolition of duty-free sales will result in 140 , 000 job losses throughout the EU .
Four thousand of these will happen in my own country .
Jobs will be lost in the duty-free , transport and tourism sectors .
Suppliers to duty-free will also suffer .
It is evident that there will be a major negative impact on some regions .
As stated in one of the amendments tabled in my name , the Commission has a responsibility to bring forward measures to assist those who will be hardest hit if the Commission does in fact implement the decision to abolish duty-free .
In my view , the report contains a bit too much detail about how the control of sales should take place for inward and outward journeys .
This applies , for example , to paragraphs 9 , 10 and 11 of the resolution , which contain recommendations about where the ticket shall be stamped when a person has bought duty-free goods .
Surely the European Parliament should not concern itself with this .
Such things should be taken care of at a much lower level of decision-making .
As far as duty-free sales are concerned , I have voted against all the proposals from the UPE group which suggest that these sales should continue after 1 July 1999 .
The only proposal I have chosen to support is Amendment No 9 , which criticizes the Commission for not having produced an impact assessment on the effects of the ending of duty-free sales .
I still consider that reasonable , even though I think that duty-free sales should end next year .
When border controls were abolished through the single market the Member States could no longer carry out border controls as before on the border itself .
In my opinion that decision was a mistake .
We should instead have done the same as in Scandinavia and abolished passport controls but maintained other border and goods controls .
In connection with the decision to abolish duty-free sales , the Commission promised a study of the economic and social consequences of an abolition .
This has not been done , for example , with regard to the effects on employment in Scandinavia etcetera .
As long as this has not been done , there should be no abolition of duty-free sales .
While everyone in the Community would like to see the creation of laws which support the directives for a common system where it is useful , duty-free sales is not one of the issues which should be consuming the Commission 's time and the Community 's money .
The pursuance of the common system should be established in a way which aids each state and their citizens .
At this time it can be said that loopholes do exist in the present system concerning tax-free sales , but complete abolition of the system creates more serious problems than its continuance .
That the effects of this proposal have not been clearly thought through is evident in the lack of facts and concrete statistics which are currently available to the Commission .
Their report was written quite a few years ago and several of their main points for eradication have been greatly improved upon in terms of tightening control of such sales .
The implementation of this procedure in 1999 will show drastic losses concurrently hitting several viable fronts .
A loss of 140 , 000 jobs , increase in airport landing charges , a marked decline in the EU tourist sector due to higher passenger fares , and the devitalization of regional airports are concrete factors which directly injure the Community .
The answer to this problem should not be found in a complete removal of the duty-free system , but in proposals for a more efficient manner in which to carry out such sales .
Although this report is primarily technical in nature and deals with the possible improvement in vendor controls in duty-free trade , its political background - the abolition of duty-free goods sales on travel routes within the EU from 1999 onwards - cannot be denied , and I would firmly reject this .
It may be that controls in ports and airports are insufficient and the customs allowance set by the Council is frequently exceeded without any controls .
If this is so , these regulations must be improved in line with the recommendations of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and Industrial Policy .
For this reason I am in favour of the Garosci report .
I am also in favour of the amendments tabled by the rapporteur , which include financial support for the people and regions which will be affected by the partial abolition of duty-free .
This clearly spells out the consequences in terms of employment that this useless measure will bring : duty-free sales represent an important proportion of revenue especially for smaller regional airports .
Travellers see duty-free as a welcome pastime when they are waiting for a flight ; its abolition would have a negative impact for them , and - with decreased airport revenue - could eventually result in increases in the price of flights .
The argument that duty-free sales would damage normal trade has been proven to be incorrect . These sales are closely tied up with their location and their environment and they would not be made in the course of normal city shopping .
The Commission 's persistence in not carrying out a study on the effects of the abolition of duty-free sales on employment is nothing short of scandalous .
In 1992 the Ministers for Finance could not predict what the employment market would be like in 1999 , or else they certainly would not have willingly endangered thousands of jobs by way of making a small cosmetic improvement in the internal market .
The key question here in political terms is the significance and future of duty-free sales within the Union .
The large majority of our group shares the belief that customs and tax loopholes and tax havens cannot be reconciled with a properly functioning internal market , and therefore we support the plans to let duty-free regulations be phased out .
The structural problems of peripheral regions and areas should be tackled in earnest , for example by defining a practical equivalent to the universal concept for transport and traffic and through an appropriate Community and national grant scheme .
A transitional follow-up grant as set out in Amendment No 30 would certainly be a practical solution for problem regions and areas .
The artificial prolongation of duty-free regulations as a roundabout way of achieving long term clarification of grey areas , as set out in Amendment No 29 , is considered by the large majority of my group to be much too vague and indirect as well as being unfair and inefficient .
De Clercq report ( A4-0205 / 98 )
We do not think that the EU should decide to what extent the Member States should teach a common syllabus of European history .
As Article 126 makes clear , education is the responsibility of the Member States themselves .
Nor do we think that we would ' strengthen European consciousness ' by harmonizing teaching aids and school years .
However , we do think that European voluntary service is a very good project which gives young people a chance to experience new cultures and learn languages .
For these reasons it is logical for us to abstain from voting on recital G.
What is citizenship of the Union ?
Put the question to the average citizen and he will shrug his shoulders .
It means little to the citizen .
Today there was a vote on the report by Mr De Clercq , which examines this citizenship .
Citizenship plays the key role in continuing political integration , according to the report .
So the citizen must be encouraged in all kinds of ways to value this European citizenship .
The citizen must thus be motivated to take an active part in this Parliament 's dream of European unity .
Furthermore the citizen must gain a European consciousness , which must be encouraged through instruction in our so-called common history and culture .
But can and should this citizenship of the Union really play a key role in continuing integration ?
Is this not putting the cart before the horse ?
The coming into being of a feeling of European citizenship can never be a means , at most it can be the end .
And even as an end we do not consider it worth striving for .
Citizenship at a national level is made up among other things of language , culture and history .
Citizenship of the Union appears to take shape in matters such as voting rights , right of residence and freedom of movement .
These are issues of a different sort .
Even with the proposed methods of promoting this notion , the citizenship that binds people together at national level cannot arise at European level .
To think that a uniform citizenship should be imposed on the people of Europe is to misunderstand the real needs and wishes of the citizen .
A citizen becomes involved through such issues as local decision making , openness , sensible legislation and tangible results .
Only when we take note of these needs of citizens and take them seriously will the citizen in turn take the Union seriously .
Ideas such as lists of candidates for the European Parliament which must include citizens of Member States other than one 's own will certainly not contribute to voters taking the Union seriously .
Those are enough reasons for our party to vote against this report .
The question of European citizenship is essential because it shows the spirit which is meant to guide the development of the European Union .
In fact , the very idea of citizenship cannot be dissociated from that of the State and it is clear that the affirmation of an even wider European citizenship arises out of the wish to achieve a European federal state , or a more centralized Europe .
The report by the chairman , Mr De Clercq is obviously consistent with this line of thinking .
The recommendation made to the political parties " to accept more Union citizens who are not nationals of the country concerned as partymembers and candidates on the electoral lists , and to encourage them to take part in political life in their country of residence ' is significant here .
This is part of the utopian desire to create a European people by force and by legal artifice , against the historical , cultural and linguistic reality .
Everything can be debated , but it must be done in a spirit of clarity and in front of the citizens of the Member States .
This is precisely what has hardly ever been done in Europe .
The system we know was built away from the eyes of the people .
The Commission is still working towards the realization of a centralized super-state , as is proved by the document ' The Commission of tomorrow ' of 16 April 1998 which states that this latter should concentrate further on the great kingly policies - foreign affairs , the currency , internal security , the single market , economic and social cohesion - and common policies .
We might ask what will be left for the Member States ?
The Commission 's answer is : greater delegation in simple administrative tasks .
Has this debate been clearly stated ?
No .
And this is where the scandal lies , because the political system which is being built is not subject to any democratic caution .
President Santer stated on 27 May , this year that the Commission must continue to play its political role , forcefully and totally independently . This is the claim for increasing power without the political responsibility .
This is contrary to the very basis of all democracy .
The report by the chairman , Mr De Clercq forms part of this logic of a European state .
Has the Directorate-General for Research in the European Parliament not stated that citizenship of the Union constitutes one of the essential structural principles of federalist political systems ?
We cannot accept this logic .
Democracy requires proximity .
The artificial super-state which we want to build has all the characteristics of a power which is both technocratic and distant .
It is radically contrary to our concept of a Europe which respects peoples and nations .
While I welcome the work of our colleague Mr De Clercq on a subject which I hold very dear , I would also like to specify the weaknesses , as I see them , in this report .
First of all , I think that citizenship cannot happen by decree , but is something which comes with practice .
Once this premise has been put forward , the rights and duties of the various players in the democratic process must be specified , because exercising citizenship is that as well .
Thus , if I express delight at the proposals made by the rapporteur in favour of the Members States , in order to broaden and support the rights of citizens , it is , however , necessary to think about how we might improve the way the various institutions are seen , so that each European can fully exercise his citizenship , in full knowledge of the situation .
These remarks are not limited to the European institutions alone , but also apply to the Member States .
In fact , how can this citizenship possibly operate properly at two " levels ' if the dysfunctionality is already appearing at national level ?
Is it necessary to give examples ?
In addition to the need for better understanding , we should add , in this field , that nothing can develop positively if we politicians do not find some real credibility .
In fact , I am silly enough to believe that this citizenship and political decisionmaking cannot be separated from one another .
Given the way that the economy affects our daily life , political action must find the right tools to do this .
We cannot and should not reduce the democratic process to an exercise in bargaining .
It is clear to me that our weak decision-making process in the context of the emerging global economy contributes to the erosion of the citizenship which we all recognize and which lies at the heart of much verbal , written and physical violence .
Finally , on a more technical note , how can we talk about European citizenship when we are dealing , as I am , with tax scandals which have been dragging on for years .
Someone affected by these problems cannot fail to question whether Europe for the European citizens really exists .
In this respect , the next few years will be critical if we are finally to achieve something amounting to European citizenship .
This greatly affects the credibility of the European Union and thus its future , if not its survival .
The construction of Europe has seen an inversion of priorities and the negative effects of this are still being felt , which the European Parliament has undertaken to correct over time .
I would like to mention the four freedoms defined by the Single Act : freedom of movement of persons , goods , services and capital .
We know that , for reasons connected with the primacy afforded to the economy and to the rapid advance of technologies , it is freedom of movement of capital which was achieved first , contrary to the wishes and expectations of the founding fathers , with consequences of which we are already aware .
That is why I agree with the rapporteur when he reminds the House , in the first point of his proposal for a resolution , of the protocol of Treaty of Amsterdam which aims to integrate the Schengen Agreement into the framework of the European Union and when he invites Member States to start work on this without further delay .
In fact , there is no doubt that the free movement of citizens is linked to the abolition of internal border controls .
Member States have still to amend laws which are sometimes too cosy as regards the conditions for establishment , the mobility of the young and the recognition of diplomas .
Citizens in the Union must feel at home in each of the Member States and must enjoy every freedom for setting up home , living , studying and working in those states .
As regards voting rights in municipal elections , I am delighted , as a Belgian , that the rapporteur has asked France and Belgium to transpose the directive into national law as soon as possible .
This is a matter which touches upon the very roots of democracy .
Moreover , I am personally in favour of the right to vote to be granted to everyone living in my country for several years and who satisfy a certain number of conditions , whether the people are or are not European .
European citizenship which is implicit in this right to vote in municipal elections goes hand in hand with the respect of minority groups and , more broadly , has to do with the defence of our values which are tolerance , respect for differences and mutual comprehension .
These values are the only real antidote to turning in on one oneself , nationalism , xenophobia and racism .
The public 's disillusionment as regards the construction of Europe is patent within several Member States .
Too often , our citizens feel that only economic and financial Europe is working , with its cohort of restructuring and redundancies .
It is essential that we correct this perception , which leads too many Europeans to get hold of the idea that the Europe under construction is not their Europe , if they do not take a complete dislike to it .
Citizenship of the Union is at the very heart of the link which must unite Europeans and the building of Europe .
Six years after its incorporation into the Maastricht Treaty , citizenship is still far too theoretical for our fellow citizens .
In the collective subconscious of Europeans , one is a citizen of a country in which one can wander around freely in every direction without having to show identity papers .
There are still too many obstacles today which prevent this from becoming a reality in the European Union .
The measures suggested in the proposal for a resolution which has been submitted to us is obviously a step in the right direction .
This is why I support this proposal unreservedly .
The right to vote is yet one more irreducible expression of citizenship .
We must therefore ask whether one can really be a full European citizen if the Member State in which a person is living as a non-national applies different laws and electoral procedures , as regards participation in European votes , to that person than to its own nationals at the same elections .
To me , the answer is a clear no .
It seems to me , therefore , that we have to go further than the current resolution .
As regards European elections , we need the laws which apply to nationals to be automatically applicable to citizens of the European Union residing in the national territory .
In the case of my country , this means , inter alia , that voting rights will be obligatory for all nationals of Member States of the Union living in Belgium , unless they can prove that they vote in their own country .
By extension , the same equivalent treatment must apply to local elections .
The Liberal Members are able to draw a lot of positive things about Union citizenship from the De Clercq report and confirm the need for the citizens to participate in the construction of Europe .
Without acceptance by the citizens there can be no common Europe .
However we are also aware of the current developments in which politicians , mainly at a European level , talk a lot about proximity to the people , but in actual fact neglect them at every turn .
However , we reject the report as a whole because we reject the institution of Union citizenship in itself because we do not have a European people .
In the opinion of the signatories to this explanation of vote , the De Clercq report is unacceptable on almost all fronts .
Thus , we have chosen to vote against the report .
For example , we find the De Clercq report 's desire to harmonize the school systems of EU countries in terms of their syllabus to be an expression of a dangerous line of thinking , particularly against the backdrop of the proposal in the report to introduce joint teaching of selected subjects to promote a clearly positive view among pupils of the EU .
In our view , teaching pupils about European history and culture is excellent , and voluntary coordination between European countries and their schools and teachers centred around particular subjects is also an excellent idea .
That way , our children and young people will be given a broad , cross-border insight into one another 's history and culture .
However , that is not the intention of the De Clercq report .
The purpose here is purely and simply to influence the views of children and young people in a particular political direction , with the ultimate goal of drumming up support for the federal EU state .
Neither can we support the desire for the Schengen acquis to be enshrined in the Treaty on European Union , because we oppose the Schengen Agreement .
Our opposition is based on the fact that Schengen does not lead to greater freedom for citizens ; on the contrary , the Schengen acquis would imply increasingly less transparent , hidden controls on people .
We are also strongly opposed to the EU having any influence whatsoever on pensions and other social benefits .
The nature of these matters is purely national .
Finally , we wish to distance ourselves from EU interference in the matter of candidates to be selected by parties for European Parliament elections .
The undersigned have voted against the report by Mr De Clercq for the following reasons :
1.Issues of citizenship should be decided by the individual states without Union interference .
This should continue in future to be the prerogative of the Nation States.2.The right to vote in municipal elections for immigrants can be decided without introducing Union citizenship .
In Sweden all immigrants already have the right to vote in municipal elections after two years of residence.3.A citizenship of the Union automatically creates discrimination against immigrants from countries outside the Union .
The right to vote in municipal elections should apply to all immigrants regardless of their country of origin.4.Freedom of movement without any restrictions is , as experience shows , absolutely undesirable for social reasons .
The States have to be able to guarantee good conditions , rights and integration for the immigrants.5.The idea of teaching a ' common syllabus ' of European history is totally bizarre .
Such a standardization of history teaching is equivalent to censorship of critical scholarship and entails the setting up of a fundamentally dubious picture of actual history .
No real European identity will be created by such artificial methods.6.Far more appropriate than the unproductive , mistaken proposals in the report would be to abolish the current semiauthoritarian level of government in the Union and replace it with a simpler system based on national sovereignty and the principle of subsidiarity .
That is the only way Europe will become a Europe of the citizens rather than a Europe of the civil servants , the lawyers and the elites .
I have voted with conviction for the resolution of the Committee on Legal Affairs and Citizens ' Rights on citizenship of the Union , including paragraph 11 , in which the Belgian government is called upon to put the directive on Community voting rights for European citizens into operation without delay .
This should have been settled two years ago .
Perhaps it could be written in large letters that my party , the Flemish Christian People 's Party ( CVP ) , have always been in favour of this European voting right .
I want to use my voting declaration to call on my Belgian colleagues in this House not just to make grandiose statements here in the European Parliament but also to get down to work on it in their own party back home .
The Belgian government has long been wanting to implement the directive but in order for the directive to take effect smoothly the constitution must first be changed .
Such a change requires a two-thirds majority in the Belgian Federal Parliament .
The opposition parties must therefore give their support .
If the rapporteur , Mr De Clercq , who is an eminent member of one of these opposition parties , can persuade his own party members at home to deliver their votes , then the appeal that he made in the European Parliament will get a rapid response .
His report would then gain in credibility .
I am voting against this report for many reasons .
I do not think , for example , that we should invest more in target-oriented information , that is , propaganda for the Union .
Nor do I think that we would ' strengthen European consciousness ' by creating a ' European history ' .
Nor do I think that we should harmonize European syllabuses and school years .
I think that most Swedes , parents and children alike , are happy with the Swedish model , which means that we have holidays in June , July and August .
In brief , this report is far too federal for me to vote for it .
Oomen-Ruijten report ( A4-0095 / 98 )
The European collective bargaining process will assist the coordinated implementation of the policy on employment and Economic and Monetary Union .
Sustained social and economic development , the strengthening of economic activity , and the creation of jobs take place through social consensus , concertation and active diplomacy .
The restoration of fundamental social balances will not take place without the support of the social partners and the development of a European social dialogue .
Experience tells us that the partial globalization experienced in Europe for the past ten years or more has been accompanied by many perverse effects due to the absence of a European social dialogue .
Much distress and misery could have been avoided with more concertation .
Let us hope at least that this painful experience will serve as a lesson to avoid further dramas as regards the globalization currently taking place .
I would like to thank the rapporteur and congratulate him on the work he has presented .
There are some positive stages ahead along the path towards European unification : completion of the single market , realization of Economic and Monetary Union , as well as the imminent arrival of the euro as a single currency .
However , none of this will be permanently established if the people of Europe feel that the unification of our continent is taking place at their expense .
From this viewpoint , the emergence of a social Europe becomes an absolute necessity .
Once it is realized , it will favour the establishment of lasting peace in terms of social relations in the European Union and will thus encourage economic growth .
Ratification by the 15 Member States of the European Union of the section of the Amsterdam Treaty relating to ' Social policy , education , vocational training and youth ' , is a new step in the right direction , but it must be followed by others and , in particular , by the inclusion in the European Treaties of fundamental trade union rights .
Moreover , as our rapporteur has quite rightly emphasized , the European Commission is speaking up in international bodies to have trade union rights and the right to bargain - rules internationally recognized in the world of work - respected in all the countries of the world .
In addition , the European Union will soon be opening its doors to states which do not have the same traditions as ourselves in terms of labour relations , nor the same habits of respect for trade union rights .
Finally , in our own countries , the far-reaching changes in the labour market as a result of technological innovation and globalization make it necessary to include these fundamental rights in the founding texts of the European Union . They also call for the creation of a transnational Community framework of guarantees and legal provisions which will ensure the harmonious deployment of social concertation at European level .
For all these reasons , I support Mrs Oomen-Ruijten 's report .
In view of the long traditions we have in Sweden concerning the rights and obligations of unions , I have voted against this report today .
Compared with many other countries in the EU , the Swedish trade union movement is very highly developed and , compared with many other countries , it has a special position in the labour market .
There is a clear risk in this proposal that many of the rights which trade unions currently enjoy are under threat , such as with regard to collective bargaining .
Obviously I have nothing against the demand for fundamental social rights , but should these matters really be centralized in Brussels ?
It is important to strengthen union rights at all levels , such as freedom of association , the right of collective bargaining and the right to strike .
One way might be to also include these rights in the Treaty at European level .
Another way might be to let unions take care of this without any Treaty provisions .
One risk of regulating at the EU level is that union rights will be mixed up with EU law and that they will be restricted instead of being strengthened .
Obviously we should try to avoid major industrial disputes , but the question is whether this should be regulated at EU level .
This proposal could be supported on condition that it is the social partners who themselves draw up the negotiating rules and principles at European level within this framework .
The EPLP position is to maintain the current industrial relations culture in the UK , but understands the background to Mrs Oomen-Ruijten 's own-initiative report as it affects other countries in the EU .
I am glad to vote for this report today and glad to see that the need to balance the EU 's emphasis on trade with a strong social angle is being taken forward at the initiative of this Parliament .
As the report rightly points out , it is to be welcomed that my own country 's government has decided to end the opt-out from the Social Chapter which threatened to leave British workers as second-class citizens compared to their counterparts in other EU countries .
It is surely only fair that the trade unions and employers ' groups which represent the people who make our economies work should see their rights of association enshrined in the Treaty on European Union in future .
And who better to consult on issues such as trade union rights in multinational businesses than the unions in which millions of our working people participate ?
Thirty years ago my predecessor as MEP for Greater Manchester West , Barbara Castle , was campaigning in Britain for a new approach to employment rights to put cooperation and fairness in place of industrial strife .
I only wish that her efforts had met with more support then .
I am committed , in voting for this report , to see that the kind of cooperation between employers and staff aimed at replacing damaging disputes with a partnership culture takes another step forwards .
Let us get bureaucracy off the backs of entrepreneurs and employees and allow them to draw up proposals for negotiating between themselves .
In this spirit of teamwork in the workplace , Europe can create a culture of fairness at work - as my own government is doing at home .
The judgement reached on 17 June by the European Court of First Instance , which rejected the request from the UEAPME , the European Union of Crafts and Small and Medium-sized Enterprises , to be allowed to take part as a full social partner in the European social policy discussions , is very regrettable .
This judgement confirms the position of power of the existing European social partners UNICE , CEEP and the ETUC .
This judgement leads us once again to ask questions about the procedure agreed in Maastricht whereby the " representative ' social partners can reach European collective agreements about work without the intervention of the European Parliament and where the Council only acts as " solicitor ' .
Mrs Oomen-Ruijten 's report rightly emphasises that overcoming conflicts of interest through discussion and social consensus contributes to the strengthening of industry and the economy as a whole , and also to the creation of job opportunities , and that such a consensus is an essential condition for sustainable socio-economic development .
The report also rightly points to the ILO Conventions Nos 87 and 98 , drawn up in the 1940s , and the European Social Charter of the Council of Europe , in which the freedom of association and the right of collective bargaining at a national level are enshrined .
The report also rightly states that these ILO Conventions should be applied at Community level .
I should like to emphasize , however , that the social partners should always be sufficiently representative .
Everyone must have a chance .
It is thus unacceptable that the ETUC refuses to include important trade unions , for example the ACVLB from Belgium or the CGT from France .
The same applies to the employers ' side .
I regret the refusal to recognise the UEAPME as a full social partner .
This decision goes against the ILO Conventions mentioned above .
This judgement is an aberration .
Social partners should be sufficiently representative .
In my opinion it is unacceptable to rule that an organization with more than nine million members , which employs some 50 million workers , should be excluded from discussions about European collective labour accords .
I wish to protest very strongly against this .
Social Europe has indeed still a long way to go .
Ghilardotti report ( A4-0203 / 98 )
The contribution made by workers in the voluntary sector is irreplaceable .
It is present in local associations but also at every level of our society , at regional , state , Community or even global level .
Their contribution sets an excellent example and they play a leading role in allowing us to experiment and invest in new sectors of activity and human solidarity .
It is also a sector of activity which desperately needs recognition of its usefulness , but while it may sometimes need only a little to encourage it , it can also be all too easily discouraged .
Public administrations will draw inspiration from this , realizing that the human and financial resources devoted to the support of associations and foundations in Europe are the most efficient , most reasonable and apparently the best market we could implement to meet the social needs of our society .
Economic and social cohesion in the European Union is and must also be the concern of the citizen .
Throughout Europe , several voluntary organizations work in all sectors of society and instil a real breath of democratic life and acceptance of citizens ' responsibility .
They often serve to bridge the gaps in the activity of local and national administrations .
This is true in such essential social areas as training , education and solidarity .
It has often been said in the House and by the Commission that this type of organization could , moreover , constitute an important source of jobs , so as to respond in a flexible and efficient manner to a number of unmet demands .
For this reason , we must support the proposals to increase European national or regional aid which can help these organizations in promoting jobs in priority sectors such as health or education , provided that the jobs so created are real jobs covered by real work contracts and not just precarious or badly paid jobs which serve only to bring down the unemployment statistics .
In conclusion , like the rapporteur , I resolutely support the Commission 's commitment to promoting the role of voluntary organizations and foundations in Europe .
But I would also like to remind the Council and the Commission of the importance of developing laws which can be applied to organizations , foundations , associations and mutual societies in the voluntary sector .
Chanterie report ( A4-0229 / 98 )
Seven months after the road transport strike in France , the European Union is beginning to be aware of gaps in its legislation on working hours .
On 15 July 1997 , the European Commission presented a White Paper on the sectors and activities excluded from the working time directive .
But , reading this paper , one can only be astonished that no proposals for directives or regulations are contained in it .
As a member of the Committee on Transport and Tourism , I would like to stress the importance of legislation concerning long-distance drivers .
It is time to amend the regulation which has been effective since 1985 ( 3820 / 85 ) relating to driving time and rest periods .
It is necessary to incorporate new data such as the daily and weekly ceiling , the number of driving hours , unloading and loading time , which is an integral part of the long-distance driver 's work .
Mr Chanterie 's report deals with these problems in a very thorough manner , and I can only congratulate him on his work .
As long ago as December 1997 , the French government had presented a memorandum demanding European harmonization of social rules in the road transport sector before the full opening of the market , which is planned for 1 July 1998 .
The Commission , which is committed to the aims of the memorandum ( regulation of working time , including loading and unloading time , compulsory initial and continuing training for professional long-distance drivers , harmonization of controls and sanctions applicable in the case of non-compliance with social legislation ) , has been very slow to make any proposals .
Now those involved in this sector will not give up the struggle and they will remain vigilant .
There is a very strong risk of strikes and the argument that this will damage the principle of free movement will not cause the barricades to fall .
If the European Union can get involved with this social aspect , it will regain some credibility .
As we are about to vote on this report , I would like to remind the House of the urgency of harmonization in European road transport .
At a time when cabotage is permitted , it is unacceptable to see the development of social dumping and the exploitation of long distance drivers .
It is economically unjust , socially unacceptable and , I would add , dangerous for everyone in terms of road safety .
Therefore , we must act as quickly as possible , at the risk of seeing costly yet understandable conflicts multiply .
It can be done if the political will exists .
It is up to our ministers to speak out on this matter and to act !
Let us look at just one example which we in the North know very well .
In France , long-distance drivers cannot drive on Sunday . In Belgium they can .
The result is that long-distance lorries all gang up at Rekem and at 10 p.m. we have miles and miles of queues of long-distance lorries invading the Lille area and crossing Villeneuve d 'Ascq , heading towards Paris .
As we enter the age of the euro and the single market , it is a shining example of the rickety nature of a lop-sided European construction which is no longer acceptable to European citizens .
The opening of markets and international competition means that working time has become an important factor in the competitiveness of European firms in home and foreign markets .
If implemented properly , a different distribution of working time could help to create or to preserve a large number of jobs .
If badly planned , however , it could damage safety , health , family life or the social life of the people concerned .
It would appear that the sectors and activities were excluded from the current Community rules on working time for questionable political and economic motives which had very little to do with scientific or social consequences .
Thus , I share the viewpoint not only of our rapporteur but also of the Joint Sectoral Committees of several excluded sectors , that working time is an issue that must be discussed fully within the context of European industrial and social relations .
While it must be clear to everyone that the flexibility which is needed to ensure the competitiveness of our businesses must not in any way become synonymous for workers with a deterioration in their living conditions or a lowering of standards of safety and protection , we should also condemn as unacceptable the fact that workers excluded from the benefits of European legislation should , therefore , be obliged to work in conditions which are potentially harmful to their family life or dangerous for their health and safety or that of others .
So I fully support the resolution which we are adopting today .
I would like to stress in particular the need for the European Union to adopt the necessary means to improve controls and harmonize sanctions , in order to combat excessive working hours .
In collaboration with the social partners and the Member States , the Commission must be the driving force in this respect .
We should be pleased that this report deals with the working conditions of sectors and activities excluded from the working time directive , in particular , workers in the transport sector , fishing , doctors in training and the self-employed .
It is clear that the working time directive will be an essential factor in improving the quality of life of all citizens and in particular for the six million workers concerned .
But we should not forget that for more than a century , the benefits of gains in productivity have always been shared out between economic investments , pay rises and reduction in working time .
This development , approved by strong action in favour of the five-day week , the eight-hour day , paid holidays , the right to continuing professional development , has come at the same time as continuous economic growth and the emergence of a society which shares the fruits of its labour amongst all consumers .
For almost twenty years , this process first started to slow down , then began to jam up completely , creating more and more exclusion and poverty for those who do not share in the distribution of labour .
It is high time to redress this situation and to manage human resources quite differently .
Everyone must share in the joint effort and must benefit in return from the share of wealth generated in order that their families can benefit from the welfare of all .
Training work has become very important in our society .
So we must assert the right and duty of every worker to improve his professional qualifications throughout his career and , and that he must be able to spend part of his working time in training as well as in productive time or service delivery .
While this may still seem a Utopian dream , except for white collar and office workers , the social partners must pay close attention to this and there should be specific clauses in each contract of employment and in each regulation .
Our society will only progress if there is greater investment in people , in their intelligence , in their desire for recognition of their skills , in their ability to progress throughout their life .
We have today voted in favour of all EU wage-earners being able to derive maximum benefit from the 1993 directive on working hours .
There are , of course , certain special circumstances in the case of the transport sector .
However , all mobile workers should at the very least be covered by regulations on annual leave , health assessment for night workers , rest periods and annual work time .
It is an excellent solution that regulations on working hours for mobile employees in the excluded sectors are being negotiated on the spot between the parties to the labour market .
Thus , we welcome the agreements entered into so far , for example in the maritime sector .
It is quite unacceptable for five million non-mobile workers in the EU not to be covered by the directive on working hours .
Thus , we have a situation whereby a sales assistant working for the Danish State Railways has different working conditions than those of a sales assistant in a cinema , even though both of them sell tickets .
Thus , we join in pressing for non-mobile workers in the EU to be fully protected by the directive .
Mr Chanterie 's report rightly underscores how urgent and even very urgent it is to put an end to the scandalous exclusion of a large number of salaried workers from the European working time directive .
The European parliament judged this directive to be wholly unsatisfactory back in 1993 when it was adapted .
Five years later , millions of salaried workers still do not enjoy the most basic protection in Europe !
Five years later , whereas there have been enormous gains in productivity everywhere , the Council and the European Commission are incapable of proposing substantial improvements to the 1993 directive and the specific decisions dealing with excluded sectors .
In fact , Parliament was only consulted on the White Paper .
How long do we need to wait before we get a directive which covers excluded sectors and improves the current directive ?
Road transport is one of the most important sectors .
Today , the road transport market is open , free , deregulated .
At the same time , in spite of the protests of salaried workers , and even strike movements , there are no European rules which harmonize - upwards - their working time and conditions , and which limit social dumping , deterioration of the best social standards , and which protect not only their safety but also the safety of others .
Europe is not working !
Working time for long-distance drivers must take account of the amount of time which is actually worked ( unloading , loading , breaks , etcetera ) . , it must very quickly come down to the 35-hour week and should never exceed 39 hours .
Otherwise , how can we possibly talk about a " European social model ' ?
Otherwise , how can we establish financial sanctions for Member States whose long-distance drivers block the roads in order to have their legitimate claims heard ?
If an operational directive is not adopted before the end of the year for this profession , liberal Europe will once more have overridden the project of a Union at the service of the people .
Mr Chanterie 's report takes us in the right direction ; it could go a lot further but , for the time being , the most urgent thing is to establish a protective framework for the six million salaried workers who are the most vulnerable .
That is the reason why I am voting for this report .
It would not be at all difficult to write an entire novel on the evolution and the discussions on working time in the road transport sector .
That is why I think that enough has been written and there has been enough blah , blah , blah , as Pauline Green has said , and that now we have to quickly find solutions which attack an iniquity which is less and less acceptable .
How can we exclude from the working directive this sector which is so vital to our every day life , when social conditions are regulated in all other sectors of employment ?
If we note that Directive 3820 / 85 authorises a working time of 13 hours in the transport sector , with a daily rest of 11 hours , which can be reduced to 9 hours three times per week , whereas we generally think of a working week of 35 hours , we note that we have a social situation where the social laws are a throwback to another age , in working conditions which were criticised by Emile Zola in " Germinal ' .
We have to move away from this .
Long-distance drivers know very well that they are doing an important job , that their businesses must carry on working , that the European economy needs them , but they do not like being treated like idiots .
If we do not want to run the risk of new industrial conflicts and unacceptable dumping , we shall have to find a fast solution to these outstanding problems .
One solution , in my opinion , would be to separate non-mobile jobs from mobile jobs .
At any rate , it should have long been the case that non-mobile jobs would appear outside the exclusions for the road transport sector , since they are fully employed most of the time , in common with all other salaried workers in the employment sector .
Then we have to find solutions for people employed in the different transport sectors , such as road transport , sea and river transport , and flight crew .
These three sectors need suitable working hours and rest periods , acceptable compensations must be arranged with a method for calculating working time over a 28-day period and another for 365 days in order to calculate retirement ; thus , in future it will be easy to control this in road transport with the introduction of the new tachograph 1 B.
This could satisfy a profession which , by its nature , is forced to work differently from all other sectors and for which working time in a given 12-month period could also be taken into consideration in order to achieve a retirement age of 55 , as has been negotiated following a strike in France .
Since we are forced to recognize that negotiations in the different Joint Sectoral Committees are becoming more and more difficult and are very likely to fail altogether , resulting in a significant loss of time , I think that we need legislation on this subject .
The Commission should take up its responsibilities .
I am certain that the European Parliament will follow .
Five years after the adoption of the battered working time directive , the Commission has come up with its White Paper , which is now under scrutiny and which sets out the problem of the numerous exceptions and exclusions , which the Council of Ministers stubbornly imposed , disregarding the proposals of the European Parliament .
Indisputably , the six million workers who today are not included in the scope of implementation of the directive must be subsumed under protective provisions , having regard of course to the specificities of the relevant sector .
Beyond legislative fine-tuning , particular attention must be paid to the implementation of the applicable protective legislation and , by extension , to combatting the phenomenon of unfair competition . The manifestations of illegal and unregulated work are observable to a large extent , especially in the sectors of road and sea transport .
The implementation of the guidelines for the opening up of the markets to arrant competition and for the abolition , in any way possible , of national instruments , together with the logic of reducing , at all costs , the operating costs in sectors such as air and rail transport , has led to the violation of collective agreements , not only in respect of working time , but also in respect of the remaining conditions of work .
From this standpoint , any settlement to protect the workers would be a positive step , provided it is the result of genuine representative consultations with their trade union organizations and provided it leads to a reduction in arbitrary decisions taken at their expense .
However , we wish to point out the inadequate content of Directive 93 / 104 " on certain details of the organization of working time ' .
This is a directive which provides for a maximum permissible working time of 48 hours a week when , at the time of its adoption , the basic working time was 40 hours ( with the result that only in England and Ireland did it lead to a reduction in working time ) . This is a directive which contains a host of exclusions and possibilities for national differences , which permits night work , excessive working time and overtime , instead of promoting the 35-hour working week without a reduction in income , and which does not safeguard , to the necessary extent , the rights of workers .
Unfortunately , the Commission , faithfully following a narrowly-defined economic logic relating to the notion of competitiveness , refuses even today to draw the necessary conclusions from the regression that the Council imposed in the directive in respect of the Social Charter on Fundamental Rights for Workers , and merely points out that " the directive permits work for more hours than is usual in practice in most Member States ' .
The logic which governs the Council and the Commission , that is , the logic of minimum social harmonization ( or of minimum specifications ) , has demonstrated that not only does it not lead to the safeguarding of workers ' rights and to the improvement of labour law but , quite the contrary , it is the institutional umbrella which provides cover for the decline in protection , subverts labour relations and calls into question everything that has been gained with so much struggle by the labour movement .
A typical example is the bill that was introduced by the Greek government , which overturns the eight-hour day , the 40-hour week , while giving the green light to the generalized application of part-time work and to the overthrow of sectoral collective bargaining through local employment contracts .
Moreover , it is not by chance that the Council itself asserts the " possibility of flexibility ' contained in the directive .
The rapporteur , while accepting the logic of flexibility , goes on to make several constructive comments on the relationship between working hours and the safety , not only of workers , but of citizens more generally .
Inter alia he calls on the Commission to submit urgently a proposal to amend the directive in its entirety .
Of course , the risk of putting forward amendments that offer greater impunity to employers , based on the more general guidelines of the EU , as these are defined in the Delors White Paper and the guidelines on employment and on ensuring " additional flexibility in the context of any new legislative proposals ' , is very real , to the extent that no mass movement will evolve to assert the rights of workers to fight against these dictates will evolve .
We believe that only a robust movement asserting the rights of workers can provide radical and effective solutions to the problem of unemployment , form a protective shield for all workers against any violation of labour legislation and , finally , secure the 35-hour working week with no reduction in income . Only such a movement can promote full employment and restrict part-time and other forms of casual work , reduce overtime , abolish excessive working time